The Municipal Code of the
City of Culver City, California
2025 S-25 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 11-10-2025
*Disclaimer: This may not be the most current version of the Culver City
Municipal Code.
For more information, please contact the City Clerk's Office at (310) 253-5851.
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2000-015
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CULVER CITY, CALIFORNIA, ENACTING A MUNICIPAL CODE,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF CULVER CITY.
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Culver
City are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the City and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of California empower and
authorize the City of Culver City to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not previously adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
   WHEREAS, the City Council has authorized a general compilation, revision and
codification of the ordinances of the City of Culver City of a general and
permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary in order to provide for the usual daily operation
of the City and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City that this ordinance take effect at an
early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Culver City, California,
DOES HEREBY ORDAIN, as follows:
   SECTION 1. "The Culver City Municipal Code" as published by American Legal
Publishing is hereby adopted, together with those secondary codes adopted by
reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except
those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the
provisions of the "Culver City Municipal Code".
   SECTION 2. This Code shall be known as the "Culver City Municipal Code" and
it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Culver City Municipal
Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any
proceeding at law or in equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any
ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or
portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of a
section of the "Culver City Municipal Code". Further, reference may be had to
the titles; chapters, sections and subsections of the "Culver City Municipal
Code" and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section
or subsection as it appears in the Code.
   SECTION 3. This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and
certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Culver City,
California, in addition to the provisions of the City Charter.
   SECTION 4. Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Culver City
Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of
Culver City, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments,
corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.
   SECTION 5. Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or
intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or sections thereof.
   SECTION 6. The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances
which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are
included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
   SECTION 7. Neither the adoption of this Code, nor the repeal or amendment
hereby of any ordinance or part or portion or any ordinance of the City shall
in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which
violations were committed prior to the effective date, thereof, nor be
construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date
due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the
provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license,
fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu
thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance,
and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full
force and effect; and further, provided, such repeal shall not affect any
offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions
of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public
use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor
shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature
or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   SECTION 8. This Code shall become effective 30 days after its adoption.
   SECTION 9. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The
Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been
declared invalid or unconstitutional.
   SECTION 10. The Culver City Municipal Code, as adopted in Section 1, shall
consist of the following Titles:
         Title 1.      General Provisions
         Title 3.      Administration
         Title 5.      Public Works
         Title 7.      Traffic Code
         Title 9.      General Regulations
         Title 11.   Business Regulations
         Title 13.   General Offenses
         Title 15.   Land Usage
         Title 17.   Zoning Code
         Parallel References
         Index
   SECTION 11. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the date of its
adoption and approval by the City Council, and the City Clerk is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Municipal Code in the Office of
the City Clerk, and with the Administrator of the Los Angeles Superior Court,
Culver Court.
   SECTION 12. Such Code shall be in full force and effect, and such Code shall
be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained as of the
date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded, and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.
   SECTION 13. This Ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days from the date
of its adoption (Govt. Code §36937) and, as required by Section 512 of the City
Charter, prior to the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the adoption hereof,
the City Clerk shall cause this Ordinance to be published in the Culver City
News (Govt. Code §36933). Additionally, the City Clerk shall post this
Ordinance or a summary thereof in at least three public places within the City
pursuant to Section 517 of the City Charter.
      APPROVED and ADOPTED this 24th day of July 2000.
                              David Hauptman /s/
                              DAVID HAUPTMAN, Mayor
                              City of Culver City, California
ATTEST:                           APPROVED AS TO FORM:
Ela Valladares /s/                         Carol A. Schwab /s/
TOM CRUNK                           CAROL A. SCHWAB
City Clerk by:                            City Attorney
Ela Valladares, Deputy City Clerk
CHARTER OF THE
CITY OF CULVER CITY CALIFORNIA
Approved by the voters on April 11, 2006, effective July 1, 2006
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CULVER CITY
Section
Preamble
Article I. Name and Charter Status
   100.   Name and Charter status.
Article II. Definitions  
   
200.   Definitions.
Article III. Form of Government
   
300.   Form of Government.
Article IV. Boundaries
   
400.   Boundaries.
Article V. Powers of the City
   
500.   Powers of the City.
Article VI. City Council
   
600.   Number, Election and Term of Office.
   
601.   Term Limits.
   
602.   Eligibility.
   
603.   Compensation.
   
604.   Vacancy.
   
605.   Forfeiture of Office.
   
606.   Mayor and Vice Mayor
   
607.   Powers of the City Council.
   
608.   City Council Meetings.
   
609.   Special Meetings.
   
610.   Notice of Public Meetings.
   
611.   Public Participation.
   
612.   Council Proceedings.
   
613.   Adoption of Ordinances and Resolutions.
   
614.   Urgency Ordinances.
   
615.   Ordinances: Enactments.
   
616.   Ordinances: Publication.
   
617.   Ordinances: Amendments.
   
618.   Ordinances: Codification.
   
619.   Ordinances: When Effective.
   
620.   Ordinances: Violation and Penalty.
   
621.   Publishing of Legal Notices.
Article VII. City Administration
   
700.   Powers and Duties of City Manager.
   
701.   Non-Interference by City Council.
Article VIII. Annual Budget
   
800.   Budget Preparation.
   
801.   Submission to City Council.
   
802.   Public Hearing.
   
803.   Further Consideration and Adoption.
   
804.   Appropriations.
   
805.   Amendments.
Article IX. City Attorney
   
900.   Eligibility.
   
901.   Duties.
Article X. Board of Education
   1000.   Number and Term.
   
1001.   Eligibility.
   
1002.   Vacancies.
   
1003.   Forfeiture of Office.
   
1004.   Organization of the Board of Education.
   
1005.   Special Elections.
Article Xl. Commissions, Boards and Committees
   1100.   In General.
   1101.   Appropriations.
   
1102.   Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.
   
1103.   Procedures.
   
1104.   Oaths and Affirmations.
   
1105.   Committees.
Article XII. Civil Service
   
1200.   Merit Principle.
   
1201.   Classification.
   
1202.   Appointments from Civil Service Positions.
   
1203.   Prohibitions.
Article XIII. Retirement System
   
1300.   Public Employees' Retirement System.
Article XIV. General Provisions Relating to Officers and Employees  
   
1400.   Official Bonds.
   
1401.   Oath of Office.
   
1402.   Financial Interest.
   
1403.   Ethical Conduct.
   
1404.   Improper Political Activity.
Article XV. Elections
   
1500.   General Municipal Elections.
   
1501.   Special Municipal Elections.
   
1502.   Elections Official.
   
1503.   Procedure for Holding Elections.
   
1504.   Initiative, Referendum and Recall.
   
1505.   Elections by Mail.
Article XVI. Financial and Fiscal Matters
   
1600.   Fiscal Year.
   
1601.   Tax System.
   
1602.   Tax Limits.
   
1603.   Bonded Debt Limit.
   
1604.   Contracts for Public Works.
   
1605.   Purchasing of Supplies, Materials and Equipment.
   
1606.   Reserve Funds.
   
1607.   Capital Funds.
   
1608.   Claim Required for Actions Against City.
   
1609.   Independent Audit Required.
Article XVII. Franchises
   
1700.   Franchises.
Article XVIII. Revenue Retention
   
1800.   Reductions Prohibited.
   
1801.   Mandates Limited.
Article XIX. Charter Review Committee
   
1900.   Charter Review Committee
Article XX. Succession and Transition
   
2000.   Effective Date of Charter.
   
2001.   Rights and Liabilities.
   
2002.   Existing Laws, Regulations and Policies.
   
2003.   Rights of Officers and Employees Preserved.
   
2004.   Continuance of City Council and Board of Education.
   
2005.   Existing Commissions, Boards and Committees.
   
2006.   Existing Employees of City.
   
2007.   Existing Contracts and Contracting Procedures.
   
2008.   Pending Actions and Proceedings.
   
2009.   [Reserved]
   
2010.   [Reserved]
   
2011.   Elimination of Transition Provisions.
Article XXI. Miscellaneous 
   
2100.   Violations.
   
2101.   Validity.
PREAMBLE
   The People of the City of Culver City, by popular vote, have enacted this
Charter to establish a responsive, efficient, effective and accountable
government through which all voices in our diverse community can be heard; to
ensure fair representation and distribution of government resources; to provide
a safe and harmonious environment for our mutual well-being; and to promote the
principles of liberty, equality and home rule.
ARTICLE I. NAME AND CHARTER STATUS
SECTION 100. NAME AND CHARTER STATUS.
   The municipal corporation now existing and known as the “City of Culver
City” shall continue to exist, under the same name, as a charter city and a
municipal corporation organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of
the State of California.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
SECTION 200. DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Charter:
   (a)   “Board of Education” shall mean and refer to the Board of Education of
the Culver City Unified School District.
   (b)   “City” shall mean and refer to the City of Culver City.
   (c)   “Constitution” shall mean and refer to the Constitution of the State
of California.
   (d)   “City Council” shall mean and refer to the City Council of the City of
Culver City.
   (e)   “Council Member” shall mean and refer to a member of the City Council
of the City of Culver City.
   (f)   The term “days” shall mean calendar days.
   (g)   “Department Head” shall mean and refer to a person appointed by either
the City Council or the City Manager to exercise management and control of a
City department.
   (h)   The term “officers” shall mean and refer to the members of the City
Council and all persons appointed by the City Council to serve on a commission,
board, committee or other governmental body.
   (i)   “School District” shall mean and refer to the Culver City Unified
School District.
   (j)   “State” shall mean and refer to the State of California.
ARTICLE III. FORM OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION 300. FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The municipal government established by this Charter shall be the “Council-
Manager” form of government, under which the City Council sets policy and the
City Manager administers the government.
ARTICLE IV. BOUNDARIES
SECTION 400. BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the City shall be those boundaries existing as of the
effective date of this Charter. The boundaries may later be changed in the
manner authorized by State law.
ARTICLE V. POWERS OF THE CITY
SECTION 500. POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The City shall have all of the rights, powers and privileges which may be
granted to a charter city under the Constitution and laws of the State, as
fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this
Charter.
   Without limiting the preceding provisions, the City shall have the power to
make and enforce all laws and regulations with respect to municipal affairs,
subject only to such restrictions and limitations as may be provided in this
Charter and in the Constitution.
   The enumeration in this Charter of any particular power shall not be held to
exclude other powers, nor to be any limitation upon this general grant of
power.
ARTICLE VI. CITY COUNCIL
SECTION 600. NUMBER, ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   The City Council shall consist of five members elected at-large, at the
times and in the manner provided in this Charter. A full term of office shall
be four years, commencing at the meeting at which the election results are
certified, and continuing until a successor is elected and certified. Any ties
in voting shall be settled by the casting of lots.
SECTION 601. TERM LIMITS.
   No person shall serve more than two consecutive full terms as a Council
Member. If a person serves a partial term in excess of two years, it shall be
considered a full term for the purpose of this provision. Nothing in this
provision shall act to bar service as a Council Member after at least two years
have elapsed from the Council Member's last full term.
SECTION 602. ELIGIBILITY.
   Only residents of the City who are lawfully registered voters of the City
shall be eligible to hold an elective City office. Candidates for election to
any such office must have been lawfully registered voters of the City for the
30 days immediately preceding the filing of their nomination papers.
   Residents who have resigned from an elective City office shall not be
eligible to hold an elective City office nor be eligible for candidacy for
election until two years have elapsed from the date of resignation.
(Res. No. 2016-R117)
SECTION 603. COMPENSATION.
   Council Members shall receive compensation for their services in accordance
with the provisions of State law.
   The City shall maintain records of the total annual compensation, including
benefits, received by individual Council Members in their capacities as elected
public officials of the City, including all compensation received for services
on the Culver City Redevelopment Agency and any other boards or agencies.
Individual Council Members shall provide information that the City requires in
order to comply with this section. Such information shall be made available to
the public in accordance with State law.
SECTION 604. VACANCY.
   The City Council, by a vote of at least three of its members, may appoint a
replacement to fill any vacancy on the City Council. Such appointee shall hold
office until a successor is elected and certified. If the vacancy occurs before
the first day to file nomination papers for the next general municipal
election, a Council Member shall be elected at that election as the successor
to any appointee, or to fill the vacancy if it has not previously been filled
by appointment, and such newly elected Council Member shall serve the remainder
of the unexpired terms and until a successor is elected and certified.
   If a vacancy is not filled by appointment within 30 days after its
occurrence, the City Council shall immediately call a special election to fill
the vacancy. The special election shall be held not later than 120 days after
the vacancy occurs, except that no special election shall be called to fill the
vacancy if it cannot be held at least 180 days before the next general
municipal election. A person elected at a special election shall hold office
for the remainder of any unexpired term and until a successor is elected and
certified.
   If there is an election to fill one or more full terms and one or more
unexpired terms, then the candidates who receive the highest number of votes
shall serve the full terms, and of the candidates remaining, those who receive
the next highest number of votes shall serve the unexpired terms.
   At any time when there are three or four vacancies on the City Council, the
remaining Council Member or Members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of holding a meeting to consider taking action pursuant to this section, and
such action may be taken by the unanimous vote of the remaining Member or
Members.
SECTION 605. FORFEITURE OF OFFICE.
   The grounds for forfeiture of the office of a Council Member are the
following:
   (a)   The Council Member is absent, without the consent of the City Council,
from all regular City Council meetings for a period of 60 consecutive days from
and after the last regular City Council meeting attended by such Council
Member;
   (b)   The Council Member is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude; or
   (c)   The Council Member ceases to be a resident and lawfully registered
voter of the City.
   After the occurrence of any of the foregoing events, the office of the
Council Member shall be declared vacant by the City Council by a vote of at
least three of its members. At the request of the affected Council Member, the
City Council shall hold a public hearing before declaring the office vacant.
SECTION 606. MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR.
   Immediately following the certification of election results for any general
or special municipal election at which Council Members are elected, the City
Council shall elect one of its members as its presiding officer, who shall have
the title of Mayor and one of its members as Vice Mayor. In odd numbered years,
the City Council shall elect the Mayor and Vice Mayor at the second City
Council meeting following twelve months after the prior election. Both the
Mayor and Vice Mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council.
   The Mayor shall have a voice and a vote in all City Council proceedings,
shall be the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes, and shall
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or as may be
imposed by the City Council consistent with the office of Mayor. The Vice Mayor
shall perform the duties of the Mayor during the absence or incapacity of the
Mayor.
   A Council Member who has held the office of Mayor or Vice Mayor for one year
shall not be eligible for reelection to that same office until one year has
elapsed.
(Res. No. 2018-R060)
SECTION 607. POWERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council, subject to the
provisions of this Charter and the Constitution. The City Council shall have
the power to:
   (a)   Appoint, suspend, remove and fix the compensation of the City Manager,
Fire Chief, Police Chief and City Attorney, by a vote of at least three of its
members;
   (b)   Create, modify or abolish any City department, and to prescribe the
powers and duties of such departments and their Department Heads;
   (c)   Review and certify the results of all City elections;
   (d)   Control all legal business and proceedings, including, but not limited
to, the authority to employ other attorneys to take charge of any litigation or
other legal matters or to assist the City Attorney in connection with any legal
matter, which authority, in whole or in part, may be delegated to the City
Attorney; and
   (e)   Compel the attendance of witnesses, examine them under oath, and
compel the production of evidence before it. The City Council may cause
subpoenas to be issued in the name of the City and be attested to by the City
Clerk. Disobedience of such subpoenas, or the refusal to testify, upon other
than constitutional grounds, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Council Members,
and any City staff members designated by the City Council, shall have the power
to administer oaths in any investigation or proceeding before it.
   Additionally, the City Council shall have all other powers consistent with
this Charter and the Constitution.
SECTION 608. CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The City Council shall hold regular meetings at such times as it shall fix
by ordinance or resolution and may adjourn any regular meeting to a date
certain, which shall be specified in the order of adjournment and when so
adjourned, each adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all purposes.
   The Council Chambers of City Hall shall be the primary place of all City
Council meetings.
   By a vote of at least three of its members, the City Council may order a
regular meeting to be held not less than seven days after that date at a place
within the City other than the Council Chambers.
   The City Council may, upon making a finding that the public interest
requires it, order a meeting adjourned to another location within the City and
to a time during the same day on which the order is made.
   If for any reason it shall be unsafe to meet in the Council Chambers,
meetings may be held for the duration of the unsafe condition at a place within
the City designated by the Mayor, or by the City Council.
   Whenever an order is made to hold a meeting at a place other than the
Council Chambers, the City Clerk shall immediately post a copy of the order at
a conspicuous location near the outside of the main entrance to the Council
Chambers. The order shall remain posted until the meeting is held.
(Res. No. 2016-R117)
SECTION 609. SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   A special meeting of the City Council may be called at any time by the
Mayor, or by a majority of the Council Members.
SECTION 610. NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   The City Council shall comply with the applicable provisions of State law
regarding the giving of notice for regular and special meetings. The City
Council shall consider whether it should establish additional procedures to
provide efficient, timely and cost-effective notice in a manner consistent with
currently available technology.
SECTION 611. PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   During any public meeting, all persons shall have the right to address the
City Council, and any City commission, board or committee, subject to
reasonable rules of decorum and time limits established by ordinance or the
presiding officer.
SECTION 612. COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS.
   Three members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to do business,
but in the absence of a quorum, a lesser number may declare a meeting
adjourned.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, actions of the City Council
shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting on a matter,
excluding abstentions.
   The City Clerk shall keep a correct record of all proceedings of the City
Council, and shall record the vote taken on all actions and enter the result in
the minutes of the meeting.
SECTION 613. ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   No ordinance shall be adopted by the City Council on the day of its
introduction, nor within five days thereafter, nor at any time other than at a
regular or adjourned regular meeting. The foregoing shall not apply to urgency
ordinances adopted in the manner provided in this Charter. A resolution adopted
by the City Council shall become effective in accordance with its terms.
   At the time of adoption of an ordinance, it shall be read in full, unless,
after the reading of the title, the further reading thereof is waived by
unanimous consent of the Council Members present. In the event that any
ordinance is altered after its introduction, it shall be reintroduced and not
finally adopted except at a regular or adjourned regular meeting, held not less
than five days after the date upon which such ordinance was so reintroduced.
The correction of typographical or clerical errors shall not constitute the
making of an alteration within the meaning of the foregoing sentence.
   The votes of at least three members of the City Council shall be required
for the introduction or enactment of any ordinance or resolution, or for the
making or approving of any order for the payment of money.
   No order for the payment of money shall be adopted or made at any time other
than at a regular or adjourned regular meeting.
SECTION 614. URGENCY ORDINANCES.
   Any ordinance declared by the City Council to be necessary as an urgency
measure for preserving the public peace, health or safety and containing a
statement of the reasons for its urgency may be introduced and adopted at any
regular, adjourned, or special meeting if passed by a vote of at least four-
fifths of its members.
SECTION 615. ORDINANCES: ENACTMENTS.
   In addition to all other acts of the City Council that are required by State
law or by this Charter to be enacted by ordinance, every act of the City
Council establishing a fine or other penalty or granting a franchise shall be
enacted by ordinance.
   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be substantially as follows:
“The City Council of the City of Culver City does ordain as follows:”.
SECTION 616. ORDINANCES: PUBLICATION.
   The City Clerk shall record the full text of all ordinances and resolutions
adopted by the City Council in a properly indexed book. The City Clerk shall
also cause each ordinance, or a summary of such ordinance, to be published not
later than 15 days after its adoption in a newspaper circulated in the City and
designated by the City Council.
SECTION 617. ORDINANCES: AMENDMENTS.
   Any provision of an existing ordinance may be amended without reenactment
and republication of the entire original ordinance.
SECTION 618. ORDINANCES: CODIFICATION.
   The City Council shall periodically provide for the preparation of a general
codification, compilation, consolidation, revision, indexing or arranging of
all City ordinances and resolutions then having the force and effect of law.
   The codification of City ordinances may be accomplished by reference to the
passage of previously adopted ordinances. Such codifications need not be
published in the manner required for other ordinances, but prior to adoption,
at least three copies of the Code shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection.
   Detailed regulations pertaining to any subject, such as fire, building,
plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes, as well as codes on other subjects
that require extensive regulations, may be adopted by reference, and without
the necessity of publication, in the manner provided above. One copy of such
codes shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, prior to their adoption,
where they shall be available for public inspection.
   Subsequent amendments to sections of the general codification of City
ordinances, or the regulatory codes, shall be enacted in the same manner
required by this Charter for the amendment of ordinances generally.
SECTION 619. ORDINANCES: WHEN EFFECTIVE.
   In order to allow the People to exercise their referendum power, no
ordinance shall become effective until 30 days from and after the date of its
adoption, except, the following, which shall take effect upon adoption:
   (a)   An ordinance calling for or otherwise relating to an election;
   (b)   An improvement proceeding ordinance adopted under some law, or
procedural ordinance;
   (c)   An ordinance declaring the amount of money necessary to be raised by
taxation, or fixing the rate of taxation; or
   (d)   An urgency ordinance adopted in the manner provided in this Charter.
SECTION 620. ORDINANCES: VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Unless a specific ordinance provides otherwise, a violation of an ordinance
of the City shall be a misdemeanor. The City Council, by ordinance, may
establish the penalty by fine or imprisonment, or both, for misdemeanors and
only by fine for infractions.
   Violations of City ordinances may be prosecuted in the name of the People of
the State of California or may be redressed by the City through any legal or
equitable remedies.
SECTION 621. PUBLISHING OF LEGAL NOTICES.
   The City Council shall designate one newspaper circulated in the City for
the publication of all notices and other matters required to be published in a
newspaper. When possible, a change to another newspaper shall not be made until
a notice of the intention to change is published in the previously designated
newspaper.
   The charges for such publications in the designated newspaper shall not
exceed the rates charged to the general public for similar publications.
   All legal notices or other matters required to be published shall also be
posted in at least three public places within the City.
   Posting of legal notices in three public places shall be sufficient, without
publication if the designated newspaper is unavailable and a suitable
replacement cannot be designated.
ARTICLE VII. CITY ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 700. POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Council shall appoint the City Manager who shall be the chief
executive officer of the City, responsible to the City Council for the
management of all City affairs placed in the City Manager's charge by or under
this Charter, by ordinance, resolution or other action of the City Council. The
City Manager, or his or her designee, shall:
   (a)   Appoint, suspend and remove all City employees, including Department
Heads, the City Clerk and the City Treasurer, except as otherwise provided by
State law or this Charter;
   (b)   Direct and supervise the administration of all City departments,
except as otherwise provided by this Charter;
   (c)   Attend all City Council meetings, at which the City Manager shall have
the right to take part in discussion, but shall not vote;
   (d)   Prepare and submit to the City Council an annual budget pursuant to
this Charter, and implement the final budget approved by the City Council; and
   (e)   Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter, or by
ordinance, resolution or other action of the City Council.
SECTION 701. NON-INTERFERENCE BY CITY COUNCIL.
   Neither the City Council, nor any Council Member shall:
   (a)   Order or direct the City Manager to appoint or remove any person to or
from any position of employment with the City;
   (b)   Except as otherwise permitted by this Charter or by ordinance, order
or direct the City Manager to enter into a municipal contract or make a
purchase of supplies from any particular person or entity;
   (c)   Interfere in any way with the performance of the duties of any City
employee; or
   (d)   Interfere in any way with the duties of the City's elections official
in the conduct of elections.
   Nothing in this section shall prevent the City Council, or any of its
members, from advising the City Manager of any information which might assist
the City Manager in the discharge of the City Manager's duties; or contacting
City employees for the purpose of inquiry, obtaining information or advising
employees of citizen complaints.
ARTICLE VIII. ANNUAL BUDGET
SECTION 800. BUDGET PREPARATION.
   All Department Heads shall, upon request, provide the City Manager with
estimates of revenues and expenditures for their departments, detailed in the
manner prescribed by the City Manager. The City Manager shall review the
estimates, hold conferences with department personnel, and prepare a proposed
budget.
SECTION 801. SUBMISSION TO CITY COUNCIL.
   At least 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City
Manager shall submit a proposed budget to the City Council. After reviewing the
proposed budget, the City Council shall set the date and time for a public
hearing on the proposed budget and, at least 10 days prior to its scheduled
date, shall cause notice of such public hearing to be published in a newspaper
circulated in the City and designated by the City Council.
   Copies of the proposed budget shall be available for public inspection in
the office of the City Clerk at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
SECTION 802. PUBLIC HEARING.
   The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget at the
time so advertised, or at any time to which the public hearing shall be
adjourned from time to time, where interested persons shall be given an
opportunity to be heard.
SECTION 803. FURTHER CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION.
   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall further
consider the proposed budget, make any revisions that it may deem advisable,
and, on or before the first day of the fiscal year, adopt the budget by a vote
of at least three of its members. Upon adoption, the budget shall be in effect
for the ensuing fiscal year. A copy of the budget, certified by the City Clerk,
shall be filed with the City Manager. An additional copy shall remain on file
in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be available for public
inspection. Copies of the adopted budget shall be made available for the use of
City departments.
SECTION 804. APPROPRIATIONS.
   After adoption of the budget, the amounts allocated in the budget as
proposed expenditures shall be appropriated to the specified City departments,
for the objects and purposes named in the budget. All appropriations shall
lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been
expended or lawfully encumbered.
SECTION 805. AMENDMENTS.
   After the adoption of the budget, the City Council may amend or supplement
the budget only by a vote of at least four-fifths of its members.
ARTICLE IX. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION 900. ELIGIBILITY.
   The City Attorney shall be an attorney-at-law, licensed and authorized to
practice in all of the courts of the State.
SECTION 901. DUTIES.
   The City Attorney, or his or her designee, shall:
   (a)   Serve as the chief legal adviser to the City Council, City Manager,
and all City departments in all matters pertaining to the business of the City;
   (b)   Represent and appear for the City in all legal actions in which the
City is concerned or is a party. In the course of performing such duties, the
City Attorney shall have the authority to employ other attorneys to handle
litigation or provide other assistance as required by the City Attorney,
subject to the provisions of this Charter;
   (c)   Attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused;
   (d)   Prepare or approve the language of all City ordinances, resolutions
and of any amendments to such ordinances or resolutions, and approve the form
of City contracts and bonds;
   (e)   Prosecute on behalf of the People criminal cases for violations of
this Charter, of City ordinances or of State laws, which in the opinion of the
City Attorney warrant prosecution; and
   (f)   Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter, or by
ordinance, resolution or other action of the City Council.
ARTICLE X. BOARD OF EDUCATION
SECTION 1000. NUMBER AND TERM.
   The Board of Education shall consist of five members, elected at-large from
the School District, for a term of four years.
SECTION 1001. ELIGIBILITY.
   Only residents of the School District who are lawfully registered voters of
the School District shall be eligible to hold office as a member of the Board
of Education. Candidates for election to such office must have been lawfully
registered voters of the School District for the 30 days immediately preceding
the filing of their nomination papers.
SECTION 1002. VACANCIES.
   The Board of Education shall fill any vacancy by appointment. Such appointee
shall hold office until a successor is elected and certified. If the vacancy
occurs before the first day to file nomination papers for the next regular
Board of Education election, a Board Member shall be elected at that election
as successor to any appointee, or to fill the vacancy if it has not been
previously filled before appointment, and such newly elected Board Member shall
serve for the remainder of any unexpired term and until a successor is elected
and certified.
   If a vacancy is not filled by appointment within 60 days after its
occurrence, the Board of Education shall immediately call a special election.
The special election shall be held not later than 120 days after the vacancy
occurs, except that no special election shall be called to fill the vacancy if
it cannot be held at least 180 days before the next regular Board of Education
election. A person elected at a special election shall hold office for the
remainder of the unexpired term and until a successor is elected and certified.
   If there is an election to fill one or more full terms and one or more
unexpired terms, then the candidates who receive the highest number of votes
shall serve the full terms, and of the candidates remaining, those who receive
the next highest number of votes shall serve the unexpired terms.
SECTION 1003. FORFEITURE OF OFFICE.
   The grounds for forfeiture of the office of a member of the Board of
Education are the following:
   (a)   The Board Member is absent, without the consent of the Board of
Education, from all regular Board meetings for a period of 60 consecutive days
from and after the last regular Board meeting attended by such Board Member;
   (b)   The Board Member is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude; or
   (c)   The Board Member ceases to be a resident and lawfully registered voter
of the School District.
   After the occurrence of any of the foregoing events, the office of the Board
Member shall be declared vacant by the Board of Education, by a vote of at
least three of its members. At the request of the affected Board Member, the
Board of Education shall hold a public hearing before declaring the office
vacant.
SECTION 1004. ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION.
   At the annual organizational meeting of the Board of Education, the members
shall elect a president, vice-president and clerk. No Board Member shall serve
more than two consecutive years in such office.
SECTION 1005. SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   The Board of Education may, at its discretion, call an election for any
reason sanctioned by law at any time it deems appropriate.
ARTICLE XI. COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
SECTION 1100. IN GENERAL.
   The City Council may, by ordinance, establish and abolish such commissions
and boards as it may determine, from time to time, to be necessary for the
effective and efficient governance of the City, to encourage citizen
participation in local government and maintain positive human relations in the
community.
SECTION 1101. APPROPRIATIONS.
   The City Council shall appropriate sufficient funds for the efficient and
proper functioning of all City commissions and boards.
SECTION 1102. CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON.
   As soon as practicable, following the first day of July of every year, each
commission or board of the City shall organize by electing one of its members
to serve as its presiding officer, with the title of Chairperson, and electing
one of its members as Vice Chairperson. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
shall each serve at the pleasure of the commission or board.
   The Chairperson shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the
commission or board, shall be the official head of the commission or board for
all ceremonial purposes, and shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by this Charter or by ordinance. The Vice Chairperson shall perform
the duties of the Chairperson during the absence or incapacity of the
Chairperson.
SECTION 1103. PROCEDURES.
   The City Manager shall designate City staff, as necessary, to assist each
commission or board, and to keep a record of its proceedings and transactions.
Each commission or board may prescribe its own rules and regulations, which
shall be consistent with this Charter and applicable ordinances, resolutions
and other City Council actions. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to
the approval of the City Council and shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection.
SECTION 1104. OATHS AND AFFIRMATIONS.
   Any commission or board, and the designated City staff, shall have the power
to administer oaths and affirmations in any investigation or proceeding pending
before the commission or board.
SECTION 1105. COMMITTEES.
   The City Council, by ordinance, resolution or other action, may establish
and abolish committees for a specified purpose, and shall appropriate
sufficient funds for the efficient and proper functioning of such committees.
ARTICLE XII. CIVIL SERVICE
SECTION 1200. MERIT PRINCIPLE.
   Appointments and promotions in the administrative service of the City shall
be made according to merit and fitness, to be ascertained, so far as
practicable, by competitive examination.
   The Civil Service System adopted by the City Council pursuant to State law
and in effect prior to the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in
full force and effect unless changed by ordinance of the City Council or by
amendment to the rules and regulations approved by the City Council. As
provided in the State enabling act referred to above, the City Council shall
not have the authority to withdraw any departments or employees, including
Department Heads, placed in Classified Service, from the operation of such
system, either by outright repeal of the Civil Service ordinance or otherwise,
unless and until its withdrawal shall have been submitted to the voters of the
City at a regular or special municipal election held in the City and shall have
been approved by majority vote at a City election.
SECTION 1201. CLASSIFICATION.
   All Department Heads shall be in the Unclassified Service.
   The City Manager, City Attorney, City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be in
the Unclassified Service.
SECTION 1202. APPOINTMENTS FROM CIVIL SERVICE POSITIONS.
   In the event an employee of the City holding a position in the Classified
Service is appointed to a position in the Unclassified Service, and within two
years is removed or resigns from that position, the employee shall revert to
his or her former position in the Classified Service upon the same terms and
conditions as if he or she had continuously remained in that position.
SECTION 1203. PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall willfully make any false statements, certificate, mark,
rating or report in regard to any application, test certification or
appointment held or made under the Civil Service System or in any manner commit
or attempt any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such Civil Service
System or its rules and regulations.
ARTICLE XIII. RETIREMENT SYSTEM
SECTION 1300. PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   Plenary authority and power are hereby vested in the City, its City Council
and its several officers, agents and employees, to do and perform any act or
exercise any authority granted, permitted or required under the provisions of
the Public Employees' Retirement Law, as it now exists or hereafter may be
amended, to enable the City to continue as a contracting City under the Public
Employees' Retirement System. The City Council may terminate the contract with
the Board of Administration of the Public Employees' Retirement System, whereby
all employees are members of the System, only under authority granted by
ordinance adopted by majority vote at a City election.
ARTICLE XIV. GENERAL PROVISIONS
RELATING TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION 1400. OFFICIAL BONDS.
   The City Council shall fix the amounts and terms of the official bonds of
all employees who are required to give such bonds. All bonds shall be executed
by a responsible corporate surety, shall be approved as to form by the City
Attorney, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Premiums on official bonds
shall be paid by the City.
SECTION 1401. OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers
and employees of the City shall take and subscribe to the following oath or
affirmation:
   “I                      , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support
and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
State of California against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of California; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.”
SECTION 1402. FINANCIAL INTEREST.
   Except as provided by State law, officers and employees of the City shall
not be financially interested in any contract made by them in their official
capacity, or by any body or board of which they are members.
   Officers and employees of the City shall not be purchasers at any sale or
vendors at any purchase made by them in their official capacity.
   The office and employment of an officer or employee shall be forfeited upon
a judicial finding of a violation of this section.
SECTION 1403. ETHICAL CONDUCT.
   It is the policy of the City that all officers and employees of the City
shall observe the highest standards of ethics. City officers and employees
shall comply with all federal, State and City statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules, regulations and policies relating to conflicts of interest, campaign
disclosure and ethical conduct, including, but not limited to, those relating
to decision-making where the official has a private financial interest;
acceptance of gifts and other items of value; acceptance of campaign
contributions; use of confidential information; and use of public property and
resources. The City Council shall adopt such ordinances and resolutions as it
deems necessary to promote ethical conduct in government.
SECTION 1404. IMPROPER POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   The officers and employees of the City shall not engage in, nor shall the
facilities of the City be used for, improper political activities. The City
Council shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations to
implement this policy.
ARTICLE XV. ELECTIONS
SECTION 1500. GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   General municipal elections for the filling of all elective offices, other
than the Board of Education, shall be held in the City on the date of the
statewide general election.
   The election of members of the Board of Education shall be held in
accordance with State law. Expenses for Board of Education elections shall be
paid by the School District.
(Res. No. 2018-R060)
SECTION 1501. SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   The City Council may, at its discretion, call an election for any reason
sanctioned by law at any time it deems necessary. Such election shall be known
as a special municipal election.
SECTION 1502. ELECTIONS OFFICIAL.
   The City Clerk shall be the City's elections official, and as such shall
supervise the conduct of City elections and shall perform all other duties
assigned by State law to the City's elections official. In all such matters,
the City Clerk shall act in a fair and impartial manner, in accordance with all
applicable provisions of this Charter, State law and City ordinances. Neither
the City Council, nor individual Council Members shall interfere with the City
Clerk in the performance of the duties assigned by this section.
SECTION 1503. PROCEDURE FOR HOLDING ELECTIONS.
   Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all City elections shall be held
in accordance with applicable provisions of the then current State law.
SECTION 1504. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL.
   The rights of the initiative, referendum and recall are reserved to the
voters of the City. All applicable provisions of the then current State law
governing the initiative, referendum and recall processes shall apply, insofar
as such provisions are not in conflict with this Charter.
SECTION 1505. ELECTIONS BY MAIL.
   The City Council may, by ordinance, authorize the conduct of elections
wholly by mail, under which all votes shall be cast in the manner of absentee
ballots.
ARTICLE XVI. FINANCIAL AND FISCAL MATTERS
SECTION 1600. FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City government shall begin on the first day of July
of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year;
provided, however, that the City Council may, by a vote of at least four-fifths
of its members, adopt an ordinance changing the City's fiscal year.
SECTION 1601. TAX SYSTEM.
   Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the City shall continue to use, for
the purpose of ad valorem municipal taxation, the County system of assessment
and tax collection, as such system is now in effect or may hereafter be amended
and insofar as such provisions are not in conflict with this Charter.
   If the City Council fails to fix the rate and levy taxes on or before August
31st in any year, the rate for the next preceding fiscal year shall thereupon
be automatically adopted and a tax at such rate shall be deemed to have been
levied on all taxable property in the City for the current fiscal year.
SECTION 1602. TAX LIMITS.
   Exclusive of special levies permitted by this Charter, the City Council
shall not levy a property tax in excess of one percent of the assessed value of
taxable property in the City for municipal purposes, unless authorized by a
two-thirds vote at a City election.
   There shall be levied and collected at the time and in the same manner as
other property taxes for municipal purposes are levied and collected as
additional taxes, if no other provision for payment thereof is made:
   (a)   A tax sufficient to meet all liabilities of the City for principal and
interest of all bonds or judgments due and unpaid, or to become due during the
ensuing fiscal year; and
   (b)   A tax sufficient to meet all obligations of the City to the Public
Employees' Retirement System, or other system for the retirement of City
employees due and unpaid or to become due during the ensuing fiscal year.
   Special levies, in addition to the above, may be made annually, based on
City Council approved estimates, for specific purposes as may be approved by
the City Council. The proceeds of any such special levy shall be used for no
other purpose than that specified.
SECTION 1603. BONDED DEBT LIMIT.
   The bonded indebtedness of the City may not exceed the sum of 15 percent of
the total assessed valuation of all the real and personal property within the
City.
SECTION 1604. CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS.
   The City Council shall, from time to time, establish, by ordinance,
procedures to ensure the integrity of awarding all contracts for the
construction or improvement of public works, buildings, streets, drains,
sewers, utilities, parks and playgrounds. Subject to such exceptions as the
City Council may establish, these procedures shall call for soliciting multiple
bids for all contracts. The procedures shall be reviewed periodically by the
City Council at a public hearing.
   The City Council may award a contract without complying with the procedures
then in place by a vote of at least four-fifths of its members after a public
hearing.
   This Charter has been enacted for the collective benefit of the People of
the City of Culver City, and is not intended to confer legal rights or remedies
upon individual persons or entities that elect to do business with the City. In
furtherance of this intention, it is specifically declared that no contractor,
person or entity shall be entitled to bring any legal or equitable action
against the City alleging that the City failed to perform its obligations under
this section or under any ordinance enacted to establish the procedures for
awarding public works contracts. Nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit or
restrict the City from adopting ordinances or entering into contracts that
grant legally enforceable rights to one or more contractors, persons or
entities.
SECTION 1605. PURCHASING OF SUPPLIES, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   The City Council shall establish procedures for the purchasing, storing and
distribution of all supplies, materials and equipment required by any City
department. The City Manager shall direct the implementation of such procedures
for all City departments.
SECTION 1606. RESERVE FUNDS.
   The City Council shall maintain sufficient cash reserves for the purpose of
placing the payment of operating expenses of the City on a cash basis. The
reserves shall be built from any available sources, and in combination with
anticipated revenues shall be sufficient to meet all lawful demands against the
City. Transfers may be authorized by the City Council from one fund to another
fund or funds in such amounts as may be required to place those funds as nearly
as possible on a cash basis. In case of such transfers, monies shall be
returned to the fund from which they were transferred as they become available.
SECTION 1607. CAPITAL FUNDS.
   The funds for capital improvements, previously created, are hereby continued
in existence. The City Council by ordinance may create a special fund or funds
for a special capital improvement purpose. Subject to the restrictions of the
Constitution, the City Council may levy and collect taxes for capital
improvements and may include in the annual tax levy a levy for such purposes in
which event it must apportion and appropriate to any such fund or funds the
money derived from such levy. It may not, in making such levy, exceed the
maximum tax rate provided for in this Charter, unless authorized by majority
vote at a City election. The City Council may transfer to any such fund any
unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand in the City at any time.
   Once established, such fund shall be restricted to only the purposes for
which it was created, unless the assent of the voters is expressed to the use
of such fund for some other purpose by majority vote at a City election.
SECTION 1608. CLAIM REQUIRED FOR ACTIONS AGAINST CITY.
   No suit may be brought on any claim for money or damages against the City,
the City Council, or any City commission, board, committee, officer or employee
until a claim has been presented and rejected in whole or in part in accordance
with procedures adopted by the City Council for the regulations of claims,
subject to the provisions of State law.
SECTION 1609. INDEPENDENT AUDIT REQUIRED.
   At the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Council shall employ an
independent, certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who, at
such time or times as may be specified by the City Council, shall examine the
books, records, inventories and reports of the City and of all officers and
employees of the City who receive, handle or disburse public funds and of all
such other City officers, employees and departments as the City Council may
direct. As soon as practicable after the end of the fiscal year, a final audit
and report shall be submitted by such accountant or firm to the City. Copies of
such audit and report shall be provided to each Council Member; and copies
shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk and made available for
inspection by the general public. Such accountant or firm shall have no direct
or indirect personal interest in the fiscal affairs of the City or of any of
the officers of the City.
ARTICLE XVII. FRANCHISES
SECTION 1700. FRANCHISES.
   The City Council may, by ordinance, grant a franchise to furnish the City
and its inhabitants with any public utility or service and to use the public
streets for that purpose. The exercise by any person, firm or corporation of
any privilege for which a franchise is required without procuring such
franchise from the City is prohibited.
   Before granting any franchise, the City Council shall adopt a resolution
declaring its intention to grant the same, stating the name of the proposed
grantee, the character of the franchise and the terms and conditions upon which
it is proposed to be granted. Such resolution shall set forth the time and
place at which any person may appear before the City Council and be heard. The
City Council shall direct the City Clerk to publish the resolution at least
once within 15 days of its passage in a newspaper circulated in the City and
designated by the City Council. The date and time fixed for the public hearing
shall be not less than 20, nor more than 60 days after the adoption of the
resolution.
   At the hearing, the City Council shall consider all protests and comments.
Thereafter, the City Council may amend, grant or deny the franchise. Such
decision shall be final and conclusive, subject to the right of referendum of
the People. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a transfer or
assignment of an existing franchise.
ARTICLE XVIII. REVENUE RETENTION
SECTION 1800. REDUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   With regard to municipal affairs and areas not preempted by the State, any
revenues raised and collected by the City shall not be subject to subtraction,
retention, attachment, withdrawal or any other form of involuntary reduction by
any other level of government.
SECTION 1801. MANDATES LIMITED.
   No other level of government shall have the right to require any person
acting on behalf of the City to perform any function unless and until the
mandating authority provides sufficient funds for the performance of such
function. The City Council may instruct any department, commission, board,
committee, officer or employee of the City to disregard any mandate for which
adequate funding has not been provided.
ARTICLE XIX. CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
SECTION 1900. CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   Beginning in January 2014, and in January every 10 years thereafter, the
City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the need for a
comprehensive review of the existing Charter and shall determine whether or not
to appoint a Committee to consider and propose amendments to the existing
Charter. Within 12 months after its creation, or such other time period as may
be specified by the City Council, the Committee shall present to the City
Council any proposed amendments to the Charter. The City Council shall act upon
the recommendations of the Committee before the last day to place the proposed
amendments on the ballot at the next regular municipal election. The City
Council may, at its discretion, appoint a Charter Review Committee at any time.
ARTICLE XX. SUCCESSION AND TRANSITION
SECTION 2000. EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARTER.
   This Charter shall be effective on the later of July 1, 2006, or the date it
is accepted and filed by the Secretary of State.
SECTION 2001. RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   The City shall continue to own, possess and control all rights and property
of every kind and nature owned, possessed or controlled by it at the time this
Charter takes effect and shall continue to be subject to all its debts,
obligations, liabilities and contracts.
SECTION 2002. EXISTING LAWS, REGULATIONS AND POLICIES.
   All lawful ordinances, resolutions, policies, rules and regulations in force
at the time this Charter takes effect, and that are not in conflict or
inconsistent with this Charter, are hereby continued in force until they have
been duly repealed, amended, changed or superseded by proper authority.
SECTION 2003. RIGHTS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES PRESERVED.
   Except as specifically provided, nothing in this Charter shall affect or
impair the civil service, pension and retirement rights or privileges of
officers or employees of the City, or of any City department existing at the
time this Charter takes effect.
SECTION 2004. CONTINUANCE OF CITY COUNCIL AND BOARD OF EDUCATION.
   The members of the City Council and of the Board of Education of the Culver
City Unified School District in office at the time this Charter takes effect
shall continue in office until the expiration of their respective terms and
until their successors are elected and certified.
SECTION 2005. EXISTING COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES.
   Commissions, boards and committees previously established by the City
Council shall continue to exist and exercise the powers and perform the duties
conferred upon them; provided, however, that the City Council may abolish any
or all of said commissions, boards or committees and may alter their structure,
membership and duties.
   The members of the commissions and boards holding office when this Charter
takes effect shall continue to hold office until their respective terms of
office shall expire and until their successors shall be appointed, or until
such time as the body is abolished by action of the City Council.
   The members of Committees existing when this Charter takes effect shall
continue to remain members until they are replaced or removed by the City
Council or until the Committee is abolished.
SECTION 2006. EXISTING EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY.
   The present employees of the City shall continue to perform their duties
without interruption, subject to this Charter and all applicable provisions of
any existing or future ordinance, resolution, rule or law relating to the
removal, duties or control of such employees.
SECTION 2007. EXISTING CONTRACTS AND CONTRACTING PROCEDURES.
   All contracts entered into by the City, or for its benefit, before the
effective date of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect
according to their terms.
   The procedures for awarding contracts for public works existing at the time
this Charter takes effect, will continue to be followed until such time as the
City Council establishes, by ordinance, different required procedures.
SECTION 2008. PENDING ACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   No civil or criminal action or proceeding that has been brought by or
against the City, or any City department and that is pending as of the
effective date of this Charter, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of
this Charter. All such actions or proceedings may be continued, even if the
functions, powers or duties of any City department that is a party to such
action or proceeding have been assigned or transferred under this Charter to
another City department. In that event, such actions may be prosecuted or
defended by the head of the City department to which such functions, powers and
duties have been assigned or transferred under this Charter.
SECTION 2009. [RESERVED]
SECTION 2010. [RESERVED]
SECTION 2011. ELIMINATION OF TRANSITION PROVISIONS.
   If, in the judgment of the City Attorney, any of the sections included in
this Article become obsolete by virtue of the completion of all acts required
under those sections, the City Attorney shall so advise the City Council. Upon
the adoption by the City Council of a resolution to such effect, the obsolete
sections shall be deemed to have expired, and the City Clerk shall then remove
those sections from the next printing of this Charter.
ARTICLE XXI. MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 2100. VIOLATIONS.
   A violation of any provision of this Charter shall be a misdemeanor, except
that such violation may be prosecuted as an infraction at the discretion of the
prosecuting authority. The City Council shall, by ordinance, establish the
penalties for a violation of this Charter, but in no event shall such penalties
exceed the maximum penalties permitted under State law.
   Any violation of this Charter may be prosecuted in the name of the People of
the State of California or may be redressed by the City through any legal or
equitable remedies.
SECTION 2101. VALIDITY.
   If any provision of this Charter, or the application of any Charter
provision to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this
Charter, and the application of such provision to other persons or
circumstances, shall not be affected.
TITLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
1.01.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
1.02.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
         
1.03.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 1.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1.01.005   How code designated and cited
   
1.01.010   Definitions; rules of construction
   
1.01.015   Legislative intent regarding official duties established by city
   
1.01.020   Catchlines of sections
   
1.01.025   Effect of repeal of ordinances
   
1.01.030   Severability of parts of code
   
1.01.035   Violations of code
   
1.01.040   Penalty for misdemeanor
   
1.01.045   Penalty for infraction
   
1.01.050   Civil penalty
   
1.01.055   Cumulative remedies and penalties
   
1.01.060   Enforcement of ordinances, citation in lieu of arrest
   
1.01.065   Municipal Code Appeals Committee
Cross-reference:
   Administrative citations, see
Ch. 1.02
   Suspension of taxes, see §
3.08.005
§ 1.01.005 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in the following Chapters and Sections shall
constitute and be designated as “The Code of the City of Culver City,
California,” and may be so cited.
('65 Code, § 1-1)
Cross-reference:
   For authority of City to codify, see
Charter Art. V, § 613
§ 1.01.010 DEFINITIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In addition to the definitions set forth in §
200 of the Charter, the following definitions shall apply to this Code, unless
the context clearly requires otherwise:
   CODE, MUNICIPAL CODE, THE CODE or THIS CODE. The Code of the City of Culver
City, California.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day
be Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
   COUNTY, THE COUNTY or THIS COUNTY. These terms shall refer to Los Angeles
County, California.
   DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. Whenever any
department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is referred to, it
shall mean of the City of Culver City, California, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The director of the County Health Department or his
authorized agent.
   MONTH. A calendar month, unless otherwise expressed.
   NUMBER.  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OR and AND.  OR may be read AND, and AND may be read OR, if the sense
requires it.
   OWNER. When applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of
the whole or a part of such building, or land.
   PERSON. Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real property
as herein defined.
   PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SHALL and MAY.  SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.
   SIGNATURE; SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   TENANT; OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, these terms shall
include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land
whether alone or with others.
   TIME. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present, and the future tense includes the present tense.
   WRITING; WRITTEN. Printing and any other mode of representing words and
letters.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
('65 Code, § 1-2) (Ord. No. 2006-009 §§ 2, 3)
§ 1.01.015 LEGISLATIVE INTENT REGARDING OFFICIAL DUTIES ESTABLISHED BY CITY.
   A.   Notwithstanding the definition of the term SHALL as set forth in §
1.01.010, no provision, section, or enactment, which is part of this Code,
shall be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee thereof
responsible or liable for any action or inaction relating to any official duty
created by this Code.
   B.   No ordinance, resolution, enactment, motion or policy made by the City
shall be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee thereof
responsible or liable for any action or inaction relating to any official duty
established by the ordinance, resolution, enactment, motion or policy.
('65 Code, § 1-2.1) (Ord. No. 85-010 § 1)
§ 1.01.020 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of
the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchline, are amended or re-enacted.
('65 Code, § 1-3)
§ 1.01.025 EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
   A.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   B.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance
repealed.
('65 Code, § 1-4)
§ 1.01.030 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of the court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
('65 Code, § 1-5)
§ 1.01.035 VIOLATIONS OF CODE.
   A.   Whenever “violate” or “violation” is used herein, it shall be deemed to
mean:
      1.   The performance of an act, or the permitting or the causing of the
performance of an act prohibited or declared to be unlawful or an offense by
this Code or any ordinance of the City.
      2.   The failure to do any act required by the Code or any ordinance of
the City.
   B.   Any violation of this Code or any ordinance of the City shall
constitute a misdemeanor; provided, however, that a violation shall constitute
an infraction when a provision of this Code or any ordinance of the City
specifically declares a violation to be an infraction; provided, further, that
any violation which would constitute a misdemeanor may be prosecuted as an
infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney.
   C.   No person shall violate any provision of the Code or any ordinance of
the City.
   D.   Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall
include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact
of such act or omission.
   E.   In addition to the penalties provided for in this Code, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code
shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated as such by the
City. Every day such condition continues shall constitute a new and separate
offense.
   F.   Each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any
provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person
shall constitute a separate offense. A person may be charged with a separate
offense for each such violation and punished accordingly.
('65 Code, § 1-10) (Ord. No. 85-018 § 1; Ord. No. 90-023 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-002
§§ 1-3)
§ 1.01.040 PENALTY FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Unless otherwise specified by this Code, a misdemeanor is punishable by a
fine not exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
('65 Code, § 1-10.1) (Ord. No. 85-018 § 1)
§ 1.01.045 PENALTY FOR INFRACTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, an infraction shall be punishable
by:
   A.   A fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation;
   B.   A fine not exceeding Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation of the same provision of this Code within one year;
   C.   A fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each additional
violation of the same provision of this Code within one year.
('65 Code, § 1-10.2) (Ord. No. 85-018 § 1; Ord. No. 90-023 § 2; Ord. No. 96-019
§ 1; Ord. No. 2008-002 § 4)
§ 1.01.050 CIVIL PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the
City is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) for each day, or part thereof, such violation occurs. The City
Attorney is authorized to bring a civil action for remedies which may include,
but are not limited to, injunctive relief, in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
('65 Code, § 1-10.3) (Ord. No. 85-018 § 1; Ord. No. 91-016, § 1)
§ 1.01.055 CUMULATIVE REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   Unless otherwise expressly provided, the remedies and penalties provided by
this Chapter are cumulative to each other, and to the remedies and penalties
available under any other provision of this Code and any other laws.
('65 Code, § 1-10.4) (Ord. No. 85-018 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-002 § 5)
§ 1.01.060 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES, CITATION IN LIEU OF ARREST.
   A.   Authority to arrest. A public officer or employee may arrest a person
without a warrant whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that the person
to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his presence which is a violation
of an ordinance of the City of Culver City which such officer or employee has
the duty to enforce.
   B.   Public officers or employees authorized to arrest. The City Council
shall by resolution specify the title of public officers and employees and the
specific ordinances they have the duty to enforce.
   C.   Citations for misdemeanors. In any case in which a person is arrested
pursuant to Subsection A. and the person arrested does not demand to be taken
before a magistrate, the public officer or employee making the arrest shall
prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to
appear, subject to the provisions of Cal. Penal Code §§ 853.5 et seq.
   D.   Employees of public pounds, societies for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, and humane societies. Employees of public pounds, societies for the
prevention of cruelty to animals, and humane societies may issue notices to
appear in court subject to Cal. Penal Code §§ 853.5 et seq., for violations of
state or local animal control laws, provided that such humane societies or
pounds have contracted with the City of Culver City to provide animal care or
protection services.
      1.   Such employees shall not be authorized to take any person into
custody.
      2.   The authority of such employees shall be limited to the area within
the boundaries of the City of Culver City.
('65 Code, § 1-11) (Ord. No. CS-899 § 1; Ord. No. CS-412; Ord. No. 95-009 § 1)
§ 1.01.065 MUNICIPAL CODE APPEALS COMMITTEE.
   Wherever in this Code the “Municipal Code Appeals Committee” is referred to
as the designated hearing body, its members shall consist of the City Manager
or his/her designee, the Fire Chief or his/her designee, and the Community
Development Director or his/her designee.
(Ord. No. 2013-009 § 5)
CHAPTER 1.02: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Section
   
1.02.005   Legislative findings and statement of purpose
   
1.02.010   Administrative citations for violations of code
   
1.02.015   Definitions
   
1.02.020   Use of the administrative citation
   
1.02.025   Administrative fines
   
1.02.030   Contents of citation
   
1.02.035   Service of citation
   
1.02.040   Satisfaction of administrative citation
   
1.02.045   Hearing of administrative citation
   
1.02.050   Right to judicial review
Cross-reference:
   Violations, penalties and remedies, see §§
1.01.035 -
1.01.055
   Enforcement of ordinances, citation in lieu of arrest, see §
1.01.060
§ 1.02.005 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   A.   The City Council hereby finds there is a need for an alternative method
of enforcement for violations of the Culver City Municipal Code.
   B.   The City Council further finds that an appropriate method of
enforcement for such violations is through the imposition of an administrative
fine, as authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4.
   C.   The procedures established in this Chapter shall be in addition to
criminal, civil or any other legal remedies established by law, which may be
pursued to address violations of the municipal code.
   D.   The City Council hereby finds and determines that enforcement of the
municipal code is a matter of local concern and serves an important public
purpose. Consistent with its powers as a charter city, the City adopts this
Subchapter in order to achieve the following goals:
      1.   To protect the public health safety and welfare of the citizens of
the City;
      2.   To gain compliance with the municipal code in a timely and efficient
manner;
      3.   To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of
an administrative fine;
      4.   To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or
refuse to comply with the provisions of the municipal code;
      5.   To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to pursue
responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system.
   E.   The imposition of an administrative fine shall be at the City's sole
discretion, and is one option the City has to address violations of the
municipal code.
   F.   By adopting this Subchapter, the City does not intend to limit its
discretion to utilize any other remedy, civil or criminal, for such violations
that the City may select in a particular case.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.010 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS FOR VIOLATIONS OF CODE.
   A.   This Chapter provides for an administrative remedy for any violation of
this Code, including continuing violations related to building, plumbing,
electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues, which remedy may be
exercised in place of, or in addition to, any other remedy allowed by law,
whether administrative, criminal, civil or equitable.
   B.   The City Manager is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
governing the civil administrative citation and hearing process, including the
delegation of the City Manager's duties under this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION or CITATION. A written notice to a responsible
person, issued by an enforcement officer, that a violation of this Code has
occurred.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR. The Community Development
Director of the City of Culver City, or his or her designee.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or OFFICER. Any police officer, City employee or agent
of the City designated by the City Manager, who has the authority and
responsibility to enforce the provisions of this Code.
   LEGAL INTEREST. Any interest that is represented by a deed of trust,
quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic's
lien or other similar instrument, which is recorded with the County Recorder.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A RESPONSIBLE PERSON. includes, but is not limited to,
the following:
      1.   A person who causes a Code violation to occur;
      2.   A person who maintains or allows a Code violation to continue, by
his or her action or failure to act;
      3.   A person whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a
Code violation by his or her action or failure to act;
      4.   A person who is the owner and/or a lessee or sub-lessee, with the
current right of possession, of real property where a property-related Code
violation occurs or exists;
      5.   A person who is the on-site manager of a business that normally
works daily at the site when the business is open, and is responsible for the
activities on such premises;
      6.   Any person with actual or apparent authority, possession or control
of real or personal property; or any other person, who creates maintains,
permits or allows a violation of this Code.
   For the purposes of this definition, PERSON includes a natural person or a
legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers,
trustees and general partners of a legal entity.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.020 USE OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   A.   Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation subject to
this Chapter has occurred, the officer may issue an administrative citation
imposing fines or penalties to responsible person(s) in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
   B.   The procedures established in this Chapter may be in addition to any
criminal, civil or other legal remedies established by law that may be pursued
to address violations of the municipal code.
      1.   The use of an administrative citation in place of or in addition to
other remedies shall be at the discretion of the City Manager, Community
Development Director, City Attorney, Enforcement Services Manager, or
enforcement officer.
      2.   Issuance of an administrative citation shall not be deemed a waiver
of any other enforcement remedies found within this Code.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.025 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   A.   Any responsible person who receives an administrative citation shall be
subject to the payment of fines as set forth in this Section.
   B.   Failure of any person to pay the administrative fines assessed by an
administrative citation may result in the matter being referred for collection,
which includes, but is not limited to, the filing of a small claims court
action.
   C.   Fines for administrative citations shall be as follows:
      1.   A fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation;
      2.   A fine not exceeding Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation of the same provision of this Code within one year;
      3.   A fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each
additional violation of the same provision of this Code within one year.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.030 CONTENTS OF CITATION.
   Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
   A.   Name of responsible person and known mailing address;
   B.   Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the
location where the violation(s) was observed;
   C.   The Code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the
violation(s);
   D.   The amount of the fine for the violation(s)
   E.   An explanation of how the fine shall be paid, and the time period
within which it shall be paid;
   F.   Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the
administrative citation may be contested, and the place to obtain a request for
hearing form to contest the administrative citation;
   G.   The name and signature of the enforcement officer issuing the
administrative citation; and
   H.   An order to correct the violation, the actions needed to correct the
violation, the timeframe within which to correct the violation, and an
explanation of the consequences for failing to correct the violation.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.035 SERVICE OF CITATION.
   A.   Procedures. The following procedures may be used in serving
administrative citations:
      1.   Personal service.
         a.   The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally
serve the responsible person, and obtain the signature of the responsible
person on the administrative citation.
         b.   If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the
administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the
validity of the administrative citation or subsequent proceedings.
      2.   Mail.
         a.   If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible
person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person
by certified mail, postage prepaid, with a requested return receipt.
         b.   Simultaneously, the administrative citation may be sent by first
class mail.
         c.   If the administrative citation is sent by certified mail and
returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective upon deposit of the
administrative citation in the U.S. mail.
      3.   Posting on property.
         a.   If the enforcement officer is unable to serve the administrative
citation under either Subsection 1. or 2. above, a copy of the administrative
citation may be posted on any real property within the City, in which the City
knows the responsible party has a legal interest.
         b.   Service under this Subsection shall be deemed effective on the
date the notice is posted.
      4.   Publication. 
         a.   If the enforcement officer cannot serve the administrative
citation by any of the preceding methods, the administrative citation may be
published in a newspaper reasonably likely to provide actual notice to the
responsible party subject to the citation.
         b.   The publication shall be once a week for four successive weeks in
a newspaper published at least once a week.
   B.   Completion of service.
      1.   The enforcement officer must complete a declaration of service.
      2.   Failure of the responsible person to receive any notice does not
affect the validity of the proceedings conducted under this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.040 SATISFACTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   A.   Alternatives. Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the
responsible person must do one of the following:
      1.   Pay the fine. 
         a.   Pay the fine to the City within 15 days from the date of the
administrative citation.
         b.   All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Culver City
and submitted to the Finance Department.
         c.   Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge a failure to
correct continuing violations, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by
the City.
         d.   Payment of the fine waives the responsible party's right to the
administrative citation hearing and appeal process;
      2.   Remedy the violation. If the violation is of a continuing nature,
pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or
zoning issues, is deemed by the enforcement officer not to create an immediate
danger to health and safety, and is corrected within the time given to remedy
the violation, no fine shall be imposed; or
      3.   Request a hearing. A request for a hearing must be filed in
accordance with the time limits and other provisions of §
1.02.045.
   B.   Failure to select and satisfy an alternative.
      1.   In the event the responsible party fails or refuses to select and
satisfy any of the alternatives set forth in this Section, then the penalty
shall be immediately due and owing to the City, and may be collected in any
manner allowed by law for collection of a debt.
      2.   Commencement of an action to collect the delinquent penalty shall
not preclude issuance of additional administrative citations to the responsible
party should the violations persist.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.045 HEARING OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   A.   Time to request a hearing. 
      1.   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there
was a violation or that he or she is the responsible person, by completing a
request for hearing form and returning it to the City within 15 days from the
date the administrative citation is served or deemed to have been served,
together with an advance deposit of the fine.
      2.   Such request for hearing forms shall be made available at no charge
by the City's Planning, Building and Enforcement Divisions.
      3.   A failure to file a timely request for hearing shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to appeal the citation and to seek judicial review.
   B.   Dismissal of citation. 
      1.   The City Manager or City Attorney may dismiss an administrative
citation at any time if it is determined to have been issued in error, or if
such dismissal is determined to be in the furtherance of justice, as determined
at the sole discretion of the City Manager or City Attorney.
      2.   In such event, any deposit made shall be refunded.
      3.   Also, any administrative citation fine which has been deposited
shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged
in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation, or that
there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.
   C.   Advance deposit hardship waiver.
      1.   Any responsible person who requests a hearing to contest an
administrative citation and who is financially unable to deposit the
administrative fines required may file a request for an advance deposit
hardship waiver.
         a.   The request shall be filed with the Community Development
Department on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available
from the Community Development Department, at the time the responsible person
requests a hearing,
         b.   The responsible person's failure to submit a completed form, with
all supporting documents, within 15 days after service of the administrative
citation, shall constitute a waiver of the right to receive a hardship waiver.
      2.   The Community Development Director may issue an advance deposit
hardship waiver only if the person requesting the waiver submits a sworn
affidavit, together with any supporting documents, demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the Director the person's financial inability to deposit with
the City the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. The Director's
decision whether to issue a hardship waiver shall be final.
   D.   Hearing procedure.
      1.   The City Manager shall establish procedures for the selection of a
hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. Administrative hearing
officers shall be selected in a manner that avoids the potential for pecuniary
or other bias.
      2.   No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing
officer shall be held unless and until a timely and complete request for
hearing form has been submitted, and the fine has been deposited in advance, or
a hardship waiver has been timely requested and approved.
      3.   After receipt of the request for hearing form, and fine deposit or
hardship waiver, a hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date
that is not less than 15 and not more than 60 days from the date that the
request for hearing form is filed in accordance with the provisions of this
Section.
         a.   The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time
and place set for the hearing by first class mail at least ten days prior to
the date of the hearing.
         b.   The responsible person may request one continuance of the
hearing, but in no event may the hearing commence later than 90 days after
receipt of the request for hearing form from the responsible person.
         c.   Further continuances or any continuance that will extend the
commencement of the hearing beyond 90 days after receipt of the request for
hearing shall be granted at the discretion of the hearing officer and only for
good cause.
      4.   The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear
at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a bar to judicial
review of the hearing officer decision, based upon a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
      5.   Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence
and discovery do not apply. The hearing officer shall only consider evidence
that is relevant to whether the violation occurred, and whether the responsible
person has caused or maintained a violation of the municipal code on the date
(s) specified in the administrative citation.
      6.   Each party shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support
of that party's case, and to cross-examine witnesses. At an administrative
hearing, the City bears the burden of proof to establish a violation of the
municipal code, and responsibility therefor, by a preponderance of the
evidence.
      7.   The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted
by the issuing enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
respective facts contained in those documents.
      8.   Upon request, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be
provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or
relied upon by the issuing enforcement officer when issuing the administrative
citation. In addition, if the issuing enforcement officer submits any
additional written reports concerning the administrative citation to the
hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of such
documentation shall be served by mail on the recipient of the administrative
citation.
      9.   Prior to issuing a written decision, the hearing officer may
continue the hearing and request additional information from the issuing
enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation.
   E.   Hearing officer's decision. 
      1.   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the hearing officer may immediately issue a verbal decision.
      2.   A written decision, including notice of the right to an appeal,
shall be issued within ten days of the hearing, and served via first class
mail.
         a.   The written decision shall be deemed to be served on the date the
decision is deposited with the United States Postal Service.
         b.   The written decision shall include the reasons for the decision,
and such decision shall be final.
      3.   If the hearing officer determines the administrative citation should
be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by
the City.
      4.   If the hearing officer determines the administrative citation should
be canceled and the fine was deposited with the City, then the City shall
promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine.
   F.   Collection of unpaid fines.
      1.   Failure to pay any unpaid administrative fines within 20 days of
service of the hearing officer's written decision, or such other time limit set
forth in the decision, unless the decision has been challenged by a timely
appeal as provided in §
1.02.050, this obligation shall constitute a special assessment and/or lien
against the real property on which the violation occurred.
      2.   The special assessment and/or lien shall be imposed pursuant to the
procedure set forth in §
9.04.060 of this Code.
      3.   Alternatively, the matter may be referred for collection, which
includes, but is not limited to, the filing of a small claims court action.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
§ 1.02.050 RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   A.   Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may
obtain judicial review of such decision by filing an appeal to be heard in the
Superior Court for the City's judicial district within 20 days of service of
the hearing officer's written decision.
      1.   Such appeal shall be pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code §
53069.4.
      2.   The appeal filed with the court shall also contain a proof of
service, showing a copy of the appeal was served upon the City to the attention
of the City Clerk.
   B.   If the court finds in favor of the appellant, the amount of the filing
fee, not to exceed Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00), as well as any fine deposit,
shall be paid to the appellant by the City. No other fees or costs shall be
paid unless ordered by the court.
   C.   If the court finds in favor of the City, any unpaid administrative
fines shall be paid to the City within 20 days of the court's decision.
(Ord. No. 2008-002 § 7 (part))
CHAPTER 1.03: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
1.03.005   Official Seal; description
   
1.03.006   Use of Official Seal
   
1.03.010   Official Flag; description
§ 1.03.005 OFFICIAL SEAL; DESCRIPTION.
   A.   Official Seal. The seal hereafter described is hereby adopted as the
Official Seal of the City of Culver City and the imprint thereof shall
hereafter be impressed upon all official documents and an enlarged copy of said
seal shall be placed on all motor equipment owned and operated by the City.
('65 Code, § 1-6)
   B.   Description. Around the outer edge shall appear the words, “City of
Culver City, Incorporated 1917,” and in the center shall appear the inscription
“Heart of Screenland,” which inscription shall run through the center of a
shield; in the upper left hand corner shall be depicted motion picture camera
equipment indicative of the present major industry in the City of Culver City;
in the lower left hand corner of said shield shall be depicted a representative
of the Golden Bear, emblematic of the State of California; in the upper right
hand corner a representation of the rising sun; and in the lower right hand
corner shall be depicted a sprig of lantana, the official flower of the City of
Culver City.
('65 Code, § 1-7)
(Ord. No. 453 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2008-002 § 6 (part))
§ 1.03.006 USE OF OFFICIAL CITY SEAL.
   A.   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the City Seal described in §
1.03.005. The City Clerk, City Manager and/or designee shall be authorized to
use the City Seal on any resolution, proclamation, certificate or other
instrument approved by the City Council or executed by the Mayor.
   B.   Except upon the approval of City Council, it shall be unlawful to use
the City Seal, or any copy, facsimile, imitation or reproduction thereof, for
any private or commercial purpose, including but not limited to:
      1.   Placing the City Seal, or any copy, facsimile, imitation or
reproduction thereof, on any written or printed material that is designed,
calculated, intended, or likely to confuse, deceive or mislead the public, or
to cause the reader of such written or printed material to believe it to be an
official City publication.
      2.   Placing the City Seal, or any copy, facsimile, imitation or
reproduction thereof, on any written or printed material in favor of or against
any ballot measure, or in favor of or against any candidate for public office.
      3.   Using the City Seal, or any copy, facsimile, imitation or
reproduction thereof, on any letterhead, document, badge, circular, envelope or
other disseminated material, except for official City business.
(Ord. No. 2007-009 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-002 § 6 (part))
§ 1.03.010 OFFICIAL FLAG; DESCRIPTION.
   A.   Official Flag. The flag hereafter described is hereby adopted as the
Official Flag of the City of Culver City, for the purpose of advertising and
publicizing the city.
('65 Code, § 1-8)
   B.   Description. On a background of white shall appear a blue facsimile of
the Official Seal of the City and at the upper left hand corner a red five-
point star. Below said seal, in large letters, shall appear the name Culver
City.
('65 Code, § 1-9)
(Ord. No. 528 §§ 1,2; Ord. No. 2008-002 § 6 (part))
TITLE 3: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
3.01.   CITY COUNCIL
         
3.02.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
         
3.03.   COMMISSIONS AND AGENCIES
         
3.04.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
3.05.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
         
3.06.   CAMPAIGN FINANCE AND OTHER POLITICAL ACTIVITIES
         
3.07.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
         
3.08.   TAXATION
         
3.09.   DISASTERS AND EMERGENCIES
         
3.10.   CITY POLICIES
         
3.11.   ELECTRONIC FILING
         
3.12.   EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES FOR CHALLENGES TO FEES, CHARGES,
AND ASSESSMENTS OF REAL PROPERTY.
CHAPTER 3.01: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions  
   
3.01.005   Compensation for Council members
   
3.01.010   Council vacancies in event of emergencies
   
3.01.015   Council member: City employment prohibition
   
3.01.020   Finance and Judiciary Committee
Meetings
   
3.01.100   Time and place
   
3.01.105   Changing place of meeting; notification
   
3.01.110   Council agenda
   
3.01.115   Mayor's duties
   
3.01.120   Absent members
   
3.01.125   Minutes
   
3.01.130   Rules of order
   
3.01.135   Addressing the City Council
   
3.01.140   Silence deemed affirmative vote
   
3.01.145   Decorum; enforcement by ex-officio Sergeant-at-Arms
   
3.01.150   Ordinances, resolutions, motions and contracts
   
3.01.155   [Reserved]
   
3.01.160   Disobedience of subpoenas; misleading statements under oath
prohibited
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 3.01.005 COMPENSATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   Pursuant to the City Charter and Cal. Gov't Code § 36516, the salary of each
Council member is hereby established at One Thousand Two Hundred Sixty-One
Dollars and Twenty-Six Cents ($1,261.26) per month.
('65 Code, § 2-1.A) (Ord. No. CS-723 § 2; Ord. No. CS-980 § 1; Ord. No. 83-0004
§ 1; Ord. No. 85-002 § 1; Ord. No. 85-016 § 1; Ord. No. 87-004 § 1; Ord. No.
89-024 § 1; Ord. No. 91-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2024-007 § 1)
§ 3.01.010 COUNCIL VACANCIES IN EVENT OF EMERGENCIES.
   In the event of a local emergency, declaration of a state of emergency, or a
state of war emergency, the City Council may be reconstituted and vacancies
filled pursuant to §
3.09.025(B) of this code.
(Ord. No. 2010-004 § 1)
§ 3.01.015 COUNCIL MEMBER: CITY EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITION.
   No person elected to the position of Council member shall accept or hold any
position as a City employee until two years have elapsed after such person has
left the office to which he or she was elected.
(Ord. No. 2008-003 § 1)
§ 3.01.020 FINANCE AND JUDICIARY COMMITTEE.
   A.   The Council shall appoint two (2) of its members and one alternate as
members of the Council Committee on Finance and Judiciary, whose duty it shall
be, on behalf of the Council, to review demands the City Treasurer has denied,
and to sign demand sheets. Should the Treasurer deny a demand, the Committee
may refer the matter to the City Council who may in their discretion order the
Treasurer to pay such demand from City funds.
   B.   The demand, payroll and Section 8 checks of the City shall bear the
signatures of the Mayor and City Treasurer.
('65 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. No. 96-006 § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Finance and revenue, see
Ch. 3.07
MEETINGS
§ 3.01.100 TIME AND PLACE.
   All official, regular and adjourned meetings of the City Council shall be
held in the City Hall on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 7:00
p.m., unless otherwise specified by resolution of the City Council. In the
event there is a need to hold a closed session, the City Council meeting for
closed session purposes will convene at a time either prior to or after the
regular Council session on the same date, with the regular Council session to
commence at 7:00 p.m. If any regular meeting shall fall on a legal holiday, no
meeting shall be held on such holiday, but shall be held on the next succeeding
day thereafter that is not a holiday at 7:00 p.m. LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in
this section, shall mean New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents’
Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans’ Day, Thanksgiving Day
and the following day, and Christmas.
('65 Code, § 2-1) (Ord. No. CS-333 § 1; Ord. No. CS-688 § 1; Ord. No. CS-757 §
1 (1); Ord. No. 93-005 § 1; Ord. No. 2004-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 4; Ord.
No. 2018-016 § 1)
§ 3.01.105 CHANGING PLACE OF MEETING; NOTIFICATION.
   A.   Changing place of meeting.
      1.   After any such meeting has been opened in the Council Chambers, the
Mayor or the City Council, as provided in §
608 of the Charter, may, if it is deemed necessary, change the place of the
meeting by reason of emergency, overcrowding, public safety, or for such other
emergency as comes within the intent of Charter §
608.
      2.   Upon such action by the Mayor or the City Council, the Council shall
publicly recess such meeting to immediately reconvene at another place within
the City Hall, within the Veterans Memorial Building, or such other building
within the City of Culver City where it may transact any business lawfully
brought before it and may therefrom lawfully adjourn.
('65 Code, § 2-1.1)
   B.   Notification of change of meeting place. In the event of the
determination to move the meeting place, such shall be publicly announced
immediately upon making such decision and the notice specifying the place to
which the meeting has been adjourned shall be posted at the Council Chamber
entrance so as to be plainly visible from the outside of the Council Chambers.
('65 Code, § 2-1.2) (Ord. No. CS-757 § 1 (1.1, 1.2))
§ 3.01.110 COUNCIL AGENDA.
   All matters to be submitted to the City Council shall be delivered in
written form to the City Manager, whereupon he shall arrange an agenda of such
matters, furnishing a copy to each member of the Council, City Clerk and City
Attorney prior to the Council meeting.
('65 Code, § 2-6) (Ord. No. CS-333 § 4; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 3.01.115 MAYOR'S DUTIES.
   A.   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer and shall assume his place and
duties as such immediately following his election. He shall state questions
coming before the Council, announce its decision on subjects and decide all
questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the Council as a whole,
in which event a majority vote shall govern and conclusively determine such
question of order. He shall move, second and vote on all questions, and on roll
call his name shall be called last.
   B.   The Mayor shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted and
contracts approved by the City Council at meetings at which he is in
attendance. In the event of his absence, the Mayor Pro-Tempore shall sign such
documents as have been adopted and approved by the Council. A contract may be
signed by any person designated by the City Council.
('65 Code, § 2-7) (Ord. No. CS-333 § 5; Ord. No. 87-007 § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Selection of Mayor and Vice Mayor, duties, see Charter §
606
§ 3.01.120 ABSENT MEMBERS.
   In case a quorum should not be present at any meeting of the Council and
there is important business to be transacted or disposed of without delay, any
two (2) members of the Council may cause written notice to be served personally
upon the absent members, together with the request for their immediate
attendance. Upon service of such notice upon him, it shall be the duty of such
absent member or members to at once attend the meeting, unless prevented by
sickness or death in the immediate family, or for other cause deemed sufficient
to excuse his attendance by the other members of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 2-8) (Ord. No. CS-333 § 8; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 5)
§ 3.01.125 MINUTES.
   The minutes of the City Council, or journal of their proceedings, shall be
kept by the City Clerk and shall be neatly typewritten in a book kept for that
purpose, with a record of each particular type of business transacted set off
in paragraphs, with proper sub-heads.
('65 Code, § 2-9) (Ord. No. 749 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 6)
§ 3.01.130 RULES OF ORDER.
   The proceedings of the Council shall be governed by the latest edition of
Rosenberg's Rules of Order, on all matters pertaining to parliamentary law, but
no ordinance, resolution, proceeding or other action of the Council shall be
invalidated, or the legality thereof otherwise affected, by the failure or
omission to observe or follow said rules. This section shall also apply to the
City's Commissions, Boards and Committees.
('65 Code, § 2-10) (Ord. No. CS-333 § 23; Ord. No. 2024-004 § 1)
§ 3.01.135 ADDRESSING THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Any person may address the City Council at a public meeting on an item
within the subject matter jurisdiction of the City Council. The City Council
may establish public comment procedures, including time limits, which shall be
included in the posted agenda.
   (B)   This section shall also apply to the City's Commissions, Boards and
Committees.
('65 Code, § 2-11) (Ord. No. CS- 333 §§ 13, 14, 15; Ord. No. 94-018 § 1; Ord.
No. 98-017, § 1; Ord. No. 2024-004 § 2)
§ 3.01.140 SILENCE DEEMED AFFIRMATIVE VOTE.
   Unless a member of the Council states that he is not voting, his silence
shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.
('65 Code, § 2-12) (Ord. No. CS-333 § 16)
§ 3.01.145 DECORUM; ENFORCEMENT BY EX-OFFICIO SERGEANT-AT-ARMS.
   A.   Decorum. The purpose of the rules of decorum is to promote mutual
respect, civility, and orderly conduct among elected and appointed City
officials, City staff, and members of the public. Other rules and standards of
decorum and civility may be established by resolution of the City Council.
      1.   By Council members. While the City Council is in session, the
Council members must preserve order and decorum including, but not limited to,
treating everyone courteously, listening to others respectfully, providing fair
and equal treatment for all persons and matters coming before the City Council,
and allowing other Council members and members of the public to speak without
intimidation or interruption, except as otherwise herein provided.
      2.   By members of the public. Members of the public are expected to
observe the rules of order and decorum established by the City Council,
including, but not limited to treating others courteously, listening to others
respectfully, and allow Council members and others to speak without
intimidation or interruption.
         a.   No person shall disrupt a City Council meeting.
         b.   As used in this section, "disrupting" means engaging in behavior
during a City Council meeting that actually disrupts, disturbs, impedes, or
renders infeasible the orderly conduct of the meeting and includes, but is not
limited to, one of the following:
            i.   A failure to comply with reasonable and lawful regulations
adopted by the City Council pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 54954.3 or any other
law.
            ii.   Engaging in behavior that constitutes use of force or a true
threat of force.
         c.   "True threat of force" means a threat that has sufficient indicia
of intent and seriousness, that a reasonable observer would perceive it to be
an actual threat to use force by the person making the threat.
('65 Code, § 2-13)
   B.   Removal. The Presiding Officer of the City Council or their designee
may remove, or cause the removal of, an individual for disrupting the meeting.
      1.   Prior to removing, or causing the removal of, an individual, the
Presiding Officer or their designee shall warn the individual that their
behavior is disrupting the meeting and that their failure to cease their
behavior may result in their removal. The Presiding Officer or their designee
may then remove, or cause the removal of, the individual if they do not
promptly cease their disruptive behavior. This paragraph does not apply to any
behavior described in § 3.01.145.A.2.b.ii.
   C.   Enforcement. The Chief of Police or designee shall be ex-officio
Sergeant-at-Arms of the City Council. They shall carry out all orders and
instructions given them by the Presiding Officer for the purpose of maintaining
order and decorum in the Council Chambers.
   D.   Commissions, Boards and Committees. This section shall also apply to
the City's Commissions, Boards and Committees.
('65 Code, § 2-14) (Ord. No. CS-333 §§ 17, 18; Ord. No. 2024- 004 § 3)
§ 3.01.150 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS AND CONTRACTS.
   A.   Submission of ordinances. No ordinance shall be prepared for
presentation to the Council unless ordered by a majority vote of the Council,
except that the Mayor, City Manager and City Attorney may present ordinances
and resolutions to the City Council on the initiative of any of those officers.
   B.   Prior approval by administrative staff. All ordinances, resolutions and
contract documents shall, before presentation to the Council, have been
approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney or his authorized
representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by
the City Manager or his authorized representative, where there are substantive
matters of administration involved.
('65 Code, § 2-15) (Ord. No. CS-333 § 21; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 3.01.155 [RESERVED]
§ 3.01.160 DISOBEDIENCE OF SUBPOENAS; MISLEADING STATEMENTS UNDER OATH
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or file, on his own
behalf or for any other person, a false or misleading application or statement
under any form of oath to the City Council or any City officer, in relation to
any matter or issue in which the City has an interest in the protection of the
public welfare or interest.
('65 Code, § 2-17) (Ord. No. CS-473; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 7)
CHAPTER 3.02: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
3.02.005   Employee bonds; fixing amount and coverage
   
3.02.010   City Manager
   
3.02.015   City Attorney
   
3.02.020   City Clerk; salary
   
3.02.025   City Treasurer; salary
   
3.02.030   Functions and duties of City Engineer
Cross-reference:
   Eligibility and duties of City Attorney, see Charter §§
900 and
901
   General provisions relating to officers and employees, see Charter §§
1400 et seq.
   Non-interference of City Council with City Manager, see Charter §
701
   Personnel officer; duties, see §
3.05.020
   Political activity of city officers, employees and consultants, see §
3.06.055
   Powers and duties of City Manager, see Charter §
700
§ 3.02.005 EMPLOYEE BONDS; FIXING AMOUNT AND COVERAGE.
   The official bond for the officers and employees of the City is hereby fixed
in the type, amount and coverage indicated herein:
   A.   Individual Faithful Performance Bonds:
   City Treasurer      $500,000.00 per occurrence
   City Clerk      $500.000.00 per occurrence
   B.   Employee Blanket Bond, $500.000.00 per occurrence.
   Coverage:
      1.   Faithful Performance Coverage for City Council members, management
employees, and police sergeants when acting as watch commanders.
      2.   Honesty Coverage for all other City employees.
('65 Code, § 2-27) (Ord. No. CS-534; Ord. No. CS-694 § 1; Ord. No. 84-013 § 1;
Ord. No. 86-008 § 1)
§ 3.02.010 CITY MANAGER.
   A.   Appointment; compensation.
      1.   The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council solely on
the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and ability to
serve in the unclassified service under the supervision of the City Council.
      2.   The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council
shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution.
('65 Code, § 2-19)
   B.   Duties and powers. The City Manager shall have the following duties and
powers:
      1.   Recommendations to City Council. To conduct studies and to make
recommendations to the City Council concerning all functions of City government
following analysis thereof; to recommend ordinances for adoption by the City
Council, subject to the prior approval of the City Attorney as to the form
thereof;
      2.   Investigation of complaints. To investigate all complaints in
relation to matters concerning the administration of the City government, and
to take appropriate measures to obtain compliance with the obligations of
permits, franchises and privileges granted by the City;
      3.   Supervision of public property. To exercise general supervision over
all public buildings, parks, and all other property which is subordinate to the
control of the City Council;
      4.   Public Relations Officer. To serve as Public Relations Officer of
the City and to cooperate with all organizations which advance the interests of
the City and its residents;
      5.   Inventory control. To prepare and keep current an inventory of
personal property owned by the City, and to recommend the acquisition, transfer
or disposition of City property; and
      6.   Personnel Officer. To serve as Personnel Officer, personally or by
delegation, and to recommend in all matters pertaining thereto.
('65 Code, § 2-20) (Ord. No. CS-84; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 8)
§ 3.02.015 CITY ATTORNEY.
   A.   Duties. In addition to those set forth in the Charter, the City
Attorney shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   Improvement act work. To perform such legal work in connection with
street, sidewalk, sewer, and lighting improvement districts as required by the
City Council;
      2.   Attorney for Police Department. To serve as attorney for the Police
Department in all matters pertaining to law enforcement. The City Council may
assign the duties of prosecution of State misdemeanors to either the District
Attorney or the City Attorney by resolution;
      3.   Drafting agreements. To draft all contracts and agreements to which
the City of Culver City may be a party, and to advise the City Council and/or
any City Officer in connection therewith; and
      4.   Attendance at meetings. To attend all meetings of the City Council,
unless excused, with the duty of reporting on or discussing the legal aspect of
any matters before the Council at such meeting, and giving his advice or
opinion in writing when requested by the City Council or by any Board or
Officer of the City.
('65 Code, § 2-21)
   B.   Hours of work. The City Attorney shall be required to devote himself to
his duties with the City of Culver City a minimum of forty (40) hours per week,
and shall not be eligible for overtime compensation.
('65 Code, § 2-22)
(Ord. No. CS-544; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 9)
§ 3.02.020 CITY CLERK; SALARY.
   The salary of the City Clerk shall be Seven Hundred and Thirty-Two Dollars
($732.00) per calendar month commencing April 19, 1960, and shall be payment
for all services required by the City Charter.
('65 Code, § 2-25) (Ord. No. CS-386 § 1)
§ 3.02.025 CITY TREASURER; SALARY.
   The salary of the City Treasurer shall be Seven Hundred Thirty-Two Dollars
($732.00) per calendar month commencing April 19, 1960, and shall be payment
for all services required by the City Charter.
('65 Code, § 2-26) (Ord. No. CS-385 § 1)
§ 3.02.030 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF CITY ENGINEER.
   Wherever in this Code any function or duty is assigned to the Director of
Public Works or the Department of Public Works, it shall be deemed to mean that
said function or duty is assigned to the City Engineer and the Engineering
Division, respectively.
('65 Code, § 2-95) (Ord. No. CS-901 § 1)
CHAPTER 3.03: COMMISSIONS AND AGENCIES
Section
General Provisions
   
3.03.005   Creation; composition; eligibility; compensation
   
3.03.010   Terms of members
   
3.03.015   Term limits
   
3.03.020   Removal; forfeiture of membership
   
3.03.025   Meetings; meeting place; quorum; minutes
   
3.03.030   Compliance with applicable laws
   
3.03.035   City Council retains jurisdiction
   
3.03.040   Policy
Civil Service Commission
   
3.03.100   Powers and duties
Cultural Affairs Commission
   
3.03.200   Powers and duties
Parks, Recreation And Community Services Commission
   
3.03.300   Powers and duties
Planning Commission
   
3.03.400   Powers and duties
   
3.03.405   Board of Zoning Adjustment
Redevelopment Agency
   
3.03.500   Necessity declared; authority
   
3.03.505   Agency designated; powers and duties
   
3.03.510   Term limits
   
3.03.515   Authorization to continue agency
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 3.03.005 CREATION; COMPOSITION; ELIGIBILITY; COMPENSATION.
   There shall be a Civil Service Commission, Cultural Affairs Commission,
Parks, Recreation, and Community Services Commission, and Planning Commission,
each consisting of five (5) members to be appointed by the City Council.
Commissioners shall be residents of the City, none of whom shall hold any paid
office or employment in the City Government. Minors, age sixteen (16) or older,
are eligible to apply with parental or legal guardian consent. No person may
serve on more than one (1) Commission at the same time. Compensation of
Commissioners, if any, may be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.03.010 TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Commissions shall generally serve for a term of four (4)
years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. The
terms of at least one (1) and not more than two (2) members shall expire on
July 1 of each succeeding odd-numbered year, and any appointment to fill an
unexpired term shall be for such unexpired period only. The City Council may
determine to appoint persons to the Commissions for terms less than four (4)
years for purposes of creating staggered terms or for any other reason
determined by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.015 TERM LIMITS.
   A.   No person shall serve more than two consecutive full terms as
Commissioner on any one (1) Commission. If a person serves a partial term in
excess of two (2) years, it shall be considered a full term for the purpose of
this provision.
   B.   Nothing in this provision shall act as a bar to service as a
Commissioner on the same Commission after at least two (2) years have elapsed
from the last full term as Commissioner.
   C.   A Commissioner who has served two (2) consecutive full terms as a
Commissioner on one (1) Commission may serve on a different Commission without
waiting the required two (2) year period provided for in this section.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.020 REMOVAL; FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP.
   A.   Commissioners serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be
removed at any time by a majority vote of the Council.
   B.   The grounds for forfeiture of the seat of a Commissioner are the
following:
      1.   The Commissioner is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude; or
      2.   The Commissioner ceases to be a resident and lawfully registered
voter of the city.
   C.   Upon request of the affected Commissioner whose seat has been
forfeited, the City Council shall hold a public hearing during which the City
Council shall consider declaring the seat vacant. The conclusion of the City
Council shall be at the City Council's sole discretion and shall be final. In
the absence of such a request and notwithstanding the provisions of §
3.03.005 hereof, after the occurrence of any of the foregoing events, the seat
of the Commissioner may be declared vacant by the City Council by a vote of at
least three (3) of its members.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.025 MEETINGS; MEETING PLACE; QUORUM; MINUTES.
   A.   Meetings. Each Commission shall meet on an as-needed basis as
determined in the sole discretion of the City Manager or duly authorized
designee. Meetings shall at all times be open to the public and shall be held
in the Council Chambers except when such Chambers are required for any meeting
of the City Council or when the Commission determines that a meeting should be
held in a different location due to the subject matter being considered, in
which case another room or public place within the City limits may be used.
   B.   Change of meeting place. Notice of change in meeting place shall be
posted on the front door of the Council Chambers.
   C.   Quorum. A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum.
   D.   Minutes. Commission minutes shall be kept in accordance with City
Council policy.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.030 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS.
   Commissioners shall comply with all applicable laws and City Council
policies.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.035 CITY COUNCIL RETAINS JURISDICTION.
   Unless prohibited by applicable federal or state law or the City Charter,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, or where final decision
making authority has been delegated by the City Council to another person or
body, the City Council retains jurisdiction on all items which may otherwise be
considered by the various Commissions. Either the City Council or the City
Manager, in their sole discretion, may determine to have any item heard
directly by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.040 POLICY.
   It shall be the policy of the City Council that each Commission shall ensure
that its programs, policies and activities provide equal access and
opportunities to all persons.
(Ord. No. 2020-004 § 2 (part))
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 3.03.100 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Civil Service Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council on matters pertaining
to the Civil Service System;
   B.   Hear appeals or grievances of any officer or employee under the Civil
Service System who is suspended, demoted or removed and report in writing its
findings and conclusions;
   C.   Examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or the
production of evidence before it by subpoenas issued in the name of the City
and attested by the City Clerk; and
   D.   Recommend new or amended Civil Service Rules consistent with the City
Charter and Civil Service System, holding public hearings thereon before
presentation to City Council for approval.
   E.   Periodically, at the discretion of the City Council, make a study of
salaries being paid by other public and private agencies, in order to ascertain
whether the salaries being paid City employees for similar work are comparable,
fair and reasonable and make recommendations with respect thereto to the City
Council;
   F.   Perform such other duties with respect to the Civil Service System, not
inconsistent with the City Charter or this Code, as may be prescribed by
ordinance, resolution, City Council policy or other City Council action.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
CULTURAL AFFAIRS COMMISSION
§ 3.03.200 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Cultural Affairs Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council on matters pertaining
to the enrichment of the community through fine arts, visual arts, performing
arts, arts education, historic preservation and cultural issues;
   B.   Serve as an advocate for cultural activities and programs within the
City;
   C.   Serve as an advocate for equity, diversity and inclusion in cultural
activities and programs within the City;
   D.   Implement the City's Public Art Program, and encourage the integration
of cultural affairs into the social and economic fabric of the City to improve
the quality of life for City residents; and
   E.   Perform such other duties, not inconsistent with the City Charter or
this Code, as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution, City Council policy
or other City Council action.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-004 § 3; Ord. No. 2023-007 § 1)
PARKS, RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
§ 3.03.300 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Parks, Recreation, and Community Services Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:
   A.   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and City Manager on
matters pertaining to public recreation, parks, recreation/community center
facilities, open space and tree programs, where such trees are located in parks
and open space, playgrounds, and music and entertainment as may from time to
time be performed in the City's parks;
   B.   At the direction of the City Council or the City Manager, assist staff
assigned to review the requirements of the City for facilities relating to the
functions set forth in division A., and to make recommendations related to the
adoption and updating of City master plans relating to parks, recreation, and
open space;
   C.   At the direction of the City Council or the City Manager, recommend and
support program policies relating to various community service functions of the
City, including, but not limited to, programs for youth, teens, seniors, and
people with special needs;
   D.   At the direction of the City Council or the City Manager, balance
program and project recommendations by applying realistic expectations of
budgetary and staffing resources, environmental sustainability, neighborhood
compatibility, and other relevant factors; and
   E.   Perform such other duties, not inconsistent with the City Charter or
this Code, as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution, City Council policy
or other City Council action.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-004 § 4)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 3.03.400 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   After a public hearing thereon, recommend to the City Council the
adoption, amendment or repeal of the General Plan, or any part thereof, for the
physical development of the City.
   B.   Exercise such control over zoning, land subdivisions and building as is
granted to it by the City Council and by the laws of the State of California;
   C.   Make recommendations concerning proposed public works and for the
clearance and rebuilding of blighted or substandard areas within the City and
public improvement in general;
   D.   Upon the direction of the City Council, issue Orders to Show Cause why
use permits, exceptions or variances granted should not be revoked for
violation and to hold necessary hearings, transmitting findings and
recommendations to City Council. A person aggrieved by the action of the
Commission may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal in
accordance with the appeal procedures and within the time limits set forth in
Chapter 17.640 of this Code; and
   E.   Perform such other duties, not inconsistent with the City Charter or
this Code, as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution, City Council Policy
or other City Council action.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.405 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT.
   A.   The Planning Commission shall appoint two of its members to act as a
Board of Zoning Adjustment. The duties of said Board shall include the
following:
      1.   To hear appeals involving error in any order, requirement, or
determination by any City official in the administration , of Title 17 of this
Code (the "Zoning Code").
      2.   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance,
resolution or City Council policy.
   B.   In the event any applicant, City official or interested person is
aggrieved by a determination of the Board of Zoning Adjustment an appeal
therefrom may be taken, in writing, to the Planning Commission as a whole, in
accordance with the appeal procedures and within the time limits set forth in
Chapter 17.640 of the Zoning Code. The Board may refer such matters to the
Planning Commission, as a whole, as it deems advisable.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
§ 3.03.500 NECESSITY DECLARED; AUTHORITY.
   It is hereby found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community
Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by
Section 33100 of said Law to function in the City of Culver City and said
agency is hereby authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under
the Community Redevelopment Law.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.505 AGENCY DESIGNATED; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Council of the City of Culver City, California hereby declares
itself to be the redevelopment agency to be known as Culver City Redevelopment
Agency and that all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by
the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency shall be, and are, vested in
this body.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.510 TERM LIMITS.
   A.   No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms on the
Redevelopment Agency. If a person serves a partial term in excess of two (2)
years, it shall be considered a full term for the purpose of this provision.
   B.   Nothing in this provision shall act as a bar to service on the
Redevelopment Agency after at least two (2) years have elapsed from the last
full term.
(Ord. No. 2011-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.03.515 AUTHORIZATION TO CONTINUE AGENCY.
   A.   Authorization to Continue Agency. Subject to Subsections C. and D.
herein, the City hereby commits to comply with and make the remittances
required by Cal. Health & Safety Code, Div. 24, Part 1.9, and authorize the
continuation of the Agency. Any remittance payments required to be paid by the
City pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code, Div. 24, Part 1.9, shall be paid
solely from Agency funds and/or assets transferred to the City in accordance
with Cal. Health & Safety Code, Div. 24, Part 1.9.
   B.   Reservation of Rights. It is the position of the City that certain or
all provisions of Assembly Bill 26 and Assembly Bill 27 (AB26/AB27) violate the
Laws, as referenced in the recitals in Ordinance No. 2011-008, and are invalid
and unenforceable. Neither the enactment of this section, nor the
acknowledgment of or references to any provisions of AB 26/AB 27, nor the
City's payment of any remittances contemplated by AB 27 shall be deemed to be,
nor are they intended as, an acknowledgment of the validity of AB 26/AB 27, and
the City reserves all rights in its sole discretion to challenge the validity
of any or all provisions of AB 26/AB 27 in any administrative or judicial
proceeding and/or repeal this section, without prejudice to the City's right to
recover any amounts remitted under Cal. Health & Safety Code, Div. 24, Part
1.9.
   C.   Enactment. This section shall be deemed as “enacted” within the meaning
of Cal. Health & Safety Code, Div. 24, Part 1.9 upon the adoption of this
section.
   D.   Authorization of Implementing Actions. The City Manager is hereby
authorized to take any actions necessary to implement this section and comply
with Cal. Health & Safety Code, Div. 24, Part 1.9, including without
limitation, providing required notices to the County Auditor-Controller, the
State Controller, and the State's Department of Finance; entering into any
agreements with the Agency to make the remittance payments; or making any
remittance payments.
(Ord. No. 2011-008 §§ 1-4)
CHAPTER 3.04: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions  
   
3.04.005   Service fees
Police Badges
   
3.04.100   Official badges; type; manner issued
   
3.04.105   Official identification cards
   
3.04.110   Possession of unauthorized police badges unlawful
   
3.04.115   Authorization to manufacture badges
   
3.04.120   Record of badges
   
3.04.125   Police badge revolving fund
   
3.04.130   Return of police badges
Police Reserve Corps
   
3.04.200   Establishment
   
3.04.205   Membership
   
3.04.210   Duties and authority
   
3.04.220   Uniform and identification
   
3.04.225   Termination from membership
   
3.04.230   False impersonation
Disposition of Unclaimed Property
   
3.04.300   Unclaimed property; disposition procedure
   
3.04.305   Records
   
3.04.310   Disposition of funds
   
3.04.315   Conversion of unclaimed property by city
   
3.04.320   Abandoned property
Military Equipment Use Policy
   
3.04.400   Definitions
   
3.04.405   Military Equipment Use Policy requirement
   
3.04.410   Reports on the use of military equipment
Cross-reference:
   Police officers' and fire fighters' salaries, see §§
3.05.200 through
3.05.215
   Unruly parties and gatherings; law enforcement expenses, see §§
9.06.005 through
9.06.025
   Application for parade permit; investigation by Police Department, see §
9.06.120
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 3.04.005 SERVICE FEES.
   A.   Purpose. It is the purpose and intention of this Section to provide for
a method whereby certain services rendered by the Police Department are
compensated on the basis of an equitable schedule as determined by City Council
resolution.
('65 Code, § 28-18)
   B.   Services included. The following services are to be compensated in sums
fixed by City Council resolution:
      1.   Providing copies of traffic accident reports;
      2.   Issuing citizen clearance letters and related services;
      3.   Taking fingerprints;
      4.   Furnishing accident photographs to persons involved in an accident.
('65 Code, § 28-19)
   C.   Exceptions. No fee shall be charged for fingerprints of:
      1.   Persons in criminal matters;
      2.   Applicants for Culver City Civil Service examinations;
      3.   Applicants for Culver City licenses;
      4.   Persons required to be fingerprinted for service in charitable
organizations.
('65 Code, § 28-20) (Ord. No. CS-457)
POLICE BADGES
§ 3.04.100 OFFICIAL BADGES; TYPE; MANNER ISSUED.
   A.   Type. The official police officer badge of the City shall be of the
type and design and size approved by the City Council in Resolutions Nos. 2249
and 2617. The “Shield type” shall be issued exclusively to regularly employed
members of the Police Department.
('65 Code, § 28-1)
   B.   Manner issued. All police badges shall be issued only by the City
Council.
('65 Code, § 28-2)
§ 3.04.105 OFFICIAL IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   An official identification card of the type approved by the Chief of Police
shall be issued to each regular appointed police officer, which card shall
contain photograph, description, name, address, rank, and number and be signed
by the Chief of Police.
('65 Code, § 28-3)
§ 3.04.110 POSSESSION OF UNAUTHORIZED POLICE BADGES UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any official
badge of the type designated herein, unless such badge has been regularly
issued to him pursuant to his official capacity with the City.
('65 Code, § 28-5) (Ord. No. 943 § 1 (part))
§ 3.04.115 AUTHORIZATION TO MANUFACTURE BADGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manufacture,
design, make, sell or transfer any badge which closely resembles an official
badge as designated herein, unless the City Council has authorized same in
writing.
('65 Code, § 28-6)
§ 3.04.120 RECORD OF BADGES.
   The Chief of Police shall at all times keep a record of all badges issued
and shall act as custodian of all unissued badges.
('65 Code, § 28-7)
§ 3.04.125 POLICE BADGE REVOLVING FUND.
   The City Treasurer shall administer a fund to be known as the Police Badge
Revolving Fund, which shall provide the funds for return of badge deposits, re-
plating and repairing of badges.
('65 Code, § 28-8)
§ 3.04.130 RETURN OF POLICE BADGES.
   It is unlawful for any person, upon demand of the Chief of Police, not to
return to the Chief of Police any badge issued to said person by the City;
provided, that upon retirement a badge engraved “retired” may be retained by
the retired employee.
('65 Code, § 28-9) (Ord. No. 943 § 1 (part))
POLICE RESERVE CORPS
§ 3.04.200 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established, in and for the City of Culver City, a Police
Reserve Corps, each member appointed by the Chief of Police.
('65 Code, § 28-12) (Ord. No. CS-58 § 1)
§ 3.04.205 MEMBERSHIP.
   The membership of the Police Reserve Corps shall be limited to 100 members.
('65 Code, § 28-13) (Ord. No. CS-58 § 2)
§ 3.04.210 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   The members of the Corps shall be qualified to assist regular police
officers in their duties and shall be subject to such requirements of training
as prescribed by the Chief of Police and the Police Reserve Manual as adopted
by the City Council. When lawfully performing duties assigned by the Chief of
Police, the Corps members shall have the same power as a regular police
officer.
('65 Code, § 28-14) (Ord. No. CS-770 § 1)
§ 3.04.220 UNIFORM AND IDENTIFICATION.
   During service in the Corps, each member shall wear such uniform and shall
carry such identification as prescribed by the Chief of Police.
('65 Code, § 28-15) (Ord. No. CS-58 § 5)
§ 3.04.225 TERMINATION FROM MEMBERSHIP.
   The Chief of Police may terminate any member of the Corps at any time.
('65 Code, § 28-16) (Ord. No. CS-58 § 7)
§ 3.04.230 FALSE IMPERSONATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not an authorized member of the Corps to
represent himself in any manner as one.
('65 Code, § 28-17) (Ord. No. CS-58 § 6)
DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 3.04.300 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; DISPOSITION PROCEDURE.
   A.   Unclaimed property in the possession of the Police Department shall be
held by the Police Department for a period of at least four (4) months, except
that bicycles shall be held for a period of at least three (3) months.
   B.   Thereafter, unless otherwise provided by law, the Police Department
shall:
      1.   Sell such property at public auction to the highest bidder, with
notice of the sale being given by the Chief of Police at least five days before
the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation, circulated within the City and published in the County, or
      2.   Transfer such property to the Purchasing Officer for sale to the
public at public auction, or
      3.   Transfer to the Chief of Police any such bicycle which is needed for
use in a program designed to prevent juvenile delinquency; a record of such use
or disposition shall be kept by the Chief.
('65 Code, § 28-21) (Ord. No. CS-94 § 1; Ord. No. CS-970 § 1)
§ 3.04.305 RECORDS.
   The Chief of Police shall keep a complete record showing when such property
came into the possession of the Police Department, a description thereof, a
record of where the same was found or from whom taken, and when claimed, the
person making such claim, or when advertised and sold, the date of such sale,
the name and address of the purchaser and the sale price thereof.
('65 Code, § 28-22)
§ 3.04.310 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   All monies received as a result of such sales shall be paid to the City
Treasurer and by him deposited in the General Fund of the City.
('65 Code, § 28-23) (Ord. No. CS-94 § 2)
§ 3.04.315 CONVERSION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY BY CITY.
   Any property not exceeding Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) in value or
cash not exceeding Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) coming into the possession
of the Police Department which is determined by the City Manager to be
unclaimed and needed for City use shall be converted for City use; provided,
however, that nothing shall be construed herein to limit or modify the
provisions of the Penal Code pertaining to the disposition of weapons or
contraband. Property valued in excess of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) or
cash exceeding Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) shall be submitted to the City
Council for review before conversion.
('65 Code, § 28-25) (Ord. No. CS-538; Ord. No. 95-019 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 §
22 (part))
§ 3.04.320 ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   The provisions of this Subchapter shall have no application to property that
has been intentionally abandoned by its owner.
(Ord. No. 2005-013 § 1)
MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY
§ 3.04.400 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   CITY. Any department, agency, bureau, and/or subordinate division of the
City of Culver City.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body that is the Culver City Council.
   MILITARY EQUIPMENT. Includes all of the following, as defined in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 7070:
      1.   Unmanned, remotely piloted, powered aerial or ground vehicles;
      2.   Mine-resistant ambush-protected (MRAP) vehicles or armored personnel
carriers. Police versions of standard consumer vehicles are specifically
excluded from this Subchapter;
      3.   High mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicles (HMMWV), commonly
referred to as Humvees, two and one-half-ton trucks, five-ton trucks, or
wheeled vehicles that have a breaching or entry apparatus attached. Unarmored
all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and motorized dirt bikes are specifically excluded
from this Subchapter;
      4.   Tracked armored vehicles that provide ballistic protection to their
occupants and utilize a tracked system instead of wheels for forward motion;
      5.   Command and control vehicles that are either built or modified to
facilitate the operational control and direction of public safety units;
      6.   Weaponized aircraft, vessels, or vehicles of any kind;
      7.   Battering rams, slugs, and breaching apparatuses that are explosive
in nature. Items designed to remove a lock, such as bolt cutters, or a handheld
ram designed to be operated by one person, are specifically excluded from this
Subchapter;
      8.   Firearms of .50 caliber or greater. Standard issue shotguns are
specifically excluded from this Subchapter;
      9.   Ammunition of .50 caliber or greater. Standard issue shotgun
ammunition is specifically excluded from this Subchapter;
      10.   Specialized firearms and ammunition of less than .50 caliber,
including assault weapons as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 30510 and 30515,
with the exception of standard issue service weapons and ammunition of less
than .50 caliber that are issued to officers, agents, or employees of a law
enforcement agency or a state agency;
      11.   Any firearm or firearm accessory that is designed to launch
explosive projectiles;
      12.   "Flashbang" grenades and explosive breaching tools, "tear gas," and
"pepper balls," excluding standard, service-issued handheld pepper spray;
      13.   Taser Shockwave, microwave weapons, water cannons, and the Long-
Range Acoustic Device (LRAD);
      14.   The following projectile launch platforms and their associated
munitions: 40 mm projectile launchers, "bean bag," rubber bullet, and specialty
impact munition (SIM) weapons;
      15.   Any other equipment as determined by a governing body or a state
agency to require additional oversight.
      16.   Notwithstanding Paragraphs 1. through 15. above, MILITARY EQUIPMENT
does not include general equipment not designated as prohibited or controlled
by the Federal Defense Logistics Agency.
   MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY. A publicly released, written document that
includes, at a minimum, all of the following:
      1.   A description of each type of military equipment, the quantity
sought, its capabilities, expected lifespan, and product descriptions from the
manufacturer of the military equipment;
      2.   The purposes and authorized uses for which the law enforcement
agency or the state agency proposes to use each type of military equipment;
      3.   The fiscal impact of each type of military equipment, including the
initial costs of obtaining the equipment and estimated annual costs of
maintaining the equipment;
      4.   The legal and procedural rules that govern each authorized use;
      5.   The training, including any course required by the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training, that must be completed before any
officer, agent, or employee of the law enforcement agency or the state agency
is allowed to use each specific type of military equipment to ensure the full
protection of the public's welfare, safety, civil rights, and civil liberties
and full adherence to the Military Equipment Use Policy;
      6.   The mechanisms to ensure compliance with the military equipment use
policy, including which independent persons or entities have oversight
authority and, if applicable, what legally enforceable sanctions are put in
place for violations of the policy;
      7.   For a law enforcement agency, the procedures by which members of the
public may register complaints or concerns or submit questions about the use of
each specific type of military equipment, and how the law enforcement agency
will ensure that each complaint, concern, or question receives a response in a
timely manner.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. Any division, section, bureau, employee, volunteer and/or
contractor of the Culver City Police Department.
   STATE AGENCY. The law enforcement division of every state office, officer,
department, division, bureau, board, and commission or other state body or
agency, except those agencies provided for in Article IV (except Section 20
thereof) or Article VI of the California Constitution.
   TYPE. Each item that shares the same manufacturer model number.
(Ord. 2022-005 § 3 (part))
§ 3.04.405 MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY REQUIREMENT.
   A.   The Culver City Police Department shall obtain approval of the City
Council, by a motion adopting a Military Equipment Use Policy at a regular
meeting of the City Council held pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act, commencing
with Cal. Gov’t Code § 54950, prior to engaging in any of the following:
      1.   Requesting military equipment made available pursuant to Section
2576a of Title 10 of the United States Code;
      2.   Seeking funds for military equipment, including, but not limited to,
applying for a grant, soliciting or accepting private, local, state, or federal
funds, in-kind donations, or other donations or transfers;
      3.   Acquiring military equipment either permanently or temporarily,
including by borrowing or leasing;
      4.   Collaborating with another law enforcement agency in the deployment
or other use of military equipment within the territorial jurisdiction of the
City of Culver City;
      5.   Using any new or existing military equipment for a purpose, in a
manner, or by a person not previously approved by the governing body pursuant
to this Subchapter;
      6.   Soliciting or responding to a proposal for, or entering into an
agreement with, any other person or entity to seek funds for, apply to receive,
acquire, use, or collaborate in the use of, military equipment;
      7.   Acquiring military equipment through any means not provided by this
section.
      B.   In order to facilitate public participation, any proposed or final
Military Equipment Use Policy shall be made publicly available on the internet
website of the Police Department for as long as the military equipment is
available for use.
   C.   The City Council shall review this Subchapter at least annually and
vote on whether to renew it at a regular meeting held pursuant to the Ralph M.
Brown Act commencing with Cal. Gov’t Code § 54950.
(Ord. 2022-005 § 3 (part))
§ 3.04.410 REPORTS ON THE USE OF MILITARY EQUIPMENT.
   A.   The Police Department shall submit to City Council an annual Military
Equipment Report for each type of military equipment approved by the City
Council within one year of approval, and annually thereafter for as long as the
military equipment is available for use.
   B.   The Police Department shall also make each annual Military Equipment
Report required by this Section publicly available on its internet website for
as long as the military equipment is available for use.
   C.   The annual Military Equipment Report shall, at a minimum, include the
following information for the immediately preceding calendar year for each type
of military equipment:
      1.   A summary of how the military equipment was used and the purpose of
its use;
      2.   A summary of any complaints or concerns received concerning the
military equipment;
      3.   The results of any internal audits, any information about violations
of the Military Equipment Use Policy, and any actions taken in response;
      4.   The total annual cost for each type of military equipment, including
acquisition, personnel, training, transportation, maintenance, storage,
upgrade, and other ongoing costs, and from what source funds will be provided
for the military equipment in the calendar year following submission of the
annual Military Equipment Report;
      5.   The quantity possessed for each type of military equipment;
      6.   If the law enforcement agency intends to acquire additional military
equipment in the next year, the quantity sought for each type of military
equipment.
   D.   Within 30 days of submitting and publicly releasing an annual Military
Equipment Report pursuant to this section, the Police Department shall hold at
least one well-publicized and conveniently located community engagement
meeting, at which the general public may discuss and ask questions regarding
the annual military equipment report and the law enforcement agency's funding,
acquisition, or use of military equipment.
   E.   The City Council shall determine, based on the annual Military
Equipment Report submitted pursuant to this Section, whether each type of
military equipment identified in that report has complied with the standards
for approval set forth in this Subchapter and the Military Equipment Use
Policy. If the City Council determines that a type of military equipment
identified in that annual Military Equipment Report has not complied with the
standards for approval, the City Council shall either disapprove a renewal of
the authorization for that type of military equipment or require modifications
to the Military Equipment Use Policy in a manner that will resolve the lack of
compliance.
(Ord. 2022-005 § 3 (part))
CHAPTER 3.05: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
Civil Service System  
   
3.05.005   Purpose
   
3.05.010   Civil service rules
   
3.05.015   Classified service; applicability
   
3.05.020   Personnel officer; duties
   
3.05.025   Right to contract for service
   
3.05.030   Appointments
   
3.05.035   Probationary period
   
3.05.040   Right of restoration
   
3.05.045   Disciplinary action
   
3.05.050   Personnel in departments of City Clerk and City Treasurer
   
3.05.055   Abolition of position
   
3.05.060   Nondiscrimination
   
3.05.065   [Reserved]
   
3.05.070   Anti-nepotism policy
Police Officers' and Fire Fighters' Salaries
   
3.05.200   Short title
   
3.05.205   Definitions
   
3.05.210   Salaries
   
3.05.215   Conditions of employment based on applicable law; severability
Retirement System
   
3.05.300   Retirement system contract
Cross-reference:
   Civil service, see Charter §§
1200 et seq.
   Civil Service Commission, see §§ 3.03.005 et seq.
   Employee bonds; fixing amount and coverage, see §
3.02.005
   Political activity of city officers, employees and consultants, see §
3.06.055
   Public Employees’ Retirement System, see Charter §
1300
CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM
§ 3.05.005 PURPOSE.
   To establish and maintain an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing
with personnel matters and to place municipal employment on a merit basis so
that the best qualified persons may be available through competitive tests.
('65 Code, § 2-28) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 1)
§ 3.05.010 CIVIL SERVICE RULES.
   In addition to such other rules as the Civil Service Commission may
determine are necessary and proper to carry out the intent and purpose of the
personnel program, the following duties, tasks and principles shall be
addressed in the Civil Service Rules:
   A.   Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position
classification plan covering all positions in the Classified Service, including
employment standards and qualifications for each class.
   B.   Preparation, revision, and administration of a plan of compensation
directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or
range of pay for each class.
   C.   Public announcement of all tests and the acceptance of applications for
employment.
   D.   Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of
resulting eligible lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment.
   E.   Certification and appointment of persons from eligible lists, and
making of temporary appointments.
   F.   Evaluation of employees during the probationary period.
   G.   Transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees in the
Classified Service.
   H.   Separation of employees from municipal service through layoff,
suspension and dismissal.
   I.   Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations,
working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare, education
and training.
   J.   Suitable provision for orderly and equitable presentations to the
Council by employees relating to general conditions of employment.
   K.   Content, maintenance and use of personnel records and forms.
('65 Code, § 2-29) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 4; Ord. 2022-006 § 1)
§ 3.05.015 CLASSIFIED SERVICE; APPLICABILITY.
   The Civil Service System shall be applicable to all departments, offices,
positions and employments and all persons employed by the City except the
following:
   A.   Elective offices;
   B.   Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;
   C.   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert professional or
technical services for a definite and limited period of time;
   D.   Assistant City Managers, Assistants to the City Manager, the Personnel
and Employee Relations Director, Public Works Director/City Engineer and such
staff assistants to any of said employees as the City Council may authorize;
   E.   Volunteer personnel, crossing guards, or other employees holding
seasonal, limited or temporary appointments of limited duration, or serving on
a part-time basis;
   F.   Staff assistants to the head of a department or division as may be
authorized by the City Council.
   G.   Professional and technical employees in the field of information
technology, who perform design, development, documentation, analysis,
acquisition, installation, creation, technical support, testing or modification
of computer systems or programs.
('65 Code, § 2-30) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 5; Ord. No. CS-910 § 1; Ord. No. 94-002 §
1; Ord. No. 97-008 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 11)
§ 3.05.020 PERSONNEL OFFICER; DUTIES.
   A.   Designation of officer. The Personnel Officer shall be the City
Manager, or such person as appointed by the City Manager. Duties may be
combined with those of any other office or position, provided the appointee
shall have had training or experience in personnel administration.
   B.   Duties.
      1.   Attend all meetings of the Civil Service Commission and serve as
liaison officer between the City Manager and the Civil Service Commission.
      2.   Administer all of the provisions of the Rules not specifically
reserved to the City Council, the Civil Service Commission, or the City
Manager.
      3.   Assist the Civil Service Commission in the preparation, study and
analysis of rules and revisions and amendments thereto, for submission to the
City Council after approval by City Attorney as to legality of such action.
      4.   Assist the Civil Service Commission in the periodic study and
analysis of salaries paid by other public and private agencies, at the
discretion of the City Council, as set forth in Section
3.03.100 of this Code.
      5.   Encourage the improvement of municipal service by studying needs and
recommending programs for education and training to the City Manager; such
programs becoming effective upon approval by the Civil Service Commission and
the City Council.('65 Code, § 2-31)
('65 Code, § 2-32) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 6; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 12; Ord. 2022-006
§ 2)
§ 3.05.025 RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SERVICE.
   The City Council, upon the recommendation of the Civil Service Commission or
the City Manager, may contract with any qualified person or agency for the
performance of technical services in the operation of the Civil Service System.
('65 Code, § 2-33) (Ord. No. CS-353 §§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 3.05.030 APPOINTMENTS.
   Appointments to vacant positions in the Classified Service shall be made in
accordance with the Civil Service Rules by the City Council, the City Manager,
or the officer to whom the power to make appointments has been delegated.
('65 Code, § 2-34) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 8; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 3.05.035 PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a
probationary period of one (1) year. During the probationary period, the
employee may be rejected at any time without right of appeal or hearing. An
employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he
has been promoted shall be reinstated to the position from which he was
promoted, unless he is dismissed from the municipal service.
('65 Code, § 2-35) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 9)
§ 3.05.040 RIGHT OF RESTORATION.
   In the event an employee of the City holding a position under Civil Service
is appointed to a position not under the Classified Service, and should
subsequently be removed therefrom, he shall revert to his former position under
the Classified Service without loss of any rights or privileges and upon the
same terms and conditions as if he had remained in said position continuously.
The right of restoration shall be effective for a period of two (2) years from
the date of appointment to the position not within the Classified Service.
('65 Code, § 2-36) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 10; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 12)
§ 3.05.045 DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   All persons holding positions in the Classified Service shall be subject to
disciplinary action for misconduct, incompetency, inefficiency or failure to
perform duties, or to observe the Rules of the Department in which he is
employed or of the Commission, but subject the right of appeal of the aggrieved
party to the Civil Service Commission in the manner set forth in the Civil
Service Rules.
('65 Code, § 2-37) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 11)
§ 3.05.050 PERSONNEL IN DEPARTMENTS OF CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER.
   The City Clerk and the City Treasurer are the appointing authorities for
personnel in their respective Departments, but such personnel shall be
appointed from the eligible lists prepared in the same manner as applies to
other employees in the Classified Service and shall be governed by all of the
requirements of said service.
('65 Code, § 2-38) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 12)
§ 3.05.055 ABOLITION OF POSITION.
   Whenever in the judgment of the City Council it becomes necessary in the
interest of efficiency or economy so to do, it may consolidate any department
or departments, or positions in the Classified Service, or if necessity for the
position involved no longer exists, it may abolish any position or employment
in the Classified Service and in the event of such consolidation or abolishment
of position may lay-off, demote, transfer or discharge the employees holding
such position. Should such position or employment or any position involving all
or any of the same duties be reinstated or created within two years, the
employee laid-off, demoted, transferred or discharged shall be eligible to be
appointed thereto in preference to any other qualified persons on the eligible
list for such position, provided that the said employee complies with the Rules
of the Civil Service Commission relative to such reinstatement.
('65 Code, § 2-39) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 12)
§ 3.05.060 NONDISCRIMINATION.
   No City employee or person seeking City employment shall be subject to
discrimination which is prohibited by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
In accordance with this policy, no employee or prospective employee shall be
interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced, employed, promoted, demoted,
discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political
opinions or affiliations, race, religious beliefs, age, sex, disability, or
national origin.
('65 Code, § 2-43) (Ord. No. CS-353 § 16; Ord. No. 84-029 § 1)
§ 3.05.065 [RESERVED]
§ 3.05.070 ANTI-NEPOTISM POLICY.
   A.   Because of the potential for creating adverse impacts on supervision,
safety, security or morale, members of an immediate family shall not be
employed in the direct line of supervision of one another.
   B.   If at the time of the adoption of this policy, an employee has an
immediate family member also employed by the City, this Section shall not be
applicable to that employee based on that existing familial relationship.
   C.   This policy shall not be applicable to any person whose immediate
family member is elected to the City Council, if such person, at the time of
such election, is currently employed by the City.
   D.   Employees who become subject to this policy after appointment, but who
are not otherwise exempted, pursuant to Subsection B., shall have the
opportunity to transfer subject to the provisions of the Civil Service Rules,
relating to transfers. In the event no transfer is available, one of the
employees shall resign and such resignation shall be effective within a
reasonable time period, not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, after
notification of the decision of transfer unavailability. The decision regarding
who shall resign may be made by the affected employees. If no decision is made
within thirty (30) calendar days:
      1.   The employee with the most recent appointment, transfer or promotion
which resulted in the application of the policy shall be deemed to have
resigned; or
      2.   If the reason the policy applies is other than an appointment,
promotion or transfer, the employee with the least cumulative seniority shall
be deemed to have resigned.
   E.   For the purpose of this Section, IMMEDIATE FAMILY shall be defined as
the following relationships whether established by blood, marriage or other
legal actions:
      1.   Parents, grandparents, step-parents, step-grandparents, brothers,
sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, step-brothers, step-sisters, children,
children's spouse(s), grandchildren, step-children, step-grandchildren.
      2.   Spouse and spouse's parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, half-
brothers, half-sisters, step-brothers, step-sisters, step-parents, step-
grandparents, step-grandchildren.
   F.   For the purpose of this Section, DIRECT LINE OF SUPERVISION shall be
defined as any regularly assigned employment relationship wherein an employee
holds a position with any control or authority over an immediate family member
of that employee. A City Council member shall be deemed to hold a position of
control and authority over every City employee. A member of a City Commission,
Board or Committee shall be deemed to hold a position of control and authority
over every City employee who is regularly assigned as staff support to that
member's Commission, Board or Committee.
   G.   When it is determined an employee is affected by this policy, the
employee may appeal such determination to the Civil Service Commission for a
final administrative adjudication of the matter; provided that the Civil
Service Commission, in its discretion, may use the services of a hearing
officer and not hold evidentiary hearings itself; and provided further that, if
the employee to whom the Policy has been determined to apply is an immediate
family member of any member of the Civil Service Commission that Commission
member shall abstain from voting on the appeal.
   H.   The administrative procedures contained in this policy shall constitute
an employee's exclusive administrative remedy. An employee may not file a
grievance or other form of complaint for any determination, decision or action
taken under this policy, except as provided in Subsection G. herein.
('65 Code, § 2-45.5) (Ord. No. 88-027 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-011 § 1)
POLICE OFFICERS' AND FIRE FIGHTERS' SALARIES
§ 3.05.200 SHORT TITLE.
   This Subchapter shall be known as “The Salary Act for Police Officers and
Fire Fighters of the City of Culver City.”
('65 Code, § 2-46) (Ord. No. 84-020 § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Police Department, see
Ch. 3.04
§ 3.05.205 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and terms defined in this Section and used in this Subchapter
shall have the following meanings:
   BASE MONTHLY SALARY shall mean the compensation attached to the positions
occupied by employees of the Police Department or the Fire Department, in the
job classifications listed in this Subchapter. Overtime pay, bonuses,
longevity, retirement, assignment pay, or other special pays are excluded.
   SALARY RATE. shall mean each hourly salary listed in the Schedule of Salary
Ranges adopted by Resolution No. CS-7714, as amended.
   SALARY STEPS. shall mean specific salary levels for the classification of
police officer and fire fighter. The number of steps and time intervals of
their occurrence is determined by the City and County of Los Angeles' salary
steps and time intervals for comparable positions.
('65 Code, § 2-47) (Ord. No. 84-020 § 1)
§ 3.05.210 SALARIES.
   A.   The salary steps for the classification of police officer in the Police
Department of the City of Culver City shall be set at an amount not less than
the average of Base Monthly Salaries for comparable steps in classifications in
the Police Department of the City of Los Angeles and the Sheriff's Department
of the County of Los Angeles.
   B.   The salary steps for the classification of fire fighter in the Fire
Department of the City of Culver City shall be set at an amount not less than
the average of Base Monthly Salaries for comparable steps in classifications in
the Fire Department of the City of Los Angeles and the Fire Department of the
County of Los Angeles.
   C.   The salary for all other classifications in the Police Department shall
be set at an amount not less than the percentages listed below:
      1.   Police Sergeant — Top step police officer plus ten percent (10%).
      2.   Police Lieutenant — Police sergeant plus ten percent (10%).
      3.   Police Captain — Police lieutenant plus fifteen percent (15%).
      4.   Assistant Chief of Police — Police captain plus ten percent (10%).
      5.   Chief of Police — Police captain plus twenty percent (20%).
   D.   The salary for all other classifications in the Fire Department shall
be set at an amount not less than the percentages listed below:
      1.   Fire Engineer — Top step fire fighter plus ten percent (10%).
      2.   Fire Captain — Fire engineer plus ten percent (10%).
      3.   Battalion Chief — Fire captain plus fifteen percent (15%).
      4.   Battalion Chief/Assistant Chief — Battalion chief plus ten percent
(10%).
      5.   Fire Chief — Battalion chief plus twenty percent (20%).
   E.   Notwithstanding Subsections A. through D., hereof, each salary step for
Culver City police officers and fire fighters shall be set at the salary rate
nearest the amount described in Subsections A. through D., hereof.
   F.   Whenever Base Monthly Salaries for police officers or fire fighters are
approved for adjustment by the elected governing body of the City of Los
Angeles or the County of Los Angeles, or both, the City Council of the City of
Culver City, within thirty (30) days, shall adjust salaries of Culver City
police officers and fire fighters, or both, in accordance with this Subchapter.
Said salary adjustments shall be effective the first pay period following the
effective date in the City of Los Angeles or the County of Los Angeles
including any retroactive adjustment of the Base Monthly Salary.
('65 Code, § 2-48) (Ord. No. 84-020 § 1)
§ 3.05.215 CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT BASED ON APPLICABLE LAW; SEVERABILITY.
   A.   Conditions of employment, except the setting of salaries as hereinabove
stated, are based upon and pursuant to applicable law.
   B.   If any Section of this Subchapter or part hereof shall be declared
unconstitutional or illegal for any purpose, then the illegal Section shall not
affect the validity or legality of the remaining portion or portions of this
Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 2-49) (Ord. No. 84-020 § 1)
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§ 3.05.300 RETIREMENT SYSTEM CONTRACT.
   A.   Contract. A contract between the City of Culver City and the Board of
Administration, California State Employees' Retirement System, in the form
attached to and authorized by Ord. 606, as well as amendments to the Contract
authorized by Ordinances CS-145 and CS-213, shall be in effect until further
amended or until terminated as provided in Article §
1300 of the Charter.
   B.   Amendment.
      1.   An amendment to the contract between the City of Culver City and the
Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System is
hereby authorized, a copy of said amendment being attached hereto, marked
Exhibit, and by such reference made a part hereof as though set forth in full.
      2.   The City Council is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to
execute said amendment for and on behalf of the City.
('65 Code, § 2-52) (Ord. No. 92-011; Ord. No. 94-019, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 97-015,
§§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 98-004, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 98-004, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 99-011,
§§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2000-020, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2004-010, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2007-
001, §§ 1, 2)
Editor's note:
   Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found on file in the office of the
City Clerk attached to the various ordinances listed above.
CHAPTER 3.06: CAMPAIGN FINANCE AND OTHER POLITICAL ACTIVITIES
Section
   
3.06.005   Intent and purpose
   
3.06.010   Definitions
   
3.06.015   Limitations on contributions
   
3.06.020   Limitations on contractor contributions
   
3.06.025   Aggregation of contributions made by related donors
   
3.06.030   Election campaign accounts and records
   
3.06.035   Mass mailing and political advertising disclosure
   
3.06.040   Enforcement
   
3.06.045   Violations and penalties
   
3.06.050   Political activity - ballot measure on working conditions
   
3.06.055   Political activity of city officers, employees and consultants
   
3.06.060   Application of other laws
Cross-reference:
   General provisions relating to officers and employees, see Charter §§
1400 et seq.
   Officers and employees, see
Ch. 3.02
§ 3.06.005 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this Chapter to supplement the requirements of the
Political Reform Act of 1974 (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 81000 et seq., as amended,
hereafter "Political Reform Act"), with regard to placing realistic and
enforceable limits on the amount individuals, corporations, and committees may
contribute to political campaigns in City elections, to inform the public of
the sources of campaign contributions and expenditures, and to prevent
corruption, or the appearance of corruption, in City government.
('65 Code, § 2-117) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.010 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as specifically provided for herein, the words and phrases in this
Chapter shall have the same meanings as in the Political Reform Act and
regulations adopted thereunder.
   ADVERTISEMENT. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t Code § 84501, and
includes, but is not limited to, any general or public advertisement which is
authorized and paid for by a person or committee for the purpose of supporting
or opposing a candidate for elective office.
   CANDIDATE. An individual who is a candidate for elective office of the City
of Culver City and meets the definition set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 82007.
CANDIDATE also includes an incumbent who was elected or appointed to an
elective office of the City of Culver City.
   COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t Code § 82013, and includes,
but is not limited to, any person or combination of persons who directly or
indirectly receives contributions totaling One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or
more in a calendar year, or makes independent expenditures totaling One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or more in a calendar year.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t Code § 82015, and
includes, but is not limited to, a payment, a non-monetary contribution
consisting of donated goods, services or facilities, a forgiveness of a loan, a
payment of a loan by a third party, or an enforceable promise to make a
payment, except to the extent that full and adequate consideration is received,
unless it is clear from the surrounding circumstances that it is not made for
political purposes. A non-monetary contribution shall be valued at the fair
market value of the goods, services, or facilities contributed to the campaign.
The fair market value for goods or services is the price that a person would be
required to pay to acquire the same goods or services in the open market place.
CONTRIBUTION does not include the following:
      1.   Volunteer personal services; or
      2.   A payment made by an occupant of a home or office for costs related
to any meeting or fundraising event held in the occupant's home or office, if
all costs for the meeting or fundraising event are paid for by the occupant,
and if the total costs for the meeting or fundraising event are Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) or less, exclusive of the fair rental value of the premises.
   ELECTION. Any general, special or recall election for an elective office of
the City of Culver City.
   EXPENDITURE. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t Code § 82025, and
includes, but is not limited to, a payment, a forgiveness of a loan, a payment
of a loan by a third party, or an enforceable promise to make a payment, unless
it is clear from the surrounding circumstances that it is not made for
political purposes. An expenditure is made on the date the payment is made or
on the date consideration, if any, is received, whichever is earlier.
   INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURE. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t Code § 82031,
and includes an expenditure made by any person in connection with a
communication that expressly advocates the election or defeat of a clearly
identified candidate, or taken as a whole and in context, unambiguously urges a
particular result in an election, but which is not made to or at the behest of
the affected candidate.
   MASS MAILING. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t Code § 82041.5, and
includes two hundred (200) or more substantially similar pieces of mail.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t Code § 82047, and includes,
but is not limited to, an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint
venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, limited liability
company, association, committee, and any other organization or group of persons
acting in concert.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, professional services, consulting services, or a
combination of services and materials, supplies, commodities, and equipment.
   SMALL CONTRIBUTOR COMMITTEE. Any committee that meets all of the following
criteria:
      1.   The committee has been in existence for at least three (3) months;
      2.   The committee receives contributions from twenty (20) or more
persons;
      3.   No one person has contributed to the committee more than Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00) per calendar year; and
      4.   The committee makes contributions to two (2) or more candidates for
elected City office.
('65 Code, § 2-118) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.015 LIMITATIONS ON CONTRIBUTIONS.
   A.   Except as provided for a Small Contributor Committee, no person, other
than a candidate in aid of himself or herself, shall make, and no person,
including a candidate, shall solicit or accept any contribution which will
cause the total amount contributed by such person to a candidate to exceed One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) with respect to a single election.
   B.   No Small Contributor Committee shall make, and no candidate shall
solicit or accept from any Small Contributor Committee, any contribution which
will cause the total amount contributed by such committee to exceed Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) with respect to a single election.
   C.   The amounts identified in Subsections A. and B. above shall be adjusted
in February (or as soon thereafter as practicable) of each odd numbered year
commencing in 2017 for any increase in the consumer price index for the
preceding calendar year (January - December) for the Los Angeles-Riverside-
Orange County CPI-U (LA-R-OC CPI-U) as published by the United States
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics rounded to the nearest Ten
Dollars ($10.00). In the event the Bureau of Labor Statistics discontinues the
publication of the LA-R-OC CPI-U, then a comparable statistic shall be used as
determined by the City's Chief Financial Officer. The City Clerk, no later than
thirty (30) days after the LA-R-OC CPI-U (or comparable statistic) is
published, shall issue a public notice establishing the amounts as adjusted in
accordance with this Subsection.
('65 Code, § 2-119) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.020 LIMITATIONS ON CONTRACTOR CONTRIBUTIONS.
   A.   No person who contracts with the City, other than a candidate in aid of
herself or himself, shall make a contribution exceeding Two Hundred and Fifty
Dollars ($250.00) to any candidate at any time between the commencement of
negotiations and either a final determination by the City to reject the award
of contract or one (1) year after approval of the contract or termination of
negotiations for the contract, where that person has received, is owed or would
be owed Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) or more for such contract.
Such contracts shall include, but are not limited to, contracts for the
rendition of services, for the furnishing of any material, supplies,
commodities or equipment to the City, for selling any land or building to the
City, or for purchasing any land or building from the City. For purposes of
this section, commencement of negotiations begins on the earlier of:
      1.   The date on which a request for proposals or notice inviting bids is
released by the City; or
      2.   As otherwise reasonably determined by the City Manager that
negotiations have commenced.
   B.   For purposes of this Section, if the person contracting with the City
is a corporation, firm, partnership, association, or other entity, a
contribution from a board member, officer or employee of that entity shall not
be deemed a contribution from the person contracting with the City, unless the
entity is majority owned by the board member, officer or employee making the
contribution.
('65 Code, § 2-120) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.025 AGGREGATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS MADE BY RELATED DONORS.
   For purposes of the contribution limits of this chapter, and as provided in
Cal. Gov’t Code § 85311(b):
   A.   The contributions of an entity whose contributions are directed and
controlled by any individual shall be aggregated with contributions made by
that individual and any other entity whose contributions are directed and
controlled by the same individual.
   B.   If two (2) or more entities make contributions that are directed and
controlled by a majority of the same persons, the contributions of those
entities shall be aggregated.
   C.   Contributions made by entities that are majority owned by any person
shall be aggregated with the contributions of that majority owner and all other
entities majority owned by that person, unless those entities act independently
in their decisions to make contributions.
('65 Code, § 2-121) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.030 ELECTION CAMPAIGN ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.
   A.   As provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 85201, upon the filing of a statement
of intention to be a candidate, the individual who intends to be a candidate
for an elective office in Culver City shall establish one (1) campaign bank
account at an office of a financial institution located in the state. The
account shall be identified as the "election campaign account."
   B.   As provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 85201(c), all campaign contributions
or loans made to the candidate, to a person on behalf of the candidate, or to
the candidate's committee shall be deposited into the account identified in
Subsection A.
   C.   In addition to filing with the state Fair Political Practices
Commission, the campaign treasurer shall file with the City Clerk the name and
address of the financial institution in which the account has been established,
and the account number.
   D.   The City Clerk, the City Attorney, a special prosecutor or other
investigating official appointed by the City Attorney, shall have full access
at all reasonable hours to the records concerning the election campaign
account.
   E.   For the campaign committee, the candidate, treasurer, and principal
officer shall maintain detailed accounts, records, bills, and receipts
necessary to prepare campaign statements, to establish that campaign statements
were properly filed, and to otherwise comply with the requirements of Chapter 4
of the Political Reform Act. The detailed accounts, records, bills, and
receipts shall be retained by the filer for a period of four (4) years after
the election for which they were used.
('65 Code, § 2-122) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.035 MASS MAILING AND POLITICAL ADVERTISING DISCLOSURE.
   A.   As required in Cal. Gov’t Code § 84305, and except as provided in
Subsection B., no candidate or committee shall send a mass mailing unless the
name, street address, and city of the candidate or committee are shown on the
outside of each piece of mail in the mass mailing and on at least one (1) of
the inserts included within each piece of mail in no less than six- (6) point
type which shall be in a color or print which contrasts with the background so
as to be easily legible. A post office box may be listed in lieu of a street
address if the organization's address is a matter of public record with the
Secretary of State.
   B.   If the sender of the mass mailing is a single candidate or committee,
the name, street address, and city of the candidate or committee need only be
shown on the outside of each piece of mail.
   C.   As required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 84506.5, an advertisement supporting
or opposing a candidate that is paid for as an independent expenditure must
include a statement that it was not authorized by a candidate or a committee
controlled by a candidate. That statement must substantially conform to the
following: "This political advertisement was not authorized by [the candidate's
name]."
('65 Code, § 2-123) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.040 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   City Clerk. The City Clerk may monitor all campaign forms and
statements filed by any person and shall notify the person pursuant to this
Chapter of any of the following apparent violations:
      1.   The non-filing or late filing of any required forms or statements
under this Chapter.
      2.   A statement that does not conform on its face with the requirements
of this Chapter.
      3.   Any reported contributions that exceed the allowable maximums
established by this Chapter.
   B.   City Attorney. The City Attorney may commence an investigation
regarding an alleged violation of this Chapter. If the City Attorney determines
that such investigation warrants further action, the City Attorney may utilize
administrative remedies pursuant to
Chapter 1.02 of this Code, file a civil action for injunctive or other relief,
or file a criminal action. Further, the City Attorney may appoint a special
prosecutor who may perform further investigation and/or pursue any or all of
these remedies; or, if permitted under state law, refer the matter to the Fair
Political Practices Commission, to further pursue enforcement of §§
3.06.015 through
3.06.035.
   C.   Citizen Complaint. Upon receipt of a written complaint from a resident
of Culver City, which shall include a statement of the grounds for the belief
that a violation of this Chapter has occurred, the City Attorney shall review
the complaint and determine whether it requires further action. The City
Attorney's written determination shall be made within fifteen (15) calendar
days after receipt of the written complaint. If the City Attorney determines
that such complaint or investigation warrants further action, the City Attorney
may utilize administrative remedies pursuant to Chapter 1.02 of this Code, file
a civil action for injunctive or other relief, or file a criminal action.
Further the City Attorney may appoint a special prosecutor who may perform
further investigation and/or pursue any or all of these remedies; or, if
permitted under state law, refer the matter to the Fair Political Practices
Commission, to further pursue enforcement of §§
3.06.015 through
3.06.035. Further, the City Attorney may send notice to the person accused,
with copies available to the public, of any other allegation(s) of violation,
or take any other action available under law.
   D.   Special Prosecutor. The City Attorney, after consultation with the City
Manager, shall have the authority to withdraw the appointment of a special
prosecutor at any time when he or she determines doing so is in the best
interest of the City.
   E.   Injunctive Relief. If a resident of Culver City files a complaint with
the City Attorney and receives a written determination by the City Attorney
indicating that no further action shall be taken, such resident may sue for
injunctive relief to enjoin violations or to compel compliance with this
Chapter; provided that, any request for temporary or preliminary relief may be
obtained only upon a showing by a preponderance of evidence that a violation or
non-compliance occurred.
   F.   Statute of Limitations. An action for violation of this Chapter must be
commenced within two (2) years of the time the alleged violation occurred.
   G.   Attorney's Fees. In a civil action, the court may award to the
prevailing party the cost of litigation, including reasonable attorney's fees,
if the City establishes an agreement with the Fair Political Practices
Commission, attorney's fees shall be allocated as determined by such agreement.
   H.   Referral to Fair Political Practices Commission. The City Attorney may
refer to the Fair Political Practices Commission any complaint alleging, or
providing evidence of, a violation of this Chapter and/or a violation of the
Political Reform Act or, after consultation with the City Manager, may
terminate any agreement made with the Fair Political Practices Commission at
any time when he or she determines doing so is in the best interest of the
City.
('65 Code, § 2-124) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.045 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction, punishable pursuant to §§
1.01.035 through
1.01.055 of this Code; provided that such person shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if he or she has been convicted of three (3) or more violations of
this Chapter within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the
violation.
   B.   Any person who knowingly or intentionally violates a provision of this
Chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable pursuant to §§
1.01.035 through
1.01.055 of this Code; provided that a minimum fine of Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) shall be imposed.
   C.   For purposes of this section, a bail forfeiture, plea of guilty, or
plea of no contest shall be deemed a conviction.
   D.   If, after election, a candidate is convicted of a misdemeanor for
knowingly or intentionally violating any provision of this Chapter, that
candidate's election to office shall be void and such office shall immediately
become vacant effective on the date of sentencing. In such event, the vacancy
shall be filled in accordance with the City Charter. If a candidate is
convicted of a misdemeanor for a knowing or intentional violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, at any time prior to election, his or her candidacy
shall be terminated immediately, and he or she shall no longer be eligible for
election or appointment to office in that election, unless the court at the
time of sentencing specifically determines, in the interest of justice, that
this provision should not be applicable.
   E.   In addition to Subsections B. and D. above, no person convicted of a
misdemeanor for knowingly or intentionally violating a provision of this
Chapter shall be qualified to be a candidate for elective City office for a
period of four (4) years following the date of conviction, unless the court at
the time of sentencing specifically determines, in the interest of justice,
that this provision should not be applicable.
('65 Code, § 2-125) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.050 POLITICAL ACTIVITY - BALLOT MEASURE ON WORKING CONDITIONS.
   No officer or employee of the City shall be prevented from soliciting or
receiving contributions to promote the passage or defeat of a ballot measure
which would affect the rate of pay, hours of work, retirement, civil service,
or other working conditions in the City; provided that such activities shall
not be conducted during working hours nor on any premises owned or operated by
the City during working hours.
('65 Code, § 2-126) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part); Ord.
No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
§ 3.06.055 POLITICAL ACTIVITY OF CITY OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND CONSULTANTS.
   A.   No City officer, employee or consultant shall participate in political
activities of any kind while in uniform.
   B.   No City officer, employee or consultant shall use or permit others to
use public resources for a campaign activity. For purposes of this section,
"campaign activity" means an activity constituting a contribution or an
expenditure as defined in §
3.06.010 of this Chapter, but does not include the incidental and minimal use
of public resources, such as equipment or office space, for campaign purposes,
including the referral of unsolicited political mail, telephone calls, and
visitors to private political entities. "Public resources" means any property
or asset owned or operated by the City, including, but not limited to, land,
buildings, facilities, funds, equipment, supplies, telephones, computers,
vehicles, travel, and City-compensated time.
   C.   No officer, employee or contractor of the City shall coerce political
action for any City elective office by directly or indirectly using, promising,
threatening or attempting to use any official action, authority or influence,
whether then possessed or merely anticipated.
   D.   No City officer, employee or contractor shall knowingly solicit
contributions to be used for any campaign for a City elective office from any
employee or contractor of the City. This provision does not prohibit
solicitations made to a significant segment of the public.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of public resources for
providing information to the public about the possible effects of any bond
issue or other ballot measure on City activities, operations, or policies,
provided that (1) the informational activities are otherwise authorized by the
constitution or laws of this City and the state, and (2) the information
provided constitutes a fair and impartial presentation of relevant facts to aid
the electorate in reaching an informed judgment regarding the bond issue or
ballot measure.
   F.   In addition to the provisions of §
1.01.035 of the Code, a violation of this section shall be grounds for
disciplinary action, including termination of position or employment of any
employee.
('65 Code, §§ 2-127 - 2-129) (Ord. No. 89-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1
(part))
§ 3.06.060 APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS.
   Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt any person or committee from applicable
provisions of any other laws of this State.
(Ord. No. 2015-006 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 3.07: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Purchasing and Contracting System
   
3.07.005   Purpose and intent
   
3.07.010   Definitions
   
3.07.015   Purchasing officer designation, duties and authority
   
3.07.020   Issuance of purchase order or approval of contract required
   
3.07.025   Unauthorized purchases and contracts
   
3.07.030   Specialized purchasing and contracting procedures
   
3.07.035   Employee interest prohibited
   
3.07.040   Issuance of purchase orders and awards of contracts to local
businesses
   
3.07.045   Multi-year contracts
   
3.07.050   Change orders and contract amendments
   
3.07.055   Exceptions to bidding requirements
   
3.07.060   Emergencies
   
3.07.065   Professional and general services
   
3.07.070   Informal bid procedures
   
3.07.075   Formal bid procedures
   
3.07.080   Interpretation of bid and proposal specifications
   
3.07.085   Equal bids
   
3.07.090   Contracts for public works projects
   
3.07.095   Disposition of city surplus property
Funds
   
3.07.200   Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
   
3.07.205   Capital outlay funds
Revenue Bonds
   
3.07.300   Issuance and sale of revenue bonds
Cross-reference:
   Benefit assessment district, see
Ch. 15.01
   Claim procedures, see §§
3.10.005 et seq.
   Finance and Judiciary Committee, see §
3.01.020
   Financial and fiscal matters, see Charter §§
1600 et seq.
PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING SYSTEM
§ 3.07.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this Subchapter is to establish procedures for the
purchase of or contracting for equipment, goods, supplies and services; to
establish procedures to ensure the integrity of awarding all contracts for the
construction or improvement of public works, buildings, streets, drains,
sewers, utilities, parks and playgrounds; and to establish procedures for the
disposition of City property. Nothing in this Subchapter is intended to require
the City to solicit bids for equipment, goods, supplies or services; accept the
lowest bid to provide equipment, goods, supplies or services; or solicit bids
for a Public Works Project or award a public works contract to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder, except as required by the City Charter; this
Code; applicable state law, but only to the extent state law does not conflict
with the City Charter or this Code; and federal law.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHANGE ORDER. A written authorization from the City directing an addition,
deletion, or revision to an approved or awarded purchase order or contract.
   LOCAL BUSINESS. A business that is located within the City of Culver City
and meets both of the following criteria:
   A.   The business has a current Culver City business tax certificate; and
   B.   The local sales tax generated by the business is allocated to the City
of Culver City.
   LOWEST RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDER. A bidder who is both responsive
and responsible, as those terms are defined herein, and submits the lowest bid.
   A.   In determining a "responsible bidder," the following factors shall be
considered:
      1.   The ability, capacity, facilities and skill of the bidder to perform
the contract or fulfill the purchase order;
      2.   The ability of the bidder to perform the contract or fulfill the
purchase order within the time specified, without delay;
      3.   The character, integrity, trustworthiness and reputation of the
bidder;
      4.   The competence, reputation and record of performance and experience
of the bidder for the successful recent completion of similar work of
comparable magnitude;
      5.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the type of work to be performed under the contract or
purchase order;
      6.   The sufficiency of the bidder's financial resources as they relate
to the ability of the bidder to perform the contract or fulfill the purchase
order;
      7.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the equipment, goods
and supplies to the particular use required;
      8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract or purchase order;
      9.   The number and scope of conditions and exceptions attached to the
bid by the bidder.
   B.   A "responsive bidder" is a bidder who submits a bid in conformity with
any and all specifications, terms, conditions and other requirements included
in the notice inviting bids.
   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT. The construction or improvement, excluding maintenance
and repair, of public buildings, works, streets, drains, sewers, utilities,
parks and playgrounds.
   PURCHASING AUTHORITY. The Purchasing Officer's authority to approve any
purchase order or contract, which does not exceed the maximum amount
established by resolution of the City Council.
   PURCHASING OFFICER. The City Manager or his or her designee.
   VENDOR. Any supplier, contractor or consultant from which the City receives
equipment, goods, supplies, materials and/or services.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.015 PURCHASING OFFICER DESIGNATION, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   A.   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the term Purchasing Officer, shall
include the term "Purchasing Agent" as used in other parts of this Code.
   B.   The Purchasing Officer shall have the following duties and authority:
      1.   Negotiate, purchase and contract for equipment, goods, supplies and
services used by the City, in accordance with City laws and regulations and
applicable state and federal law.
      2.   Develop and maintain a standardized system for the purchasing of and
contracting for equipment, goods, supplies and services.
      3.   Encourage open competitive bidding.
      4.   Advise the City Council on all matters pertaining to purchasing and
contracting.
      5.   Determine that requests for bids, including bid specifications, and
requests for proposals are adhered to in all respects.
      6.   Establish procedures and requirements for bidder's security and
performance bonds.
      7.   Maintain a vendor file, consisting of a list of prospective vendors
who have made written requests that their names be added to such vendor file.
      8.   Promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this
Subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.020 ISSUANCE OF PURCHASE ORDER OR APPROVAL OF CONTRACT REQUIRED.
   In order to more efficiently manage the City's purchasing and contracting
system, the City shall issue a purchase order or contract, as applicable, to
each vendor who agrees to provide equipment, goods, supplies, materials or
services to the City, unless otherwise authorized by the Purchasing Officer or
the rules and regulations adopted by the Purchasing Officer pursuant to this
Subchapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, no vendor shall be authorized
to provide any equipment, goods, supplies, materials or services to the City
without first receiving a properly authorized and executed purchase order or
contract issued or approved by the Purchasing Officer upon verification of
sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.025 UNAUTHORIZED PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, or agent of the City to
purchase equipment, goods or supplies, contract for services or the performance
of Public Works Projects, or otherwise make any contract, in violation of this
Subchapter. Any purchase or contract made contrary to the provisions of this
Subchapter shall not be binding on the City, and the City shall not be
obligated thereunder.
   B.   Purchases of or contracts for equipment, goods, supplies, and services,
and the performance of Public Works Projects shall not be divided or staged for
the purpose of circumventing the requirements of this Subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.030 SPECIALIZED PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING PROCEDURES.
   A.   Nothing in this Subchapter shall prohibit the City from using
specialized purchasing or contracting procedures when authorized by state law.
If state law authorizes such procedures, they need not also be specifically
authorized by this Subchapter. Such specialized procedures may include, without
limitation, prequalification of general contractors or subcontractors and
alternative project delivery methods including, but not limited to, design/
build contracting procedures.
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subchapter, for any
contract totally or partially funded by the State or Federal Government, all
applicable state and federal laws shall be followed, including, but not limited
to, applicable purchasing and contracting standards and procedures.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.035 EMPLOYEE INTEREST PROHIBITED.
   No employee, member of the City Council, nor any appointed member of a City
Commission, Board or Committee, shall be financially interested, directly or
indirectly, in any purchase order or contract for furnishing equipment, goods,
supplies or services within the purview of this Subchapter. Any purchase order
or contract involving former City employees, members of the City Council, or
any appointed member of a City Commission, Board or Committee, shall be awarded
solely by the City Council at a public meeting.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.040 ISSUANCE OF PURCHASE ORDERS AND AWARDS OF CONTRACTS TO LOCAL
BUSINESSES.
   The City shall give preference to a local business when issuing a purchase
order or awarding any contract for the purchase of equipment, goods or
supplies; provided, the local business to be awarded the contract will be able
to provide equipment, goods or supplies which are equal in quality and meet all
bid specifications of the City and of other competing bidders, and the contract
to be awarded meets one of the following criteria, as determined by the
Purchasing Officer:
   A.   The difference between bids from the local business and a business
outside the City is less than the current sales tax benefit the City would
receive from the local sales tax; or
   B.   Any other reason which would reasonably justify selection of local
businesses based upon criteria which do not unlawfully discriminate against
outside businesses.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.045 MULTI-YEAR CONTRACTS.
   Unless otherwise limited by the City's Charter, this Code or applicable
state or federal law, the term of a contract shall be as set forth in the
contract, and may include extensions as authorized in the contract. The
Purchasing Officer may approve a multi-year contract; provided, the annual
value of the multi-year contract does not exceed the Purchasing Authority.
Otherwise, multi-year contracts shall require the approval of the City Council.
In the event the same vendor has been utilized for a period of five consecutive
years, the informal or formal bidding procedures as set forth in §§
3.07.070 and
3.07.075 of this Subchapter shall apply. This §
3.07.045 shall not apply to purchases subject to the exceptions set forth in §§
3.07.055.A through
3.07.055.G.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.050 CHANGE ORDERS AND CONTRACT AMENDMENTS.
   A.   Any alteration to, amendment of, or deviation from an awarded purchase
order or contract as to scope, cost, time for completion, material, equipment
or services furnished as a part of the purchase order or contract, or any
alteration to, amendment of, or deviation from the nature of work to be
performed, shall require the completion and issuance of a Change Order or
execution of a contract amendment, as applicable. Additions to work cannot be
combined with deletions to work to avoid the requirements of this §
3.07.050.
   B.   If the original purchase order or contract was approved by the
Purchasing Officer, then the Purchasing Officer may approve a Change Order or
contract amendment, as applicable, for that purchase order or contract;
provided, the Change Order or contract amendment does not exceed the Purchasing
Officer's Purchasing Authority. If the original purchase order or contract was
approved by the City Council, then the Purchasing Officer may approve a Change
Order or contract amendment in an amount that does not exceed the Purchasing
Officer's Purchasing Authority. All other Change Orders and contract amendments
shall be approved by the City Council or the person, if any, designated in a
contract approved by the City Council. No Change Order or contract amendment
shall be binding on the City until approved as provided in this §
3.07.050.
   C.   Change Orders shall not be issued unless:
      1.   The Change Order arises in good faith out of an unknown condition or
unforeseen circumstance differing materially from the conditions of the
purchase order or contract; or the Change Order-arises due to an error or
omission, as determined by the City, in the City's bid specification that
accompanied the request for bids; or the City desires to make a material
substitution or addition to the project based on new information obtained
during the construction phase of the project; and the Change Order does not
change the purpose and is reasonably related to the scope of work of the
original purchase order or contract; and
      2.   With regard to the purchase of equipment, goods or supplies, the
Change Order is required to allow the equipment, goods or supplies to fulfill
the purpose for which they were intended, and such Change Order does not
authorize the purchase of additional equipment, goods or supplies that could
also be purchased from another source and used compatibly with the equipment,
goods or supplies purchased.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.055 EXCEPTIONS TO BIDDING REQUIREMENTS.
   The bidding requirements set forth in §§
3.07.070 and
3.07.075 of this Subchapter shall not apply in the following circumstances:
   A.   When the needed equipment, supplies or services that are proprietary
items of original equipment manufacturers and/or their authorized exclusive
distributors.
   B.   When the equipment is a component for equipment or a system of
equipment previously acquired by the City, and is necessary to repair, maintain
or improve the City's utilization of the equipment.
   C.   When the requesting department determines in writing, after conducting
a good faith review of the available sources, that there is only one source for
the required equipment, good, supply or service. The department requesting sole
source procurement shall provide written evidence to support a sole source
determination. Such evidence shall be approved by the Purchasing Officer. The
Purchasing Officer may require that negotiations be conducted as to price,
delivery and terms. The Purchasing Officer may also require the submission of
cost or pricing data in connection with an award under this §
3.07.055 or may require that formal or informal bidding procedures be used.
   D.   Where items to be purchased are for resale to the public.
   E.   Where items to be purchased are computer software, hardware maintenance
services or software maintenance services.
   F.   Any contract involving the purchase of equipment, goods, supplies or
services entered into with another governmental entity.
   G.   Purchases of equipment, goods or supplies where competitive bid
procedures have already been utilized by the City, another public agency,
including, but not limited to, federal, state and county governments,
including, state of California agencies, counties, cities, joint power agencies
and special districts, or nonprofit agencies whose main purpose is to assist
cities or other public entities, including, but not limited to, the League of
California Cities and Independent Cities Association; provided, the equipment,
goods or supplies are supplied to the City at the same or better price, as was
obtained through the competitive bid procedures of that entity.
   H.   Emergency purchase as set forth in §
3.07.060 of this Subchapter.
   I.   Contracts for professional or general services as set forth in §
3.07.065 of this Subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.060 EMERGENCIES.
   A.   In the case of an emergency, the Purchasing Officer is authorized to
purchase equipment, goods, supplies or services, in an amount up to the
Purchasing Authority, as established by resolution of the City Council, and
without following the purchasing or bidding procedures otherwise required by
this Subchapter. For purposes of this Subchapter, an emergency is a sudden,
unexpected occurrence, requiring immediate action necessary to permit the
City's continued operation or provision of services. An emergency purchase
shall be limited to such equipment, goods, supplies or services necessary to
satisfy the emergency need. The Department Head shall file a written report
with the Purchasing Officer and report to the City Council at the next regular
City Council Meeting after such emergency purchase.
   B.   In case of a locally declared emergency or if the City Manager
determines there is an unforeseen emergency situation that threatens life,
property or the general public health, safety and welfare, expenditures shall
be made utilizing provisions as established in Chapter 3.09 (Disasters and
Emergencies) of this Code.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.065 PROFESSIONAL AND GENERAL SERVICES.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter, the City may award
purchase orders and contracts in any amount for professional or general
services without complying with the provisions of this Subchapter; provided,
the purchase order or contract shall be based upon competitive quotations,
whenever practical, as determined by the City Manager.
   B.   For purposes of this §
3.07.065, professional services shall include, but not be limited to, services
of engineers, architects, accountants, attorneys, doctors, and other
professionals when the City is contracting for the skill, integrity, judgment,
and/or special technical ability of the professional.
   C.   For purposes of this §
3.07.065, general services shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Any communication, gas, water, electric light and power service or
similar utility service;
      2.   Insurance, postage, freight and courier service;
      3.   Travel/hotel accommodations, education and training expense;
      4.   Subscriptions and memberships;
      5.   Repair and maintenance service for equipment, machinery or other
City-owned personal property; and
      6.   Repair and maintenance service for City-owned, occupied or operated
real property and buildings; and
      7.   Rental or lease of real property or equipment and other personal
property.
   D.   The City, in its discretion, may conduct a request for proposals
("RFP") or request for qualifications ("RFQ") process for the award of
contracts for professional or general services. Awards for such contracts shall
be made by the City Council based on demonstrated competence and
qualifications, as set forth in the RFP/RFQ, for the types of services to be
performed, at fair and reasonable prices to the City in accordance with the
following provisions:
      1.   Budget verification. Prior to RFP/RFQ issuance, the Purchasing
Officer shall confirm the requested purchase is identified in the current
fiscal year adopted budget. For items not identified in the current fiscal year
adopted budget, the requesting City department shall be required to receive
City Council approval prior to RFP/RFQ issuance.
      2.   RFP/RFQ specifications. RFP/RFQ specifications shall be prepared and
include the basis on which the RFP/RFQ will be evaluated, including, but not
limited to, demonstrated competence, professional qualifications necessary, and
satisfactory performance of services.
      3.   Proposal submittal and opening. The process for submittal and
opening of proposals shall be stated in the RFP/RFQ. Proposals must be received
prior to the deadline stated in the RFP/RFQ.
      4.   Protests. Except as otherwise required by applicable state or
federal law, or set forth in a specific RFP/RFQ document, proposals submitted
in response to an RFP or RFQ, shall not be subject to the protest procedures
set forth in Section
3.07.075.G.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.070 INFORMAL BID PROCEDURES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter, any purchase of equipment,
goods or supplies of an estimated value within the Purchasing Authority may be
made by the Purchasing Officer in the open market pursuant to the procedure
prescribed in this §
3.07.070 without following the formal competitive bid procedures prescribed in
§
3.07.075. Such purchases shall be based upon competitive quotations, whenever
practical, as determined by the City Manager, and shall be awarded to the
lowest responsive and responsible bidder.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.075 FORMAL BID PROCEDURES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter, purchases of equipment,
goods and supplies of an estimated value exceeding the Purchasing Authority,
shall be by formal sealed written competitive bids. Awards for such
expenditures shall be made by the City Council to the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   Budget verification. Prior to issuance of a request for bids, the
Purchasing Officer shall confirm the requested purchase is identified in the
current fiscal year adopted budget. For items not identified in the current
fiscal year adopted budget, the requesting City department shall be required to
receive City Council approval prior to issuance of the request for bids.
   B.   Bid specifications. Bid specifications shall be prepared and include
the criteria that must be met to be considered the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder.
   C.   Notice inviting bids. Notices inviting sealed bids shall either be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City or posted on
the City's website, and shall be posted at City Hall and other public posting
locations, as determined by the Purchasing Officer, at least ten (10) days
prior to the date set for opening of the bids. In addition, notices inviting
bids shall be disseminated via email or United States Mail to at least three
prospective bidders approved by the Purchasing Officer, when feasible, and all
those who have requested to be placed on the bidders list. Notices shall
include a general description of the articles for which bids are being sought,
and the time, date and location for submitting and opening of the bids.
   D.   Bid submittal and bid opening. The process for submittal and public
opening of sealed bids shall be stated in the notice inviting bids. All bids
received shall be available for public inspection at the time and place of
opening, and thereafter, in the Office of the City Clerk. Bids must be received
prior to the bid opening to be considered.
   E.   No bids received. If no bids are received through the formal bid
procedure set forth in this §
3.07.075, then informal competitive bid procedures as set forth in §
3.07.070 may be utilized without further complying with this Subchapter.
   F.   Rejection or waiver of bid requirements.
      1.   The City Council may reject any and all bids-presented and may re-
solicit for bids, or abandon the project, in its sole discretion.
      2.   Except as provided in §
3.07.090, the City Council may waive, by a majority vote, any irregularities or
informalities in any bid or any bidding process.
      3.   Except as provided in §
3.07.090, upon determining that conformance with the procedures set forth in
this §
3.07.075 would be contrary to the best interests of the City or upon
determining that compliance with the procedures would be impractical, the City
Council may waive, by a majority vote, any or all of the requirements of this §
3.07.075 and, if it deems it to be in the City's best interest, authorize a
negotiated contract.
   G.   Bid protest procedures. Except as otherwise set forth in the notice
inviting bids or bid specifications, the following bid protest procedures shall
apply to all City bids:
      1.   Only bidders who submitted a timely bid may file a bid protest. The
term "bidder" does not include subcontractors, suppliers or other third
parties.
      2.   The bid protest must be in writing.
      3.   Protests based on alleged defects, ambiguities or improprieties in
the notice inviting bid and bid specifications must be filed with the City
prior to the deadline for bid submittal.
      4.   All other protests must be filed and received by the City not more
than three City business days after bidders receive notification of City's
intent to award the contract.
      5.   The written bid protest must set forth, in detail, all grounds for
the bid protest, including without limitation all facts, supporting
documentation, legal authorities and argument in support of the grounds for the
bid protest. All factual contentions must be supported by competent, admissible
and credible evidence.
      6.   Any matters not set forth in the written bid protest shall be deemed
waived.
      7.   Any bid protest not conforming to this §
3.07.075.G shall be rejected by the City as invalid, and shall constitute a
waiver of any right to further pursue a bid protest, including the filing a
Government Code claim or initiation of legal proceedings.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.080 INTERPRETATION OF BID AND PROPOSAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   Oral interpretation of written bid or proposal specifications shall not be
made to prospective bidders or proposers. If the prospective bidder or proposer
discovers discrepancies or omissions in any specifications, or if the bidder or
proposer is in doubt as to the meaning of any specifications, the bidder or
proposer shall request a written interpretation or modification from the City.
If interpretations or modifications are deemed necessary, the City will issue a
written addendum to potential bidders or proposers known to have received
copies of the specifications.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.085 EQUAL BIDS.
   Whenever two or more equivalent bids are received, the Purchasing Officer or
the City Council may choose whichever of the following options it deems to
serve the best interest of the City:
   A.   Select one bid, giving preference to a local business; or
   B.   Reject all bids and reissue a notice inviting bids; or
   C.   Reject all bids and authorize negotiation of an agreement between the
City and one of the equivalent bidders.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.090 CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS.
   The following procedures shall govern the award and implementation of
contracts for Public Works Projects:
   A.   Public Works Projects within Purchasing Authority. The bidding of a
Public Works Project involving an estimated expenditure within the Purchasing
Authority shall comply with the informal bid procedures set forth in §
3.07.070 of this Subchapter.
   B.   Public Works Projects exceeding Purchasing Authority but not exceeding
one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000). The bidding of a Public Works
Project involving an estimated expenditure exceeding the Purchasing Authority,
but not exceeding one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00), shall
comply with the formal bid procedures set forth in §
3.07.075 of this Subchapter. Project plans and specifications for a Public
Works Project in this category, when such project is not included in the
current fiscal year adopted budget, shall be approved by City Council prior to
the issuance of a notice inviting bids.
   C.   Public Works Projects exceeding one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000). The bidding of a Public Works Project involving an estimated
expenditure exceeding one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00), shall
comply with the formal bid procedures as set forth in §
3.07.075 of this Subchapter. Project plans and specifications for a Public
Works Project in this category shall be approved by the City Council prior to
issuance of a notice inviting bids.
   D.   Award of contract. Except as otherwise provided by this Subchapter:
      1.   The award of a contract for a Public Works Project involving an
expenditure within the Purchasing Authority shall be made by the Purchasing
Officer to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder.
      2.   The award of a contract for a Public Works Project involving an
expenditure exceeding the Purchasing Authority shall be made by the City
Council to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder.
   E.   Waiver of bidding procedures. The City Council, by four affirmative
votes, may award a contract for a Public Works Project without complying with
the formal bid procedures set forth in Section 3.07.075; provided, a public
hearing is held on the award of the contract. Notice of the public hearing
shall either be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City
or posted on the City's website, and shall be posted at City Hall and other
posting locations, as determined by the Purchasing Officer, at least ten (10)
days prior to the date set for the public hearing.
   F.   Prevailing wage and other Labor Code requirements. A contract for a
Public Works Project, where the initial contract amount, or aggregate contract
amount after a Change Order has been approved, exceeds twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000) for construction work or fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000)
for alteration, demolition, repair, or maintenance work, shall include a
provision requiring contractor to pay prevailing wages and comply with all
applicable Prevailing Wage Laws as set forth in the California Labor Code,
Division 2, Part 7, Chapter 1, Articles 1-5, as amended.
   G.   Acceptance of work; notice of completion and release of retention. For
every Public Works Project, the Public Works Director shall have the authority
to accept the work performed in writing and, in his or her discretion, execute
and record a Notice of Completion of the project and release the retention
after 35 days but within 60 days thereafter.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.07.095 DISPOSITION OF CITY SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   A.   The Purchasing Officer shall be responsible for disposing of all
surplus, abandoned, stolen and recovered property.
   B.   Surplus property shall be disposed of by a method determined by the
Purchasing Officer to be of the most value and in the City's best financial
interest; however, property acquired through federal or state funds must be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the funding agency, if
applicable. The following disposal methods may be used for surplus property:
      1.   Auctions or sealed bids. The Purchasing Officer may dispose of
surplus property via a competitive sale to the public, generally through a
sealed bid or auction.
      2.   Transfer from one City division to another. Upon receipt of notice
of the condemned property, the Purchasing Officer shall first attempt to
transfer the property to another City division.
      3.   Transfer to not-for-profit entity. Upon receipt of notice of the
condemned property, the Purchasing Officer may attempt to dispose of surplus
property to a not-for-profit entity by gift.
      4.   Transfer to another government entity. By resolution or ordinance,
the City may dispose of surplus property to another governmental entity by
gift, sale, trade or barter.
      5.   Trading in for new purchase. The Purchasing Officer may bargain with
vendors for the trading in of condemned property as an offset or allowance on
the purchase of other property, provided all vendors are given an equal
opportunity to view and appraise the condemned property for such purpose.
      6.   Transfer of partnered police dogs to retired peace officers. Upon
the honorable retirement of a peace officer from the City of Culver City Police
Department, the Purchasing Officer may authorize the conveyance of that peace
officer's Department partnered police dog on behalf of and for resale to the
retiring peace officer at no cost or below fair market value.
(Ord. 2018-008 § 1 (part))
FUNDS
§ 3.07.200 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   A.   Source. All moneys received by the City from the State of California
under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of
real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or
improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into
said fund.
(Ord. 436 § 2)
   B.   Purpose. All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the
purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Cal. Sts. &
High. Code §§ 181 et seq.
(Ord. 436 § 3)
('65 Code, § 2-87)
Cross-reference:
   New Development Impact Fund, see §
15.06.010
   City Art Fund, see §
15.06.110
§ 3.07.205 CAPITAL OUTLAY FUNDS.
   A.   Special Fund for capital outlays.
      1.   Source. Taxes may be levied upon the taxable property for the
raising of moneys for said fund, subject to the laws of taxation. Also the City
Council may transfer to this fund unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand
at the end of any fiscal year.
      2.   Purposes. This fund shall remain exclusively for making capital
outlays.
('65 Code, § 2-88) (Ord. No. 609)
   B.   Special capital outlay funds.
      1.   Pursuant to Charter § 1607, the following special funds are created
for special capital outlay purposes:
         Duplicating Machine Fund — 13-3;
         City Buildings Maintenance Fund — 13-7;
         Police Department Fund — 14-0;
         Fire Department Buildings, Facilities and Equipment Fund — 14-1;
         Weed Control Equipment Fund — 14-5;
         Parking Meters Fund — 14-6;
         Public Works Equipment Fund — 15-0;
         Street Department Fund — 15-3;
         Street Maintenance Equipment Fund — 15-4;
         Municipal Plunge Equipment and Facilities Fund — 16-1;
         Park Department Land, Buildings, Facilities and Equipment Fund — 16-3;
         Tree Planting and Landscaping Fund — 16-4;
         City Yard Land, Buildings, Facilities and Equipment Fund — 17-5;
         City Hall Building, Equipment, Facilities and Replacement Fund — 19-0;
         Advertising and Promotion Fund — 138C-C;
         Bus Department Facilities, Equipment, Repair and Replacement Fund —
270-2.
      2.   Source. That the City Council will, from time to time, levy and
collect taxes for capital outlays and will include in the annual tax levy, from
time to time, a levy for such purposes, in which event there shall be
apportioned and appropriated to the Special Capital Outlay Funds the money
derived from such levy.
      3.   Purposes. Each fund shall remain inviolate for the department or
division denoted by the name, unless changed by lawful election. Unencumbered
funds may be transferred by the City Council into any of the Special Capital
Outlay Funds.
('65 Code, § 2-90) (Ord. No. 2006-009 § 15)
   C.   Expenditure requirement. Not less than three-fourths of the funds
derived from each annual tax levy and from other sources for Capital Outlay
purposes shall be apportioned and appropriated not later than the end of the
third quarter of the fiscal year.
('65 Code, § 2-91) (Ord. CS-188 §§ 1 - 5)
REVENUE BONDS
§ 3.07.300 ISSUANCE AND SALE OF REVENUE BONDS.
   The City Council, exercising the powers reserved to the City under Cal.
Const. Art. XI, § 5, and pursuant to City of Culver City Charter §
500, may, by resolution(s), issue and sell revenue bonds for any City purpose
or purposes.
('65 Code, § 2-140) (Ord. No. 91-003 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 16)
CHAPTER 3.08: TAXATION
Section
General Provisions  
   
3.08.005   Tax modifications
Sales and Use Tax
   
3.08.100   Purpose
   
3.08.105   Sales tax
   
3.08.110   Place of sale
   
3.08.115   Use tax; sales price to include delivery charges
   
3.08.120   Adoption of state law provisions; limitations
   
3.08.125   Conditions when permit not required
   
3.08.130   Exclusions and exemptions
   
3.08.135   Alternative exclusions and exemptions
   
3.08.140   Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions
   
3.08.145   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3.08.150   Existing sales and use tax ordinances suspended
Utility Users’ Tax
   
3.08.200   Title
   
3.08.205   Definitions
   
3.08.210   Communications users’ tax
   
3.08.215   Electricity users’ tax
   
3.08.220   Gas users’ tax
   
3.08.222   Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of
gas or electricity
   
3.08.225   Water users’ tax
   
3.08.230   Effect of state and federal authorization
   
3.08.232   Bundling taxable and nontaxable charges
   
3.08.235   Exemptions
   
3.08.240   Collection of tax
   
3.08.245   Reporting and remitting
   
3.08.250   Penalty
   
3.08.255   Actions to collect
   
3.08.257   Additional powers and duties of Tax Administrator
   
3.08.260   Failure to pay tax; administrative remedy
   
3.08.265   Appeals
   
3.08.267   No injunction or writ of mandate
   
3.08.270   Records
   
3.08.275   Refunds
   
3.08.278   Audit of communications users’ tax
   
3.08.280   Severability
   
3.08.285   Reserved
   
3.08.287   Amendment or repeal
   
3.08.290   Notice of changes to subchapter
Essential City Services Transactions and Use Tax
   
3.08.300   Title
   
3.08.305   Operative date
   
3.08.310   Purpose
   
3.08.315   Contract with state
   
3.08.320   Transactions tax rate
   
3.08.325   Place of sale
   
3.08.330   Use tax rate
   
3.08.335   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
3.08.340   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
3.08.345   Permit not required
   
3.08.350   Exemptions and exclusions
   
3.08.355   Amendments
   
3.08.360   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3.08.365   Severability
   
3.08.370   Effective date
   
3.08.375   Termination date
Real Property Transfer Tax
   
3.08.400   Tax imposed
   
3.08.405   Persons required to pay tax
   
3.08.410   Administration of tax
   
3.08.415   Due dates; delinquency; penalties; interest
   
3.08.420   Declaration of amount of tax due
   
3.08.425   Determination of deficiency; recomputation of tax due
   
3.08.430   Notice of determination
   
3.08.435   Manner of giving notice
   
3.08.440   Petition for redetermination
   
3.08.445   Consideration of petition; hearing
   
3.08.450   Decreasing or increasing amount of determination
   
3.08.455   Finality of determination
   
3.08.460   Tax a debt
   
3.08.465   Refunds
   
3.08.470   Severability
Neighborhood Safety and City Services Protection Transactions and Use Tax
   
3.08.500   Title
   
3.08.505   Operative date
   
3.08.510   Purpose
   
3.08.515   Contract with state
   
3.08.520   Transactions tax rate
   
3.08.525   Place of sale
   
3.08.530   Use tax rate
   
3.08.535   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
3.08.540   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
3.08.545   Permit not required
   
3.08.550   Exemptions and exclusions
   
3.08.555   Amendments
   
3.08.560   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3.08.565   Severability
   
3.08.570   Effective date
Taxes; Condominiums
   
3.08.600   Condominium tax law
   
3.08.605   Tax refund
   
3.08.610   Tax lien and hearing
   
3.08.615   Filing notice of lien
Water Extraction Tax
   
3.08.700   Tax imposed
Commercial and Industrial Development Tax
   
3.08.800   Title
   
3.08.805   Tax imposed
   
3.08.810   Tax rates
   
3.08.815   Adjustments for modification subsequent to issuance of building
permit
   
3.08.820   Exemption
   
3.08.825   Refunds
Cigarette Tax
   
3.08.900   Definitions
   
3.08.905   Tax imposed
   
3.08.910   Tax owed to city by retailer; tax paid to retailer by purchaser
   
3.08.915   Retailer remits quarterly; establishment of reporting periods
   
3.08.920   Registration
   
3.08.925   Delinquent taxes; penalties and interest
   
3.08.930   Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax, interest,
and penalties
   
3.08.935   Appeal
   
3.08.940   Keeping of records; inspection
   
3.08.945   Refunds
   
3.08.950   Actions to recover tax
   
3.08.955   Failure to register or file reports; other violations; penalty
   
3.08.960   Suspension of tax
Neighborhood Services and Community Safety Transactions and Use Tax
   
3.08.1000   Title
   
3.08.1005   Operative date
   
3.08.1010   Purpose
   
3.08.1015   Contract with state
   
3.08.1020   Transactions tax rate
   
3.08.1025   Place of sale
   
3.08.1030   Use tax rate
   
3.08.1035   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
3.08.1040   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
3.08.1045   Permit not required
   
3.08.1050   Exemptions and exclusions
   
3.08.1055   Amendments
   
3.08.1060   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3.08.1065   Severability
   
3.08.1070   Effective date
Cross-reference:
   Tax limits, see Charter §
1602
   Tax system, see Charter §
1601
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 3.08.005 TAX MODIFICATIONS.
   A.   Suspension of operation. From time to time, by resolution, the City
Council may suspend the operation of any tax for any period of time if the City
Council finds and determines that the proceeds of the tax during said period of
time are not necessary for the usual and ordinary operations of the City.
('65 Code, § 33G-1)
   B.   Reduction of amount. From time to time, by resolution, the City Council
may reduce the amount of any tax for any period of time if the City Council
finds and determines that the proceeds from the amount of the reduction are not
necessary for the usual and ordinary operations of the City during said period
of time.
('65 Code, § 33G-2)
   C.   Postponement of operative date. From time to time, by resolution, the
City Council may postpone the operative date of any ordinance which repeals or
terminates an existing tax the proceeds of which the City Council finds and
determines are necessary for the usual and ordinary operations of the City.
('65 Code, § 33G-3)
(Ord. No. CS-933 § 1(A, B, C))
SALES AND USE TAX
§ 3.08.100 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subchapter is as follows:
   A.   To adopt a sales and use tax regulation which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part
1.5 (commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.);
   B.   To adopt a sales and use tax regulation which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California
insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and
limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.5 (commencing
with §§ 7200 et seq.);
   C.   To adopt a sales and use tax regulation which imposes a tax and
provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State
Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable
to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;
   D.   To adopt a sales and use tax regulation which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.5 (commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.), minimize
the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize
the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the
provisions of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 33-1) (Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.105 SALES TAX.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate of one percent (1%)
of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal
property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date.
('65 Code, § 33-2) (Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.110 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
of such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to
the State Sales and Use Tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has
more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales
are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
('65 Code, § 33-3) (Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.115 USE TAX; SALES PRICE TO INCLUDE DELIVERY CHARGES.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage use or other consumption in
this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and
after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at
the rate of one percent (1%) of the sale price of the property. The sales price
shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State Sales or
Use Tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
('65 Code, § 33-4) (Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.120 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW PROVISIONS; LIMITATIONS.
   A.   Adoption of state law provisions. Except as otherwise provided in this
Subchapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.5 (commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.), all
of the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1 (commencing with §§
6001 et seq.) are hereby adopted and made a part of this Subchapter as though
fully set forth herein. All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation
Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.5 (commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.) shall
automatically become a part of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 33-5)
   B.   Limitations. In adopting the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div.
2, Part 1 (commencing with §§ 6001 et seq.), wherever the State of California
is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be
substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the
word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State
Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the
State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the
substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather
than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this Subchapter; the
substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not
necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the
State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide
an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt
from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain
subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div.
2, Part 1 (commencing with §§ 6001 et seq.), or to impose this tax with respect
to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said
provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737,
6797 or 6828; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in
the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §
6203.
('65 Code, § 33-6)
(Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.125 CONDITIONS WHEN PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this
Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 33-7) (Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.130 EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   There shall be excluded from the measure of Tax:
   A.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California
upon a retailer or consumer;
   B.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
Div. 2, Part 1.5 (commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.) by any city and county,
county, or city in this State;
('65 Code, § 33-8) (Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.135 ALTERNATE EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   1.   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.
      2.   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax
under a Sales and Use Tax Ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code Div. 2, Part 1.5 (commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.) by any city and county,
county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this
Subchapter.
      3.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the
sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State,
the United States, or any foreign government.
      4.   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§
6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the
United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
      5.   This Subsection A. shall be operative January 1, 1984.
('65 Code, § 33-9)
   B.   1.   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.
      2.   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax
under a Sales and Use Tax Ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code Div. 2, Part 1.5 (commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.) by any city and county,
county, or city, in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this
Subchapter.
      3.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the
sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State,
the United States, or any foreign government.
      4.   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§
6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the
United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
      5.   This Subsection B. shall be operative on the operative date of any
act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code § 7202 or which repeals and reenacts Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7202 to
provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne
vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7202, subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) as those
subdivisions read on October 1, 1983.
('65 Code, § 33-9)
(Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 83-032 §§ 1 - 4)
§ 3.08.140 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   Section
3.08.135 of this Subchapter shall become operative on January 1st of the year
following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an
assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio
which is required for local assessments by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 401, at
which time §
3.08.130 of this Subchapter shall become inoperative.
   B.   In the event that §
3.08.135 of this Subchapter becomes operative and the State Board of
Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed
property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments
by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 401, §
3.08.130 of this Subchapter shall become operative on the first day of the
month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which
time §
3.08.135 of this Subchapter shall be inoperative until the first day of the
month following the month in which the Board again adopts an assessment ratio
for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local
assessment by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 401, at which time §
3.08.135 shall again become operative and § 3.08.130 shall become inoperative.
('65 Code, § 33-10) (Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.145 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this
City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this Subchapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.5
(commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.), or any tax or any amount of tax required to
be collected.
('65 Code, § 33-11) (Ord. No. CS-790 § 2 (part))
§ 3.08.150 EXISTING SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCES SUSPENDED.
   At the time Ordnance No. CS-790, codified in this Subchapter, goes into
operation, the provisions of Ordinances Nos. 627 and CS-152 and all amendments
thereto, shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or effect until
and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the
functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax
imposed by this Subchapter; provided, however, that if for any reason it is
determined that the City of Culver City is without power to adopt Ordinance No.
CS-790, or that the State Board of Equalization is without power to perform the
functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by
this Subchapter, the provisions of Ordinances Nos. 627 and CS-152, and all
amendments thereto, shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be
deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of one percent (1%)
continuously from and after April 1, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the State Board
of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and
operation of the taxes imposed by this Subchapter, the provisions of Ordinances
Nos. 627 and CS-152, and all amendments to said Ordinances, shall again be in
full force and effect at the rate of one percent (1%). Nothing in this Section
shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the City
of Culver City any sales or use tax accrued and owing by reason of the
provisions of Ordinances Nos. 627 and CS-152 and all amendments thereto, in
force and effect prior to and including March 31, 1956.
('65 Code, § 33-12) (Ord. No. CS-797 § 1)
UTILITY USERS’ TAX
§ 3.08.200 TITLE.
   This Subchapter shall be known as the Utility Users’ Tax Ordinance of the
City of Culver City.
('65 Code, § 33B-1) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1
(part))
§ 3.08.205 DEFINITIONS.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this subchapter.
   ANCILLARY TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Services that are associated with or
incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services,
including but not limited to, the following services:
      1.   CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE. An ancillary service that links two or
more participants of an audio or video conference call, and may include the
provision of a telephone number. CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE does not include
the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.
      2.    DETAILED TELECOMMUNICATIONS BILLING SERVICE. An ancillary service
of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a
customer's billing statement.
      3.   DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE. An ancillary service of providing telephone
number and/or address information.
      4.   VERTICAL SERVICE. An ancillary service that is offered in connection
with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling
features that allow customers to identify callers, and to manage multiple calls
and call connections, including conference bridging services.
      5.    VOICEMAIL SERVICE. An ancillary service that enables the customer
to store, send or receive recorded messages. VOICEMAIL SERVICE does not include
any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to
utilize the voicemail service.
   BILLING ADDRESS. The mailing address of the service user where the service
supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
   CITY. The City of Culver City.
   COMMUNICATION SERVICES. Telecommunications services and video services.
   ELECTRICAL CORPORATION. Includes any organization or municipality or agency
engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user.
   EXEMPT WHOLESALE GENERATOR. The same meaning as set forth in the Federal
Power Act (15 U.S.C. Section 79z-5a) and regulations thereunder.
   GAS. Natural or manufactured gas, or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel that may
be substituted therefor.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NON-UTILITY SERVICE SUPPLIER.
      1.   A service supplier, other than a provider of electric distribution
services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates
electricity for sale to others, and shall include, but is not limited to, any
publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, exempt
wholesale generator, municipal utility district, federal power marketing
agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity.
      2.   An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer,
aggregator, pool, operator, or other electricity supplier other than a provider
of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city,
which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity
users within the city; and
      3.   A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a
provider of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the
city, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to gas users within
the city.
   PERSON. Without limitation, any domestic, non-profit or foreign corporation,
firm, association, syndicate, joint-stock company, partnership of any kind,
joint venture, club, trust, limited liability company, business or common-law
trust, society, any natural individual, cooperative, receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, or any
municipal corporation (other than the city).
   PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Any dedicated communications services that
entitle the user to the exclusive or priority use of communications channels.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER.  Any entity or person that provides telephone
communication, electric, gas, water, or video service to a user of such
services within the city. The term shall include an entity or person required
to collect (or self-collect under §
3.08.222 of this subchapter) and remit a tax imposed by this subchapter,
including its billing agent in the case of gas, electric, water and video
service suppliers.
   SERVICE USER. A person required to pay a tax imposed by this subchapter.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Treasurer of the City of Culver City, or his or her
authorized representative.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. The transmission, conveyance, or routing of
voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or
between or among points, whatever the technology used, whether or not such
information is transmitted through interconnected service with the public
switched network, or through fiber optic, coaxial cable, power line
transmission, broadband, digital subscriber line or other wireless
transmission. The term TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES includes such transmission,
conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to
act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission,
conveyance or routing, without regard to whether such services are referred to
as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the
Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes
video and/or data services that are functionally integrated with
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES include, but are not
limited to, the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which
such services are calculated or billed: central office and custom calling
features (including but not limited to, call waiting, call forwarding, caller
identification and three-way calling), local number portability, text
messaging, ancillary telecommunication services; prepaid and post-paid services
(including but not limited to, prepaid calling cards); mobile
telecommunications service; private communication service; paging service; and
800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal
Communications Commission). TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES does not include digital
downloads, such as downloads of books, music, ringtones, games and similar
digital products.
   VIDEO SERVICE SUPPLIER. Any person, company, or service that provides one or
more channels of video programming or video communications (including the
leasing of channel access to provide such video programming or communications)
to or from an address in the city, including to or from a business, home,
condominium, or apartment, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included
in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way
are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. VIDEO
SERVICE SUPPLIER includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video
programming distributors [as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(12)], suppliers
of cable television, master antenna television, satellite master antenna
television, multichannel multipoint distribution services, direct broadcast
satellite (to the extent allowed by federal law), and other suppliers of video
programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever
their technology.
   VIDEO SERVICES. Any and all services related to the supplying of video
programming (including origination programming), communications (including two-
way communications), regardless of the content of  the video programming or
communications, and shall include, without limitation, the leasing of channel
access (e.g., home shopping) to the extent that the service user is subject to
an additional direct or indirect charge for programming or communications over
the leased channel and ancillary video services, including any service that is
associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services,
including but not limited to: electronic program guide services, search
functions, or other interactive services that are associated with or incidental
to the provision or use of video programming.
('65 Code, § 33B-2) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1
(part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 1)
§ 3.08.210 COMMUNICATIONS USERS' TAX.
   A.   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person who uses communication
services in the city, including intrastate, interstate (including calls to the
District of Columbia), and international communication services, to the extent
permitted by state and federal law. The tax imposed by this section shall be at
the rate of eleven percent (11%) of the charges made for such communication
services, and shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier
or its billing agent to the extent allowed by law, the tax on communication
services shall apply to a service user if the billing or service address of the
service user is within the city’s boundaries.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided herein, COMMUNICATION SERVICES shall
include all COMMUNICATION SERVICES for which there is a charge, regardless of
the means or technology used to provide such services. The tax imposed under
subsection A. above shall not be imposed upon any person for using the
following communication services:
      1.   Except with respect to local telephone service, services used in the
collection of news for the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a
general news service similar to that of the public press or radio broadcasting,
or in the dissemination of news through the public press, or a news ticker
service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press
or by means of radio broadcasting, if the charge for such service is billed in
writing to such person.
      2.   Services furnished to a public international organization in which
the United States participates pursuant to treaty or Act of Congress, or to the
American National Red Cross.
      3.   Any toll telephone service that originates within a combat zone and
is from a member of the Armed Forces of the United States performing service in
such combat zone; provided a certificate, setting forth such facts as the
Secretary of the United States Treasury may by regulations prescribe, is
furnished to the person receiving such payment.
      4.   No tax shall be imposed under this section on the amount paid for
any communications services, to the extent that the amount so paid is for use
by a common carrier, telephone or telegraph company, or radio broadcasting
station or network in the conduct of its business.
      5.   The installation of any instrument, wire, pole, switchboard,
apparatus or equipment as is properly attributable to such installation.
      6.   Amounts paid by a nonprofit hospital for services furnished to such
organization. For purposes of this exemption, the term NONPROFIT HOSPITAL means
a hospital referred to in Section 170(b)(1)(A)(iii) of the Internal Revenue
Code, which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501 (a) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      7.   Services or facilities furnished to the government of any state, or
any political subdivision thereof.
      8.   Services or facilities paid for by a nonprofit educational
organization and furnished to such organization. For purposes of this
subsection, the term NONPROFIT EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION means an educational
organization described in Section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue
Code, which is exempt from income tax under Section 501(a) of the same code.
The term also includes a school operated as an activity of an organization
described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, which is exempt
from income tax under Section 501(a) of the same code, if such school normally
maintains a regular faculty and curriculum, and normally has a regularly
enrolled body of pupils or students in attendance at the place where its
educational activities are regularly carried on.
      9.   Items otherwise taxed. Only one payment of tax under this section
shall be required with respect to the tax on any service.
   C.   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication
services.
   D.   Charges for video services that are taxable under this section include,
but are not limited to, charges for the following:
      1.   Franchise fees and access fees (PEG), whether designated on the
customer's bill or not;
      2   Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt
of video services;
      3.   All programming services (e.g., basic services, premium services,
audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, and electronic program
guide services);
      4.   Equipment leases (e.g., converters, remote devices);
      5.   Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of
service, and special services (e.g., no promotional mail); and
      6.   The leasing of channel access (e.g., home shopping) to the extent
that the service user is subject to an additional direct or indirect charge for
programming or communications over the leased channel; provided that, in the
absence of evidence of direct payment by the service user, the indirect payment
of the service user(s), which is subject to the utility users’ tax, shall be
deemed to be the lease payment to the video service supplier by the party
leasing the channel access.
   E.   The Tax Administrator shall, from time to time, survey the video
service suppliers in the city to identify the various components of the video
service that are being offered to customers within the city, and the charges
therefor. The Tax Administrator may, thereafter, issue and disseminate to such
video service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components:
i) that are necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of video
services; or ii) that currently are, or historically have been, included in a
bundled rate for video service by a local distribution company. Charges for
such components shall be subject to the tax of subsection A. above.
   F.   To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication
services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the
Tax Administrator that the service user owed and has previously paid the same
tax in another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a
credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally
imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit
shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.
   G.   For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and
remit a tax under this subchapter, "substantial nexus" and "minimum contacts"
shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or
remittance of the utility users’ tax to the fullest extent permitted by state
and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial
interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication services used by a
person with a service address in the city, shall be subject to a rebuttable
presumption that "substantial nexus/minimum contacts" exists for purposes of
imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this
section. For communication services for which there is no billing address or
primary physical location for the provision of services, the service address
shall mean the point of sale of the services.
   H.   The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be
collected from the service user by the service supplier. In the case of video
services, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk
video services (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such services are resold to
individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate
purchaser of the video services. The amount of tax collected in one month shall
be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. If a
service supplier of communication services uses a billing agent or billing
aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall:
i) provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone number of
each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service
supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and ii) upon
request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any
information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing
aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is necessary to
verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of
such tax to the city.
   I.   The Tax Administrator may, from time to time, issue and disseminate to
service suppliers subject to the tax collection requirements of this section,
an administrative ruling identifying those communication services that are
subject to the tax of subsection A. above. This administrative ruling shall be
consistent with legal nexus rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to
communication services. To the extent that the Tax Administrator determines
that the tax imposed under this section shall not be collected in full for any
period of time, such a determination falls within the Tax Administrator's
discretion to settle disputes. The Tax Administrator's exercise of
prosecutorial forbearance under this subchapter does not constitute a change in
taxing methodology for purposes of Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750, and the city does
not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the communication users' tax in
full as a result of entering into such administrative agreements.
('65 Code, § 33B-3) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-829 § 1; Ord. No.
84-011 § 1; Ord. No. 88-013 § 1; Ord. No. 94-022 §§ 1-4 ; Am. Ord. No. 2000-
001§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-005 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-007 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-007½
§ 2)
§ 3.08.215 ELECTRICITY USERS' TAX.
   A.   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in
the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of eleven
percent (11%) of the charges made for such electricity, and for any
supplemental services or other associated activities directly related to and/or
necessary for the provision of electricity to the service users, which are
provided by a service supplier or non-utility service supplier to a service
user.
   B.   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include:
      1.   Energy charges;
      2.   Distribution or transmission charges;
      3.   Metering charges;
      4.   Stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation,
emergency, or other similar minimum charges for services.
      5.   Customer charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges,
demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges,
independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive
transition charges (CTC), trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges),
franchise fees, franchise surcharges, which are necessary or common to the
receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and
      6.   Charges, fees, or surcharges for electric services or programs,
which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges
appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
   C.   The Tax Administrator shall, from time to time, survey the electric
service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of
electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and
commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor,
including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies
as a condition of providing such electric service. The Tax Administrator may,
thereafter, issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an
administrative ruling identifying those components and items that are: i)
necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or
ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate
for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail
customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to
the tax of subsection A. above.
   D.   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or
services related to the provision of such electricity.
   E.   As used in this section, the term USING ELECTRICITY shall not include
the mere receiving of such electricity by an electric public utility or
governmental agency at a point within the city for resale.
   F.   The tax on electricity provided by a non-utility service supplier not
under the jurisdiction of this subchapter shall be collected and remitted in
the manner set forth in §
3.08.222 of this subchapter. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed
by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric
service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month
shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the
option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person
shall remit an estimated amount of tax, measured by the tax billed in the
previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the
following month. If an electric service supplier uses a billing agent or
billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier
shall: i) provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone
number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the
service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and ii)
upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any
information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing
aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is necessary to
verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of
such tax to the city.
('65 Code, § 33B-4) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-829 § 2; Ord. No.
84-011 § 2; Ord. No. 94-025 §§ 1, 2; Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1 (part); Ord. No.
2008-007½ § 3)
§ 3.08.220 GAS USERS' TAX.
   A.   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the city,
which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by
this section shall be at the rate of eleven percent (11%) of the charges made
for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and
delivery of such gas.
   B.   As used in this section, the CHARGES shall include:
      1.   The community charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by
the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling,
production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other
operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which
is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport;
      2.   Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the
extent not included in commodity charges);
      3.   Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier shall
not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when
the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction
where such stored gas in ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the
service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for
gas storage by the service supplier, and to remit the tax to the appropriate
jurisdiction;
      4.   Capacity or demand charges, service establishment or reestablishment
charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and
monthly charges, and any other charges, which are necessary or common to the
receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; and
      5.   Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are
mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear
on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
   C.   The Tax Administrator shall, from time to time, survey the gas service
suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail
service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/ industrial
customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are
mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing
such gas service. The Tax Administrator may, thereafter, issue and disseminate
to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those
components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and
enjoyment of gas service; or ii) currently, or historically have been, included
in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to
a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items
shall be subject to the tax of subsection A. above.
   D.   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services
related to the delivery of such gas.
   E.   There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax is imposed in
this section is computed: (1) charges made for gas that is to be resold and
delivered through a pipeline distribution system; (2) charges made for gas to
be used in the generation of electricity by an electrical corporation; (3)
charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct
of the business of gas public utilities; (4) charges made for gas used in the
propulsion of a motor vehicle, as defined in the California Vehicle Code,
utilizing natural gas; and (5) charges made for gas used by a non-utility
service supplier to generate electricity for its own use or for sale to others,
provided the electricity so generated is subject to the tax in accordance with
§
3.08.215 of this subchapter.
   F.   The tax that is calculated on charges for gas provided by self-
production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of
this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in §
3.08.222 of this subchapter. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this
section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or
its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted
to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator, on or
before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the option of the
person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an
estimated amount of tax, measured by the tax billed in the previous month or
upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. If a gas
service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect,
and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: i) provide to the Tax
Administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and
billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill,
collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and ii) upon request of the Tax
Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records
in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the
opinion of the Tax Administrator, is necessary to verify the proper
application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.
('65 Code, § 33B-5) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-829 § 3; Ord. No.
84-011 § 3; Ord. No. 94-025 §§ 3, 4; Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1 (part); Ord. No.
2008-007½ § 4)
§ 3.08.222 COLLECTION OF TAX FROM SERVICE USERS RECEIVING DIRECT PURCHASE OF
GAS OR ELECTRICITY.
   A.   Any service user subject to the tax imposed by §
3.08.215 or by §
3.08.220 of this subchapter, which produces gas or electricity for self-use;
which receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services,
directly from a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this
subchapter; or which, for any other reason, is not having the full tax
collected and remitted by its service supplier, a non-utility service supplier,
or its billing agent on the use of gas or electricity, including any related
supplemental services, in the city, shall report this fact to the Tax
Administrator, and shall remit the tax due directly to the Tax Administrator
within 30 days of such use. In lieu of paying the actual tax, the service user
may, at its option, remit to the Tax Administrator, within 30 days of such use,
an estimated amount of tax, measured by the tax billed in the previous month,
or upon the payment pattern of similar customers of the service supplier using
similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall
submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60
days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Town
Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.
   B.   The Tax Administrator may require the service user to identify its non-
utility service supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of
account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or
electricity used, including any related supplemental services, and the cost or
price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory
evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax in the opinion
of the Tax Administrator is excessive, the Tax Administrator may determine the
tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would
have incurred if the gas or electricity used, including any related
supplemental services, had been provided by the service supplier that is the
primary supplier of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedule for this
purpose shall be available from the city.
(Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 5)
§ 3.08.225 WATER USERS' TAX.
   A.   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using the city water
that is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall
be at the rate of eleven percent (11%) of the charges made for such water, and
shall be paid by the person paying for such water.
   B.   There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this
section is computed charges made for water that is to be resold and delivered
through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal water department,
public utility or a county or municipal water district for water used and
consumed by such department, utility or district in the conduct of the business
of such department, utility or district.
('65 Code, § 33B-6) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-829 § 4; Ord. No.
CS-830 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 968 § 1; Ord. No. 84-011 § 4; Ord. No. 94-025 § 5; Am.
Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 6)
§ 3.08.230 EFFECT OF STATE AND FEDERAL AUTHORIZATION.
   To the extent that the city's authorization to impose or collect the tax
imposed in this subchapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in
state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this subchapter shall be
required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and
collected to the full extent of the city's authorization, up to the full amount
of the tax imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 7)
§ 3.08.232 BUNDLING TAXABLE AND NONTAXABLE CHARGES.
   If a nontaxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a
single charge, the entire charge shall be deemed taxable, unless the service
supplier or taxpayer reasonably identifies actual charges not subject to the
utility users’ tax, based upon books and records that are kept in the regular
course of business, in a manner consistent with generally accepted accounting
principles.
(Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 8)
§ 3.08.235 EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon:
      1.   Any person or service, if imposition of such tax upon that person or
service would be in violation of a federal or California statute, the
Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of
California;
      2.   The city;
      3.   Any individual 60 years of age or older, who uses communication,
electric, gas, or water services; in or upon any premises occupied by such
individual; provided the total adjusted gross income of that individual, as
used for purposes of the California Personal Income Tax Law, was no more than
$18,200 for the most recent completed calendar years; and provided the combined
adjusted gross income of all members of the household in which such individual
resided was no more than $21,500; or
      4.   Any individual who meets the criterion of disability, as established
by the Social Security Administration's Supplemental Security Income Program
for the Aged, Blind, and Disabled (Title XVI of the Social Security Act, as
amended), without regard to the age of such disabled individual.
   B.   The exemptions granted by this section shall not eliminate the duty of
the service supplier from collecting taxes from such exempt individuals, or the
duty of such exempt individuals from paying such taxes to the service supplier;
unless an exemption is applied for by the service user and granted in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   C.   Any service user exempt from the taxes imposed by this subchapter
because of the provisions of subsection A. above, may file an application with
the Tax Administrator for an exemption. Such application shall be made upon a
form supplied by the Tax Administrator; and shall state those facts, declared
under oath, that qualify the applicant for an exemption.
   D.   The Tax Administrator shall review all such applications, and shall
certify as exempt those applicants determined to qualify therefor; and shall
notify all service suppliers affected that such exemptions have been approved.
For each exemption, the following information shall be transmitted to the
service supplier:
      1.   Name of exempt applicant;
      2.   Account number shown on utility bill;
      3.   Address to which exempt service is being supplied; and
      4.   Any other information as may be necessary for the service supplier
to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure.
   E.   Upon receipt of such notice, the service supplier shall not be required
to continue to bill any further tax imposed by this subchapter from such exempt
service user, until further notice by the Tax Administrator is given. The
service supplier shall eliminate such exempt service user from its tax billing
procedure no later than 60 days after receipt of such notice from the Tax
Administrator.
   F.   All exemptions shall continue and be renewed automatically by the Tax
Administrator, so long as the prerequisite facts supporting the initial
qualification for exemption shall continue; provided, however, that the
exemption shall automatically terminate with any change in the service address
or residence of the exempt individual; further provided such individual may
nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each change of address or
residence.
   G.   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and right to demand evidence
of continued eligibility of a service user for exemption under the provisions
of this section. Such evidence may include, but need not be limited to, copies
of business records, letters or statements from the Social Security
Administration, copies of income tax returns, and such other evidence
concerning the service user or other members of his or her household as may
tend to prove or disprove such eligibility. Failure to provide such evidence as
is within the control of a service user to so provide, either directly by him
or her, or by his or her consent, or the consent of a member of his or her
household, when such evidence is requested of the service user in writing by
the Tax Administrator, shall be grounds for the immediate discontinuance of the
service user's eligibility for exemption under the provisions of this section.
Evidence provided to the Tax Administrator, upon request or voluntarily
provided by the service user without request, may not be used against such
service user as evidence of violation of the provisions of this section; such
evidence may only be used as grounds for termination of the exemption herein
provided.
   H.   Any individual exempt from the tax shall notify the Tax Administrator
within ten days of any change in fact or circumstance that might disqualify him
or her from receiving such exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person
to knowingly receive the benefits of the exemptions provided by this section,
when the basis for such exemption either does not exist or ceases to exist.
   I.   Notwithstanding any of the provisions hereof, any service supplier who
determines by any means that a new or nonexempt service user is receiving
service through a meter or connection exempt, by virtue of an exemption issued
to a previous user or exempt user of the same meter or connection, such service
supplier shall immediately notify the Tax Administrator of such fact; and the
Tax Administrator shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether or not
the provisions of this section have been complied with, and where appropriate,
order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt
service user.
   J.   Any individual entitled to be exempt from the taxes imposed by this
subchapter, who used communication, electric, gas, or water services and paid
more than $3.00 in such taxes, may, during the calendar year following such
payment, apply for a refund thereof, on forms provided by the Tax
Administrator. Refund applications shall contain a declaration of those facts,
under oath, that qualify the applicant for a refund, and shall be accompanied
by the customer's bills showing the amount of such taxes billed by service
supplier during the preceding calendar year. Refund claims may be filed by an
individual who used communication, electric, gas, or water services and paid
the taxes prescribed by this subchapter, either directly or indirectly to the
service user rather than the service supplier. In the event the applicant has
lost or destroyed any relevant billings or statements showing the amount of tax
paid, or if the applicant indirectly paid such taxes in conjunction with the
occupation of premises without receiving a specific billing therefor from the
service user, the maximum refund shall be $48.00, or $4.00 for each full month
of services received by the applicant, whichever is less.
   K.   If the Tax Administrator determines that an application for exemption
is faulty, or that the applicant has failed to truthfully set forth such facts,
the application for the exemption shall be denied in writing to the applicant.
The applicant shall thereafter have a right to file an amended application for
exemption; or to appeal the Tax Administrator's decision to the City Manager
within a ten-day period after the mailing date of the Tax Administrator's
rejection. In the case of an appeal, the City Manager shall review the facts in
consultation with the City Attorney, and shall render a final determination on
such appeal.
   L.   Upon request of the Tax Administrator, a service supplier, or its
billing agent, shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those
customers that, according to its billing records, are deemed exempt from the
utility users’ tax.
('65 Code, §§ 33B-8, 33B-18) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-671 § 1;
Ord. No. CS-727 § 1; Ord. No. CS-771 § 1; Ord. No. CS-812 § 1; Ord. No. CS-820
§ 1; Ord. No. CS-879 § 1; Ord. No. CS-887 § 1; Ord. No. 86-004 § 1; Am. Ord.
No. 2000-001§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2001-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part);
Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 9)
§ 3.08.240 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   A.   The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by
the provisions of this subchapter shall be performed as follows.
   B.   The tax shall be collected, insofar as practicable, at the same time
as, and along with, the collection of charges made in accordance with the
regular billing practice of the service supplier.
   C.   The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the
beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person that
starts on or after the operative date of this subchapter. Where a person
receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than
another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.
   D.   If the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than
the full amount of the charge and tax that has accrued for the billing period,
a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have
been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service
supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on such charges, §
3.08.260 of this subchapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 33B-9) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-880 § 1; Am. Ord.
No. 2000-001§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 10)
§ 3.08.245 REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return with
the Tax Administrator, on forms approved by the Tax Administrator, on or before
the due date. The full amount of the tax owed shall be included with the return
and filed with the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to
require such further information as he or she deems necessary to properly
determine if the tax here imposed is being levied and collected in accordance
with this subchapter. Returns and remittances are due immediately upon
cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §
7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and his or her agents, shall maintain such
filing returns as confidential information, and not subject to the Public
Records Act.
('65 Code, § 33B-10) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1
(part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 11)
§ 3.08.250 PENALTY.
   A.   Taxes collected from a service user, or owed by a service user subject
to §
3.08.222 of this subchapter, that are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on
or before the due dates provided in this subchapter are delinquent. Should the
due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by
the Tax Administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or
legal holiday.
   B.   If the person required to collect and/or remit the utility users’ tax
under this subchapter fails to collect the tax, by failing to properly assess
the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer’s billing, such
taxes are delinquent.
   C.   A penalty at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax that is
delinquent shall be imposed upon the service supplier or the service user that
fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under §
3.08.222 of this subchapter.
   D.   The Tax Administrator shall have power to impose additional penalties
upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes under the provisions of
this subchapter, for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting, at the rate
of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to
be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.
   E.   In addition to any other penalties imposed by this subchapter, any
person required to collect and/or remit any tax imposed by the provisions of
this subchapter who fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the
tax on the customer’s billing), or who fails to remit the tax collected, or, in
the cases of a service user that fails to properly self-collect and remit the
tax under §
3.08.222 of this subchapter, shall pay interest at the rate of three- quarters
of one percent (¾%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the
tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent, until paid.
('65 Code, § 33B-11) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1
(part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 12)
§ 3.08.255 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any
such tax collected from a service user that has not been remitted to the Tax
Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to
collect and remit, and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. In the
event that a service supplier required to collect and remit a tax under the
provisions of this subchapter fails to do so, in whole or in part, the amount
of such unremitted tax shall be deemed a debt owed by the service supplier to
the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be liable to an action, brought in the name of the city, for
the recovery of such amount, plus any collection costs incurred by the city as
a result of the person’s noncompliance with this subchapter, including but not
limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees.
('65 Code, § 33B-12) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1
(part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 13)
§ 3.08.257 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   A.   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby
directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this subchapter.
   B.   The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations
not inconsistent with provisions of this subchapter for the purpose of carrying
out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein
imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file
in the Tax Administrator’s office.
   C.   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make
administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict
requirements of this subchapter, and thereby: i) conform to the billing
procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to §
3.08.222 of this subchapter) so long as such agreements result in the
collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this
subchapter; or ii) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of
collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such
agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office, and is voidable
by the Tax Administrator or the city at any time. Such administrative
agreements fall within the Tax Administrator's discretion to settle disputes.
The Tax Administrator's exercise of prosecutorial forbearance under this
subchapter does not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of
Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750, and the city does not waive or abrogate its ability to
impose the utility users’ tax in full as a result of entering into such
administrative agreements.
   D.   The Tax Administrator shall be authorized to determine the eligibility
of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax
imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 14)
§ 3.08.260 FAILURE TO PAY TAX; ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY.
   A.   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him or her from the amounts
remitted to a service supplier, or that a service user has failed to pay the
amount of the tax for a period of two or more billing periods, or whenever the
Tax Administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, he or she may
relieve the service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this
subchapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods. The
service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such
service users, and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this
subchapter.
   B.   The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that he or she has
assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and
demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by
handing it to him or her personally, or by deposit of the notice in the United
States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the
address to which billing was made by the service supplier; or, should the
service user have changed his or her address, to his or her last known address.
If a service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within 15
days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, which shall be
the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice
shall be imposed, along with interest at the rate of three- quarters of one
percent (¾%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, form the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent, until paid, but not less than $5.00.
   C.   The Tax Administrator may make an assessment for taxes not paid or
remitted by a service user required to pay or remit. The notice of the
assessment shall briefly refer to the amount of the taxes and penalties
imposed, and the time and place when such assessment shall be submitted to the
City Council for confirmation or modification. The Tax Administrator shall mail
a copy of such notice to the service supplier and service user at least ten
days prior to the date of the hearing, and shall post such notice, for at least
five continuous days prior to the date of the hearing, in a conspicuous place
freely accessible to the public at large. Any interested party having any
objections may appear and be heard at the hearing, provided his or her
objection is filed in writing with the Tax Administrator prior to the time set
for the hearing. At the time fixed for considering the assessment, the City
Council shall hear the same, together with any objection filed regarding
aforesaid, and thereupon may confirm or modify the assessment by motion.
('65 Code, § 33B-13) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1
(part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 15)
§ 3.08.265 APPEALS.
   A.   Filing an appeal. If the service user or service supplier is aggrieved
by any decision or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, or with the
failure to grant a refund or exemption as provided for under this subchapter,
he or she may appeal to a Board of Review comprised of the City Manager, the
Community Development Director and the Public Works Director, or their duly
authorized designee, by filing a notice of appeal with the Tax Administrator
within 14 days of the decision or administrative ruling that aggrieved the
service user or service supplier. The Tax Administrator shall thereupon fix a
time and place for a hearing of such appeal. The Tax Administrator shall give
notice to such person of the time and place of hearing as provided herein.
   B.   Notice of appeal. The notice of appeal filed by the service user or
service supplier shall contain the name and address of the person appealing the
action, the decision appealed from, and the grounds for the appeal. A defect in
the form of the notice does not affect its validity or the right to an appeal.
The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the fee fixed by resolution of the
City Council. The notice of appeal shall be served upon the Tax Administrator
by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon,
addressed to the Tax Administrator. For the purpose of this section, a service
by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. Within 15
days after the date of service, the person assessed may either apply in writing
to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the assessment, or may file a written
request that such hearing be waived. If the person neither requests a hearing
upon the assessment nor requests a waiver of hearing within the prescribed
time, the Tax Administrator's decision becomes final, and penalties and
interest as provided by this subchapter shall continue to accrue until paid.
   C.   Waiver of hearing. If the person requests that the hearing be waived,
the Tax Administrator may either grant such request and notify the person
thereof in writing, or may, at his or her discretion, deny the request and set
the appeal for hearing at the time and in the manner prescribed herein. If the
Tax Administrator grants the request for waiver of hearing, the Board of Review
shall consider the appeal without conducting a hearing on the matter, and issue
its written decision within 30 days of the date upon which the Tax
Administrator granted the request for waiver of hearing. The decision of the
Board of Review shall be served upon the appealing service user or service
supplier, by a deposit of a copy of the decision in the United States mail,
postage prepaid thereon, addressed to such person.
   D.   Notice of hearing before Board of Review. If the person requests a
hearing upon any decision or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator or
if the Tax Administrator denies the request for the waiver of hearing, the Tax
Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the Board of
Review no later than 90 days after the date of the application, or as the case
may be, the date of the Tax Administrator’s denial of the request for waiver of
hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the
person appealing the decision of the Tax Administrator, not later than 15 days
before the date set for hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires the
person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate
the records required to be produced.
   E.   Hearing before Board of Review. At the hearing, the person appealing
the decision and the Tax Administrator may submit such evidence as they believe
to be relevant to their respective positions. The Board of Review may require
the presentation of additional evidence from either the person assessed or from
the Tax Administrator, or from both, and may continue the hearing from time to
time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. The
Board of Review shall issue a written decision within 30 days of the conclusion
of the hearing. The decision of the Board of Review shall be served upon the
appealing service user or service supplier, by a deposit of a copy of the
decision in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to such
person.
   F.   Written exceptions. Within 15 days from the date of service of the
notice of decision of the Board of Review, the person appealing the decision of
the Tax Administrator may file written exceptions to the decision of the Board
of Review. . Upon filing of written exceptions, the Board of Review may either
deny the exceptions or modify its decision, as it deems appropriate. If the
Board of Review may either deny the exceptions or modify its decision, as it
deems appropriate. If the Board of Review modifies its decision, it shall cause
a written notice of decision, as required herein, to be given to the person
appealing the decision of the Tax Administrator, at the time and in the manner
provided herein. If the Board of Review does not modify its decision within 30
days from the service of such exceptions, the exceptions shall be deemed
denied.
   G.     Effect of delay in administrative proceeding. Failure of the Tax
Administrator to set any hearing within the time prescribed herein, and failure
of the Board of Review to complete any procedure prescribed in this section
within the period stated, shall not affect the validity of any proceedings
taken hereunder. The city's failure to meet the notice and timing requirements
under this section does not constitute a waiver of the city's rights; nor does
such a failure abrogate any decision of the Tax Administrator or the Board of
Review.
   H.   Effect of payment of a tax. Acceptance of any payment upon a tax, the
validity of which has not previously been passed upon by the Board of Review,
shall not preclude the Tax Administrator from subsequently levying another
assessment in any case where the original assessment does not truly reflect the
correct tax liability.
('65 Code, § 33B-14) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1
(part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 16)
§ 3.08.267 NO INJUNCTION OR WRIT OF MANDATE.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city, or
against any officer of the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this
subchapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or
remitted.
('65 Code, § 33B-14) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Am. Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1
(part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part); Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 17)
§ 3.08.270 RECORDS.
   A.   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit
to the city any tax imposed by this subchapter to keep and preserve, for a
period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine
the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of
and remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator,
or the Tax Administrator’s designated representative, shall have the right to
inspect at all reasonable times. The Tax Administrator, or the Tax
Administrator’s designated representative, is authorized to execute a non-
disclosure agreement approved by the City Attorney, to protect the
confidentiality of customer information pursuant to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§
7284.6 and 7284.7.
   B.   The Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator’s designated
representative, may request from a person providing transportation or
distribution services of gas or electricity to service users within the city, a
list of the names, billing and service addresses, quantities of gas or
electricity delivered, and other pertinent information, of its transportation
customers within the city pursuant to Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 6354(e).
   C.   If any person subject to record keeping under this section unreasonably
denies the Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator’s designated
representative, access to such records, the Tax Administrator, or the Tax
Administrator’s designated representative, may impose a penalty of $500 on such
person for each day following the initial date that the person refuses to
provide such access. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed under this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 33B-15) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1 (part);
Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 18)
§ 3.08.275 REFUNDS.
   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid, paid more than once,
or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax
Administrator under this subchapter, it may be refunded as provided in this
section.
   B.   The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid
more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by
the Tax Administrator under this subchapter, provided that no refund shall be
paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant, or his or her
guardian, conservator, executor or administrator, has submitted a written claim
to the Tax Administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or
illegal collection of the tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s
right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing
herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of
taxpayers. The submission of a written claim, which is acted upon by the City
Council, shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon (see Cal. Gov’t Code § 935).
The City Council shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set
forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 912.4. If the City Council fails or refuses to act
on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Cal. Gov’t Code § 912.4, the
claim shall be deemed to be rejected by the City Council on the last day of the
period within which the City Council was required to act upon the claim as
provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 912.4.
   C.   It is the intent of the City Council that the one-year written claim
requirement of this subsection be given retroactive effect; provided, however,
that any claims that arose prior to the commencement of the one-year claims
period of this section, and are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable
statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the Tax
Administrator, as provided in this subsection, within 90 days following the
effective date of this section.
   D.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service
supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or
a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges
for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this subchapter on the
amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and
the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded
taxes against the amount of tax due upon the next monthly return. In the event
this subchapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes shall be borne
by the city.
('65 Code, § 33B-16) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1 (part);
Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 19)
§ 3.08.278 AUDIT OF COMMUNICATIONS USERS' TAX.
   The city shall annually verify that the communications users' tax imposed by
this subchapter has been properly collected and remitted in accordance with
this subchapter, and properly expended according to applicable law. The annual
verification shall be performed under the direction of the Tax Administrator by
a qualified independent third party employing reasonable, cost-effective
procedures.
(Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 20)
§ 3.08.280 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this subchapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Subchapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases is declared unconstitutional.
('65 Code, § 33B-17) (Ord. No. CS-621 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2000-001§ 1 (part);
Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 21)
§ 3.08.285 [RESERVED].
§ 3.08.287 AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   Taxes imposed by this subchapter may be decreased, repealed or amended by
the City Council, but may not be increased without a vote of the people as
required in Cal. Const. Art. XIII C and Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750(h).
(Ord. No. 2008-007½ § 23)
§ 3.08.290 NOTICE OF CHANGES TO SUBCHAPTER.
   If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the
tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice requirements
of Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 799. Prior to the effective date of the ordinance
change, the service supplier shall provide the Tax Administrator with a copy of
any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier
needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails to
provide such written instructions, the Tax Administrator, or its agent, shall
send by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all collectors and
remitters of the city’s utility users taxes according to the latest payment
records of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. No. 2000-001 § 1 (part))
ESSENTIAL CITY SERVICES TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
§ 3.08.300 TITLE.
   This Subchapter shall be known as the Essential City Services Transactions
and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of Culver City hereinafter shall be called
“City.” This Subchapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of
the City.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.305 OPERATIVE DATE.
   The operative date of this Subchapter shall be the first day of the first
calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this
Subchapter by the voters, the date of such adoption being as set forth below.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.310 PURPOSE.
   This Subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes,
and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish
those purposes:
   A.   To enhance the City's ability to offset state budget cuts and provide
essential City services to the residents of Culver City, such as: preserving
quality neighborhoods and ensuring effective 911 emergency response by
retaining firefighters, police officers, and paramedics; fixing potholes/
streets; maintaining parks, community centers, storm drains; continuing after
school programs, senior services, graffiti removal, arts/cultural programs, and
other general services.
   B.   To ensure that the City has the financial means to provide for the
well-being and security of its residents and businesses as the City and its
economic base grows.
   C.   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251)
and Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.7, § 7285.9 which authorizes the City
to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the
electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an
election called for that purpose.
   D.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part
1.6.
   E.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax
and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the
State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use
Taxes.
   F.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.6,
minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same
time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation
under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.315 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the State Board of
Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the
City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to
the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the
operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following
the execution of such a contract.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.320 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at
the rate of 0.5% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all
tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the
operative date of this Subchapter. The tax imposed herein is in addition to any
other transactions tax imposed by the City, the County of Los Angeles, or the
State of California.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.325 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or its agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.330 USE TAX RATE.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this Subchapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of 0.5% of the sales price of the property. The
sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to
state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. The
tax imposed herein is in addition to any other transactions tax imposed by the
City, the County of Los Angeles, or the State of California.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.335 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.6,
all of the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1 (commencing with
Section 6001) are hereby adopted and made a part of this Subchapter as though
fully set forth herein.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.340 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1:
   A.   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      1.   The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of
Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;
      2.   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this Subchapter;
      3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         a.   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other
consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1, or;
         b.   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      4.   In Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828.
   B.   The word “City” shall be substituted for the word “State” in the phrase
“retailer engaged in business in this State” in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6203
and in the definition of that phrase in § 6203.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.345 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.350 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   A.   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or Use tax.
   B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
      2.   Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a
point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or its agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier
for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this division,
delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied:
         a.   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject
to registration pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code Div. 3, Chapter 1 (commencing
with Section 4000), aircraft licensed in compliance with Cal. Public Utilities
Code § 21411, and undocumented vessels registered under Cal. Vehicle Code Div.
3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) by registration to an out-of-City address
and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating
that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
         b.   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to
furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this Subchapter.
      4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this Subchapter.
      5.   For the purposes of subdivisions 3. and 4. of this section, the sale
or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   C.   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this Subchapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property:
      1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Cal.
Rev. & Tax Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1.
      3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
Subchapter.
      4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this Subchapter.
      5.   For the purposes of subdivisions 3. and 4. of this section, storage,
use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power
over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant
to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the
contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      6.   Except as provided in subdivision 7., a retailer engaged in business
in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of
tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property
into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the
property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order,
either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the
City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or
person in the City under the authority of the retailer.
      7.   “A retailer engaged in business in the City” shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Cal. Vehicle Code Div. 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000), aircraft
licensed in compliance with Cal. Public Utilities Code § 21411, or undocumented
vessels registered under Cal. Vehicle Code Div. 3.5 (commencing with Section
9840). That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser
who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the
City.
   D.   Any person subject to use tax under this Subchapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Cal.
Rev. & Tax Code Div. 2, Part 1.6 with respect to the sale to the person of the
property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use
tax.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.355 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this Subchapter to Cal.
Rev. & Tax Code, Div. 2, Part 1 relating to sales and use taxes and which are
not inconsistent with Cal. Rev. & Tax Code Div. 2, Parts 1.6 and 1.7, and all
amendments to Cal. Rev. & Tax Code Div. 2, Parts 1.6 and 1.7, shall
automatically become a part of this Subchapter, provided however, that no such
amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this
Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.360 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this Subchapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax Code Div. 2, Part 1.6, of
any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.365 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Subchapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Subchapter and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.370 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Subchapter relates to the levying and collecting of the City
transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately upon its adoption
by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the City voting in an election
on the subject.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.375 TERMINATION DATE.
   The authority to levy the tax imposed by this Subchapter shall expire March
31, 2033.
(Ord. No. 2012-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-008 § 1 (part))
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 3.08.400 TAX IMPOSED.
   A.   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which
any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted,
assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (including the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00) a tax on such consideration or value at
the rates set forth below:
      1.   0.45% of the amount of consideration or value of $1,499,999 or less;
and
      2.   1.5% of the amount of consideration or value from $1,500,000 to
$2,999,999; and
      3.   3.0% of the amount of consideration or value from $3,000,000 to
$9,999,999; and
      4.   4.00% of the amount of consideration or value equal to or over
$10,000,000.
   B.   The City Manager shall increase or decrease the amounts of
consideration or value that establish the threshold of each of the four (4) tax
rate tiers set forth in Subsection A. by an amount proportional to the change
in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, Los Angeles-Long Beach-
Anaheim (CPI), as published by the U.S. Department of Labor, rounded up to the
nearest one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), provided that such increase or
decrease may not be done more than once per five (5) years after the effective
date of the ordinance from which this Subsection is derived, and provided the
amounts of consideration or value that establish the threshold of each of the
four (4) tax rate tiers may not decrease below the amounts established in
Subsection A. In the event the Bureau of Labor Statistics discontinues the
publication of the CPI, then a comparable statistic shall be used as determined
by the City’s Chief Financial Officer.
   C.   Notwithstanding Subsection A. herein, the following transfers shall be
taxed at a rate of 0.45% regardless of the value of the consideration:
      1.   A transfer of improved real property to a nonprofit corporation, or
a limited partnership or limited liability company in which a nonprofit
corporation is the managing general partner or managing member, accompanied by
a binding agreement or covenant recorded on the property and enforceable by the
City to provide all residential units on the property (other than units
reserved for on-site property managers) at an affordable rent or affordable
housing cost to lower income households as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code
Section 50079.5; and
      2.   A transfer of real property that contains four (4) or more dwelling
units designed for permanent residential occupancy, including accessory
dwelling units, and meets all of the following conditions:
         a.   At least one (1) or more of the dwelling units was newly
constructed within the last five (5) years prior to the transfer of the real
property, based on the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for
such newly constructed dwelling units (“newly constructed” shall not include
the remodel or renovation of an existing unit);
         b.   The newly constructed dwelling units must have resulted in a net
increase in the total number of dwelling units on the real property; and
         c.   The transfer of real property is the first transfer following the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy for such newly constructed dwelling
units.
   D.   The City Council is authorized to establish such rules and procedures
that are necessary and desirable for implementation of this Section 3.08.400
and may amend any aspect of this Subchapter
3.08.400 et seq. as long as the amendment does not result in an increase in the
authorized tax rate.
('65 Code, § 33D-1) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-015 § 1; Ord. No.
2020-016 § 1)
§ 3.08.405 PERSONS REQUIRED TO PAY TAX.
   Any persons who make a transfer which is subject to the tax imposed under §
3.08.400 of this Subchapter, and any persons to whom such a transfer is made
shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the tax imposed under §
3.08.400 of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 33D-2) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.410 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The City Treasurer of the City of Culver City (hereinafter in this
Subchapter referred to as “Treasurer”) shall collect the tax imposed under this
Subchapter and shall otherwise administer this Subchapter. He may make such
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Subchapter, as he may deem
reasonably necessary or desirable to administer this Subchapter as well as
necessary forms and receipts.
('65 Code, § 33D-3) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.415 DUE DATES; DELINQUENCY; PENALTIES; INTEREST.
   The tax imposed under this Subchapter is due and payable at the time the
deed, instrument or writing effecting a transfer subject to the tax is
delivered, and is delinquent if unpaid at the time of recordation thereof. In
the event that the tax is not paid prior to becoming delinquent, a delinquency
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of tax due shall accrue. In the
event a portion of the tax is unpaid prior to becoming delinquent, the penalty
shall only accrue as to the portion remaining unpaid. An additional penalty of
ten percent (10%) shall accrue if the tax remains unpaid on the 90th day
following the date of the original delinquency. Interest shall accrue at the
rate of one-half of one percent (.5%) a month, or fraction thereof, on the
amount of tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date the tax becomes delinquent
to the date of payment. Interest and penalty accrued shall become part of the
tax.
('65 Code, § 33D-4) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.420 DECLARATION OF AMOUNT OF TAX DUE.
   A.   The tax imposed by this Subchapter shall be paid to the Treasurer by
the persons referred to in §
3.08.405 of this Subchapter. The Treasurer shall have the authority as part of
any rules and regulations promulgated by him as provided for herein to require
that the payment shall be accompanied by a declaration of the amount of tax due
signed by the person paying the tax or by his agent. The declaration shall
include a statement that the value of the consideration on which the tax due
was computed includes all indebtedness secured by liens, deeds of trust, or
other encumbrances remaining or placed on the property transferred at the time
of transfer, and also includes all special assessments on the property at which
the purchaser or transferee agrees to pay or which remains a lien on the
property at the time of transfer. The declaration shall identify the deed,
instrument or writing affecting the transfer for which the tax is being paid.
The Treasurer may require delivery to him of a copy of such deed, instrument or
whenever he deems such to be reasonably necessary to adequately identify such
writing or to administer the provisions of this Subchapter. The Treasurer may
rely on the declaration as to the amount of the tax due provided he has no
reason to believe that the full amount of the tax due is not shown on the
declaration.
   B.   Whenever the Treasurer has reason to believe that the full amount of
tax is not shown on the declaration or has not been paid, he may, by notice
served upon any person liable for the tax, require him to furnish a true copy
of his records relevant to the value of the consideration or fair market value
of the property transferred. Such notice may be served at any time within three
(3) years after recordation of the deed, instrument or writing which
transferred such property.
('65 Code, § 33D-5) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.425 DETERMINATION OF DEFICIENCY; RECOMPUTATION OF TAX DUE.
   A.   If on the basis of such information as the Treasurer receives pursuant
to the last paragraph of §
3.08.420 of this Subchapter, and/or on the basis of such other relevant
information that comes into his possession, he determines that the amount of
tax due as set forth in the declaration, or as paid, is insufficient, he may
recompute the tax due on the basis of such information.
   B.   If the declaration required by §
3.08.420 of this Subchapter is not submitted, the Treasurer may make an
estimate of the value of the consideration for the property conveyed and
determine the amount of tax to be paid on the basis of any information in his
possession or that may come into his possession.
   C.   One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due
with respect to any transfer.
('65 Code, § 33D-6) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.430 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION.
   The Treasurer shall give notice to a person liable for payment of the tax
imposed under this Subchapter of his determination made under §
3.08.425 of this Subchapter. Such notice shall be given within three (3) years
after the recordation of the deed, instrument or writing effecting the transfer
on which the tax deficiency determination was made.
('65 Code, § 33D-7) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.435 MANNER OF GIVING NOTICE.
   Any notice required to be given by the Treasurer under this Subchapter may
be served personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made by
depositing the notice in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope with
postage paid, addressed to the person on whom it is to be served at his address
as it appears in the records of the city or as ascertained by the Treasurer.
The service is complete at the time of the deposit of the notice in the United
States mail, without extension of time for any reasons.
('65 Code, § 33D-8) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.440 PETITION FOR REDETERMINATION.
   Any person against whom a determination is made under this Subchapter or any
person directly interested may petition for a redetermination within sixty (60)
days after the service upon the person of notice thereof. If a petition for
redetermination is not filed within the sixty (60) day period, the
determination becomes final at the expiration of the period.
('65 Code, § 33D-9) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.445 CONSIDERATION OF PETITION; HEARING.
   If a petition for redetermination is filed within the sixty (60) day period,
the Treasurer shall reconsider the determination and, if the person has so
requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing, and shall
give him ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of hearing. The Treasurer
may designate one or more deputies for the purpose of conducting hearings and
may continue a hearing from time to time as may be necessary.
('65 Code, § 33D-10) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.450 DECREASING OR INCREASING AMOUNT OF DETERMINATION.
   The Treasurer may decrease or increase the amount of the determination
before it becomes final, but the amount may be increased only if a claim for
the increase is asserted by the Treasurer at or before the hearing.
('65 Code, § 33D-11) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.455 FINALITY OF DETERMINATION.
   The order or decision of the Treasurer upon a petition for redetermination
becomes final thirty (30) days after service upon the petitioner of notice
thereof.
('65 Code, § 33D-12) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.460 TAX A DEBT.
   The amount of any tax, penalty, and interest imposed under the provisions of
this Subchapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. Any person owing money to
the City under the provisions of this Subchapter shall be liable to an action
brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.
('65 Code, § 33D-13) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.465 REFUNDS.
   Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been overpaid, or
paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected, or received by the City
under this Subchapter, it may be refunded as hereinafter provided in this
Section, provided a written claim therefor stating under penalty of perjury the
specific grounds under which the claim is founded is filed with the Treasurer
within three (3) years of the date of payment. The claims shall be on forms
furnished by the Treasurer. The Treasurer may make such refund if he is
satisfied that the claimant is entitled to the refund under the provisions of
this Section. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section,
unless the claimant establishes his right by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
('65 Code, § 33D-14) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.470 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Subchapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances, is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this Subchapter which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
Subchapter are declared to be severable.
('65 Code, § 33D-15) (Ord. No. CS-921 § 1 (part))
NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY AND CITY SERVICES PROTECTION TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
§ 3.08.500 TITLE.
   This Subchapter shall be known as the City of Culver City Neighborhood
Safety and City Services Protection Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The
City of Culver City hereinafter shall be called "City." This Subchapter shall
be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.505 OPERATIVE DATE.
   The operative date of this Subchapter shall be the first day of the first
calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this
Subchapter by the voters, the date of such adoption being as set forth below.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.510 PURPOSE.
   This Subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes,
and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish
those purposes:
   A.   To enhance the City of Culver City's ability to offset rising costs for
providing services and protecting essential City services to the residents of
Culver City, such as: maintaining 911 emergency response times by retaining
firefighters, police officers, paramedics; fully staffing neighborhood fire
stations; fixing potholes/streets; continuing senior services and after school
programs; maintaining parks and other unrestricted general fund City services.
   B.   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251) of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and
Tax. Code and § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Div. 2 which authorizes the City to adopt
this tax Subchapter which shall be operative if a majority of the electors
voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election
called for that purpose.
   C.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev.
and Tax. Code.
   D.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax
and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.
   E.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax.
Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at
the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to
taxation under the provisions of this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.515 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax Subchapter;
provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a
contract.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.520 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at
the rate of one quarter of one percent (0.25%) of the gross receipts of any
retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said
territory on and after the operative date of this Subchapter. The tax imposed
herein is in addition to any other transactions tax imposed by the City, the
County of Los Angeles, or the State of California.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.525 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or its agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.530 USE TAX RATE.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this Subchapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of one-quarter of one percent (0.25%) of the sales
price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such
charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. The tax imposed herein is in addition to any other
transactions tax imposed by the City, the County of Los Angeles, or the State
of California.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.535 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and
Tax. Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with § 6001) of Div. 2
of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this
Subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.540 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax.
Code:
   A.   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      1.   The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State
of California;
      2.   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
Subchapter.
      3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         a.   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other
consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1
of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code, or;
         b.   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      4.   In §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715,
6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code.
   B.   The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase
"retailer engaged in business in this State" in § 6203 and in the definition of
that phrase in § 6203.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.545 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under § 6067 of the Cal.
Rev. and Tax. Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by
this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.550 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   A.   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
      2.   Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a
point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or its agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier
for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this Paragraph,
delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied:
         a.   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject
to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Div. 3 of the
Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the Cal.
Pub. Util. Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Div. 3.5 (commencing
with § 9840) of the Cal. Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address
and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating
that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
         b.   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to
furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this Subchapter.
      4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this Subchapter.
      5.   For the purposes of Subparagraphs 3. and 4. of this Section, the
sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   C.   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this Subchapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property:
      1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in §§ 6366
and 6366.1 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code of the State of California.
      3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
Subchapter.
      4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this Subchapter.
      5.   For the purposes of Paragraphs 3. and 4. of this Section, storage,
use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power
over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant
to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the
contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      6.   Except as provided in Paragraph 7., a retailer engaged in business
in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of
tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property
into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the
property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order,
either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the
City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or
person in the City under the authority of the retailer.
      7.   "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Div. 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft
licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the Cal. Pub. Util. Code, or
undocumented vessels registered under Div. 3.5 (commencing with § 9840) of the
Cal. Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any
purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an
address in the City.
   D.   Any person subject to use tax under this Subchapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code with respect to the sale to the
person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.555 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this Subchapter to Part 1
of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code relating to sales and use taxes and
which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Div. 2 of the Cal.
Rev. and Tax. Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Div. 2 of
the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code, shall automatically become a part of this
Subchapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to
affect the rate of tax imposed by this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.560 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this Subchapter, or Part 1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and
Tax. Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.565 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Subchapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Subchapter and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.570 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Subchapter relates to the levying and collecting of the City
transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately upon its adoption
by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the City voting in an election
on the subject.
(Ord. No. 2018-017 § 1 (part))
TAXES; CONDOMINIUMS
§ 3.08.600 CONDOMINIUM TAX LAW.
   There is hereby imposed upon the development and construction of all
condominium projects, whether of new construction or of conversion of an
existing building, a tax of $1,000 per planned salable unit. This tax shall not
apply to:
   A.   Any development or construction of a condominium unit or conversion of
an existing building to a condominium for which a completed sale has occurred
and to which legal title has passed from the seller to the buyer;
   B.   To any development or construction of any condominium unit or any unit
within a conversion of an existing building to a condominium which has prior to
September 20, 1973, paid, or unqualifiedly obligated itself to pay, any fee to
the City of Culver City in lieu of dedication of open space pursuant to any
ordinance of the City of Culver City.
('65 Code, § 33E-1) (Ord. No. CS-782 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.605 TAX REFUND.
   In the event that the condominium or condominium conversion development is
abandoned before substantial work has begun, the tax paid will be refunded to
whomsoever paid said tax, upon payee's filed statement that he has abandoned
the project. Any further development within the project or attempted sale of
condominium units where the tax paid has been refunded shall be unlawful.
('65 Code, § 33E-2) (Ord. No. CS-782 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.610 TAX LIEN AND HEARING.
   In the event that a developer fails to pay the condominium tax, the City
Treasurer shall have the power to file a lien upon the subject project in the
form set out below in §
3.08.615. The obligation to pay the tax and the amount of the tax owed will be
determined prior to filing said lien at a properly noticed public hearing.
('65 Code, § 33E-3) (Ord. No. CS-782 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.615 FILING NOTICE OF LIEN.
   The City Treasurer shall deliver to the county auditor a notice of lien
substantially in the following form, to wit:
   “NOTICE OF LIEN
   Pursuant to the authority vested in me by this Subchapter, I did cause a
hearing to be held ten days after notice at said hearing was delivered to all
interested parties, to wit: on the        day of                 , 19     , to
ascertain why a tax lien should not be imposed upon the hereinafter described
property for non-payment of a required condominium tax,                   , of
which is still unpaid and owing, and having determined at such hearing that
said amount is owed to the City of Culver City, said City hereby does claim a
lien on said real property in the sum of            and the same shall be a
lien upon said real property until the said sum has, been paid in full and
discharged of record and said sum shall be collected in the same manner and at
the same time as are the taxes for said City on said real property and subject
to the same penalties and procedures to foreclose.
   The real property herein mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed is that
certain piece or parcel of land in the City of Culver City, County of Los
Angeles, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to wit:
   (Description of property)
Dated this       day of                             , 19    
   City Treasurer”
('65 Code, § 33E-4) (Ord. No. CS-782 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
WATER EXTRACTION TAX
§ 3.08.700 TAX IMPOSED.
   On and after July 1, 1978, every person who extracts water from a well or
wells shall pay a tax on each acre-foot of water extracted in an amount which
equals fourteen percent (14%) of the lowest charge made by the Los Angeles
Metropolitan Water District for delivery within Southern California of an acre-
foot of untreated water. Said tax shall not apply to any water which is subject
to the City's utility users' tax and for the use of which a utility users' tax
is paid.
('65 Code, § 33F-1) (Ord. No. CS-934 § 1; Ord. No. CS-968 § 2)
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT TAX
§ 3.08.800 TITLE.
   This tax shall be known as the “Commercial and Industrial Development Tax.”
('65 Code, § 33J-1) (Ord. No. 90-004 § 1)
§ 3.08.805 TAX IMPOSED.
   There is hereby imposed a tax upon the development, construction,
reconstruction or remodeling of all commercial and industrial structures or
properties in the City, which is due and payable prior to issuance of the first
building permit for all or any portion of such development, construction,
reconstruction or remodeling. As used herein, commercial and industrial
development projects shall not include public buildings used for governmental
or school purposes.
('65 Code, § 33J-2) (Ord. No. 90-004 § 1)
§ 3.08.810 TAX RATES.
   A.   Every person developing or constructing a new commercial or industrial
building, or reconstructing or remodeling an existing commercial or industrial
building, shall pay a tax to the City, as follows:
      1.   Prior to issuance of a building permit with a total building
valuation, as determined by the Building Official, of less than Two Hundred
Fifty Thousand Dollars ($250,000.00), a tax of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00).
      2.   Upon issuance of a building permit with a total building valuation,
as determined by the Building Official, of Two Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars
($250,000.00) or more, a tax at the rate of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for
the first Two Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($250,000.00) of building
valuation, plus one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the portion of building
valuation in excess of Two Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($250,000.00).
   B.   For the purpose of determining the rate of tax pursuant to this
Section, the Building Official shall aggregate the valuation of all building
permits issued to the person for any commercial or industrial building on the
site within the preceding twelve (12) months; provided that the valuation of
any building permit issued prior to July 23, 1990 shall be excluded therefrom.
('65 Code, § 33J-3) (Ord. No. 90-004 § 1; Ord. No. 90-024 § 1)
§ 3.08.815 ADJUSTMENTS FOR MODIFICATION SUBSEQUENT TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING
PERMIT.
   If, as determined by the Building Official, permit modifications are
necessary subsequent to the issuance of the building permit, the Building
Official shall determine whether the total building valuation of the building
or buildings require adjustment, and the taxes established herein shall be due
and payable for such adjustment at the time the building valuation is so
adjusted.
('65 Code, § 33J-4) (Ord. No. 90-004 § 1)
§ 3.08.820 EXEMPTION.
   No tax shall be levied or collected on the valuation of any building permit
issued for reconstruction or remodeling of a building in connection with
earthquake rehabilitation required by this Code.
('65 Code, § 33J-5) (Ord. No. 90-004 § 1)
§ 3.08.825 REFUNDS.
   A refund of the taxes imposed pursuant to this Subchapter shall be made when
the building permit is not used for such construction. Any claim for refund
shall be processed in the same manner as refunds for building permit fees.
('65 Code, § 33J-6) (Ord. No. 90-004 § 1)
CIGARETTE TAX
§ 3.08.900 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
   CIGARETTE. Any roll for smoking, made wholly or a part of tobacco,
irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of whether the tobacco is
flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredients where such roll has a
wrapper or cover made of any other material except where such wrapper is wholly
or in the greater part made of tobacco and such roll weighs over three pounds
per thousand.
   RETAILER. Any domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, joint
venture, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, club, Massachusetts
business or common law trust, society, or individual who sells cigarettes for
any purpose other than resale. Where cigarettes are offered for sale through
the means of a vending machine, the person holding title to the cigarettes in
the machine shall be deemed the retailer.
   USE or CONSUMPTION. The exercise of any right or power over cigarettes
incident to the ownership thereof other than the sale of the cigarettes or the
keeping or retention thereof for the purpose of sale.
('65 Code, § 33A-1) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 2)
§ 3.08.905 TAX IMPOSED.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed upon the use or consumption in the City of
Culver City of cigarettes purchased from a retailer for use or consumption
within the City of Culver City, at the rate of two mills ($0.002) per
cigarette, effective July 1, 1967.
('65 Code, § 33A-2) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 3; Ord. No. CS-566 § 1)
§ 3.08.910 TAX OWED TO CITY BY RETAILER; TAX PAID TO RETAILER BY PURCHASER.
   The tax constitutes a debt owed by the purchaser to the City which is
extinguished only by payment of the tax to the City Treasurer or to the
retailer. When a purchase from a retailer is made within the City, the tax
shall be paid to the retailer at the time the purchase price is paid. The tax
collected or required to be collected by the retailer constitutes a debt owed
by the retailer to the City. Should any remittance of tax be made by a retailer
prior to sale of cigarettes to a consumer, such remittance shall be considered
as an advance payment to be reimbursed by adding the amount of the tax to the
price of the cigarettes at the time of sale to the user or consumer.
('65 Code, § 33A-3) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 4)
§ 3.08.915 RETAILER REMITS QUARTERLY; ESTABLISHMENT OF REPORTING PERIODS.
   Each retailer selling cigarettes within the City of Culver City shall
collect the tax imposed under this Subchapter, and on or before the last day of
the month following the close of a calendar quarter remit the total amount so
collected to the City Treasurer, together with a statement on a form provided
by the City Treasurer showing the number of cigarettes sold to purchasers, the
amount of tax collected, and such other information as the City Treasurer shall
require. Where the City Treasurer determines that efficiency in the
administration of the tax would be promoted, he may establish reporting periods
greater than quarterly, but not to exceed one year. The City Treasurer may
establish shorter reporting periods for any retailer if he deems it necessary
in order to insure collection of the tax. Statements and payments are due
immediately upon cessation of the business of selling cigarettes for any
reason. All taxes collected by retailers pursuant to this Subchapter shall be
held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the
City Treasurer.
('65 Code, § 33A-4) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 5)
§ 3.08.920 REGISTRATION.
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after commencing business, each retailer shall
register with the City Treasurer and obtain from him a “Cigarette Tax
Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises; provided, however, each retailer who does not operate from a
fixed place of business shall keep the registration certificate upon his person
at all times while engaging in the business of being a retailer. No person
shall engage in the business of being a retailer without obtaining a
registration certificate therefor. Said certificate shall, among other things,
state the following:
      1.   The name of the operator.
      2.   The address of the retailer's place of business.
      3.   The date upon which the certificate was issued.
      4.   “This Cigarette Tax Registration Certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Cigarette
Tax Ordinance by registering with the City Treasurer for the purpose of
collecting the Cigarette Tax from purchasers of cigarettes and remitting said
tax to the City Treasurer. This certificate does not authorize any person to
conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a cigarette
retailing business without complying with all state and local applicable laws,
including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board,
commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not
constitute a permit.”
   B.   All Cigarette Tax Registration Certificates shall be counter-by the
City Treasurer.
   C.   A retailer having more than one place of business within the City at
which cigarettes are sold, other than a vending machine operator, shall be
required to obtain a separate registration for each such place of business.
('65 Code, § 33A-5) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 6)
§ 3.08.925 DELINQUENT TAXES; PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   A.   Taxes collected by a retailer which are not remitted to the City
Treasurer on or before the due dates fixed in §
3.08.915 hereof, or fixed by the City Treasurer as provided herein, are
delinquent.
   B.   Any retailer who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Subchapter
within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten per cent (10%) of the
amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   C.   Any retailer who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before
a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent shall pay a delinquency penalty of ten per cent (10%) of the
amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten per cent
(10%) penalty first imposed.
   D.   Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions
of this Section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.
('65 Code, § 33A-6) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 7)
§ 3.08.930 FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX, INTEREST,
AND PENALTIES.
   A.   If any retailer shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make,
within the time provided in this Subchapter, any report and remittance of said
tax or any portion thereof required by this Subchapter, the City Treasurer
shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and
information on which to base his estimate of tax due. As soon as the City
Treasurer shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon
which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Subchapter and payable
by any retailer who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such
report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such
retailer the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this Subchapter. In
case such determination is made, the City Treasurer shall give a notice of the
amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United
States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the retailer so assessed at his last
known place of address.
   B.   Such retailer may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of
such notice, make application in writing to the City Treasurer for a hearing on
the amount assessed. If application by the retailer for a hearing is not made
within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined
by the City Treasurer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and
payable. If such application is made, the City Treasurer shall give not less
than five (5) days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the
retailer to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount
specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At
such hearing, the retailer may appear and offer evidence why such specified
tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the
City Treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall
thereafter give written notice to the retailer in the manner prescribed herein
of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The
amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an
appeal is taken as provided in §
3.08.935 hereof.
('65 Code, § 33A-7) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 8)
§ 3.08.935 APPEAL.
   Any retailer aggrieved after such hearing by any decision of the City
Treasurer with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if
any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax
due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the
City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such retailer at his last known
place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and
shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service
of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and
payable upon the service of notice.
('65 Code, § 33A-8) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 9)
§ 3.08.940 KEEPING OF RECORDS; INSPECTION.
   It shall be the duty of every retailer liable for the collection and payment
to the City of any tax imposed by this Subchapter to keep and preserve, for a
period of four (4) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment
to the City, which records the City Treasurer shall have the right to inspect
at all reasonable times.
('65 Code, § 33A-9) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 10)
§ 3.08.945 REFUNDS.
   A.   A retailer may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected
and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or
illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed
by the City Treasurer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was
not subject to the tax.
   B.   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the
claimant makes a verified claim within three (3) years of the date of payment.
('65 Code, § 33A-10) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 11)
§ 3.08.950 ACTIONS TO RECOVER TAX.
   Any person using or consuming cigarettes within the City who has not paid
the tax required by the provisions of this Subchapter and any retailer who has
failed to collect or who has collected but not remitted any tax required to be
paid by the provisions of this Subchapter, shall be liable to an action brought
in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.
('65 Code, § 33A-11) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 12)
§ 3.08.955 FAILURE TO REGISTER OR FILE REPORTS; OTHER VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   Any retailer or other person who fails or refuses to register as required
herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses
to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the City Treasurer,
or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, and any person required
to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or
fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of
any amount due required by this Subchapter to be made, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not
more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
('65 Code, § 33A-12) (Ord. No. CS-520 § 13)
§ 3.08.960 SUSPENSION OF TAX.
   In order to comply with the requirements of those provisions of Chapter 963
of the Statutes of 1967, which provide in effect that State cigarette tax
revenue will not be available to any city having a local cigarette tax on or
after October 1, 1967, the taxing provisions of this Subchapter shall be
suspended on and after October 1, 1967, and shall remain suspended and
thereafter be of no force and effect so long as there is in effect the
provisions of the California Revenue and Taxation Code as amended and pursuant
to said Code the City is entitled to participate in the State cigarette tax
revenues. If, in the event said Revenue and Taxation Code shall be further
amended so that the City is not entitled to further participation in State
cigarette tax revenues, then the provisions of this Subchapter shall become
operative and effective and in the event the provisions of the Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code §§ 30001 et seq. by which the City is entitled to participate in the State
cigarette tax revenues shall be declared invalid, then the provisions of this
Subchapter shall be deemed not to be suspended. The collection and enforcement
provisions of this Subchapter shall remain in full force and effect for taxes
imposed before October 1, 1967, but shall be suspended in the same manner that
other provisions of this Subchapter are suspended for taxes imposed upon or
after October 1, 1967.
('65 Code, § 33A-13) (Ord. No. CS-579 § 1)
NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES AND COMMUNITY SAFETY TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
§ 3.08.1000 TITLE.
   This Subchapter shall be known as the City of Culver City Neighborhood
Services And Community Safety Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of
Culver City hereinafter shall be called "City." This Subchapter shall be
applicable in the incorporated territory of the City.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1005 OPERATIVE DATE.
   The operative date of this Subchapter shall be the first day of the first
calendar quarter commencing more than one-hundred and ten (110) days after the
adoption of this Subchapter by the voters, the date of such adoption being as
set forth below.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1010 PURPOSE.
   This Subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes,
and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish
those purposes:
   A.   To enhance the City of Culver City's ability to offset rising costs for
providing services and protecting essential City services to the residents of
Culver City, such as: maintaining 911 emergency response times by retaining
firefighters, police officers, paramedics; fully staffing neighborhood fire
stations; fixing potholes/streets; continuing senior services and after school
programs; maintaining parks and other unrestricted general fund City services.
   B.   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251) of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and
Tax. Code and § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Div. 2 which authorizes the City to adopt
this tax Subchapter which shall be operative if a majority of the electors
voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election
called for that purpose.
   C.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev.
and Tax. Code.
   D.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax
and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.
   E.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax.
Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at
the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to
taxation under the provisions of this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1015 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax Subchapter;
provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a
contract.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1020 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at
the rate of one quarter of one percent (0.25%) of the gross receipts of any
retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said
territory on and after the operative date of this Subchapter. The tax imposed
herein is in addition to any other transactions tax imposed by the City, the
County of Los Angeles, or the State of California.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1025 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or its agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1030 USE TAX RATE.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this Subchapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of one-quarter of one percent (0.25%) of the sales
price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such
charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. The tax imposed herein is in addition to any other
transactions tax imposed by the City, the County of Los Angeles, or the State
of California.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1035 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and
Tax. Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with § 6001) of Div. 2
of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this
Subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1040 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax.
Code:
   A.   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      1.   The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State
of California;
      2.   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
Subchapter.
      3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         a.   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other
consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1
of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code, or;
         b.   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      4.   In §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715,
6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code.
   B.   The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase
"retailer engaged in business in this State" in § 6203 and in the definition of
that phrase in § 6203. A "retailer engaged in business" under that section
shall also include any retailer that, in the preceding calendar year or the
current calendar year, has total combined sales of tangible personal property
in this state or for delivery in the state by the retailer and all persons
related to the retailer that exceeds five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000).
For purposes of this section, a person is related to another person if both
persons are related to each other pursuant to Section 267(b) of Title 26 of the
United States Code and the regulations thereunder.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1045 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under § 6067 of the Cal.
Rev. and Tax. Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by
this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1050 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   A.   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
      2.   Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a
point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or its agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier
for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this Subsection,
delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied:
         a.   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject
to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Div. 3 of the
Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the Cal.
Pub. Util. Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Div. 3.5 (commencing
with § 9840) of the Cal. Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address
and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating
that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
         b.   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to
furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this Subchapter.
      4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this Subchapter.
      5.   For the purposes of Subdivisions 3. and 4. of this Section, the sale
or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   C.   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this Subchapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property:
      1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in §§ 6366
and 6366.1 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code of the State of California.
      3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
Subchapter.
      4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this Subchapter.
      5.   For the purposes of Subdivisions 3. and 4. of this Section, storage,
use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power
over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant
to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the
contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      6.   Except as provided in Subdivision 7., a retailer engaged in business
in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of
tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property
into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the
property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order,
either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the
City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or
person in the City under the authority of the retailer.
      7.   "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Div. 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft
licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the Cal. Pub. Util. Code, or
undocumented vessels registered under Div. 3.5 (commencing with § 9840) of the
Cal. Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any
purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an
address in the City.
   D.   Any person subject to use tax under this Subchapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code with respect to the sale to the
person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1055 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this Subchapter to Part 1
of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code relating to sales and use taxes and
which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Div. 2 of the Cal.
Rev. and Tax. Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Div. 2 of
the Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code, shall automatically become a part of this
Subchapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to
affect the rate of tax imposed by this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1060 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this Subchapter, or Part 1.6 of Div. 2 of the Cal. Rev. and
Tax. Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1065 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Subchapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Subchapter and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
§ 3.08.1070 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Subchapter relates to the levying and collecting of the City
transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately upon its adoption
by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the City voting in an election
on the subject.
(Ord. No. 2025-012, § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 3.09: DISASTERS AND EMERGENCIES
Section
Disaster Council and Emergency Services Organization
   
3.09.005   Purposes
   
3.09.010   Definitions
   
3.09.015   Disaster Council membership; powers and duties
   
3.09.020   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services; powers and
duties
   
3.09.025   Succession
   
3.09.030   Emergency organization
   
3.09.035   Emergency plan
   
3.09.040   Expenditures
   
3.09.045   Temporary antenna installations
   
3.09.050   Punishment of violations
Anti-Price Gouging
   
3.09.200   Findings and intent
   
3.09.205   Definitions
   
3.09.210   Prohibition against excessive and unjustified increases in consumer
prices during a declared emergency
   
3.09.215   Extension of time period during which prohibition is in effect
DISASTER COUNCIL AND EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION
§ 3.09.005 PURPOSES.
   The declared purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons, property and the
environment within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the
emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this
city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected
private persons.
('65 Code, § 12-1) (Ord. No. CS-696 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.09.010 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates:
   EMERGENCY.  The actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or
of extreme peril to the safety of persons, property or the environment within
this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm,
epidemic, civil unrest, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, or
earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from terrorist
acts or threats, war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions
resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be
beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of
this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to
combat.
   LOCAL EMERGENCY. The meaning given it in Section 8558 of the California
Government Code, or its successor provision.
   STATE OF EMERGENCY. The meaning given it in Section 8558 of the California
Government Code, or its successor provision.
   STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY. The meaning given it in Section 8558 of the
California Government Code, or its successor provision.
   SUCCESSOR PROVISION. The specified section of state law as amended from time
to time and any replacement for that section if that section is recodified or
renumbered.
('65 Code, § 12-2) (Ord. No. CS-696 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.09.015 DISASTER COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   A.   Disaster Council membership. The Culver City Disaster Council shall
consist of the members of the City Council. The Mayor shall serve as
Chairperson, and the Vice Mayor shall serve as Vice Chairperson.
   B.   Powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the Disaster Council, and it
is hereby empowered:
      1.   To develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency
and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and
rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements.
      2.   To forward a copy of any emergency plan developed and adopted by the
City to the State of California Office of Emergency Services, including without
limitation, the City of Culver City Emergency Plan provided for in §
3.09.030.
      3.   To register disaster service workers; provided, however, that the
Disaster Council may delegate the act of registering disaster service workers
to others through the City of Culver City Emergency Plan.
      4.   To designate the individual responsible for keeping the registration
of disaster service workers current, and for the accuracy and safekeeping of
the official registration records, provided however, that the documented proof
that the disaster service worker has taken the oath of office shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk.
      5.   To direct the activities of disaster service workers within the City
through its role in the adoption of the City of Culver City Emergency Plan. The
Emergency Plan shall delegate to City staff the authority to direct the
activities of disaster service workers during a Local Emergency, State of
Emergency, or State of War Emergency.
('65 Code, §§ 12-3 - 12-4) (Ord. No. CS-696 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2
(part))
§ 3.09.020 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES; POWERS AND
DUTIES.
   A.   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
      1.   There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency
Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.
      2.   There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of
Emergency Services. The Assistant City Manager shall be the Assistant Director
of Emergency Services.
   B.   Powers and duties.
      1.   The Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to:
         a.   Monitor and evaluate potentially dangerous emergency situations,
and when appropriate, request the City Council to proclaim the existence or
threatened existence of a Local Emergency if the City Council is in session, or
to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a
Local Emergency is proclaimed by the Director of Emergency Services, the City
Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days
thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. If the
City Council does not ratify the Local Emergency, such inaction shall not
affect the validity of the Local Emergency during the period of time it was in
effect.
         b.   Request the Governor to proclaim a State of Emergency when, in
the opinion of the Director of Emergency Services, the locally available
resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency and the City Council is not
in session.
         c.   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of
this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this Chapter.
         d.   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff
of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them.
         e.   Represent the City in all dealings with public or private
agencies on matters pertaining to Emergencies as defined herein.
         f.   Coordinate and carry out the policies and direction of the City
Council and the Disaster Council, and perform such other duties and
responsibilities as delegated by the Disaster Council or by the City Council.
         g.   Adopt rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of
this Chapter for operation of the Office of Emergency Services.
         h.   In the event of the proclamation of a Local Emergency as herein
provided, the proclamation of a State of Emergency by the Governor or the
Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a State
of War Emergency, the Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered:
            (1)   To implement and carry out the City of Culver City Emergency
Plan adopted pursuant to §
3.09.030;
            (2)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of persons, property and the environment as affected
by such emergency, including but not limited to orders and regulations imposing
a curfew within designated boundaries where necessary to preserve the public
order and safety; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be
confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;
            (3)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other
properties found lacking and needed for the protection of persons, property,
and the environment, and to bind the City for the fair value thereof, and, if
required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;
            (4)   To authorize the use of any gifts of services, equipment,
temporary loan of equipment, supplies, goods or other in-kind donations, as
necessary to provide for the protection of persons, property, and the
environment, regardless of whether the donation comes from public or private
sources. The order authorizing the use of any gifts shall be in writing. Any
such donations used by the City shall be deemed duly accepted by the City
Council in accordance with Section 37354 of the California Government Code, or
its successor provision. A report of all such gifts used shall be made to the
City Council at its next regular meeting for review;
            (5)   To require emergency services of any City officer or
employee, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she
deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties, and to grant to public
officers, employees, and registered volunteers the authority to command the aid
of citizens of the community as they deem necessary in the execution of their
duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and
immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service
workers;
            (6)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City
department or agency;
            (7)   To request state aid, including without limitation, financial
aid, equipment, personnel, supplies or anything else that the state or federal
government may provide to assist the City in coping with, responding to, or
recovering from the emergency situation;
            (8)   To perform such other functions as necessary or appropriate
to cope with the emergency situation; and
            (9)   To execute all of his or her ordinary powers as City Manager,
all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this Chapter or by
resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto and adopted by the City Council,
and all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement
approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority,
         i.   In the event of a situation in which a significant number of
persons are without the ability to obtain shelter, resulting in a threat to
their health and safety, the Director of Emergency Services may issue a
declaration of a shelter crisis pursuant to Section 8698.2 of the California
Government Code, or its successor provision.
      2.   The Director of Emergency Services, or his or her designee, shall,
with the assistance of the Fire Chief, and the Police Chief, manage the
emergency operations of the City.
      3.   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services shall, under the
supervision of the Director of Emergency Services, have such powers and duties
as may be assigned by the Director of Emergency Services.
('65 Code, §§ 12-5 - 12-6) (Ord. No. CS-696 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22
(part); Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.09.025 SUCCESSION.
   A.   Director of Emergency Services.
      1.   The City Manager, as Director of Emergency Services, shall designate
the order of succession to that office, in a letter signed by the City Manager
and delivered to the City Clerk, and such person(s) designated shall
automatically serve as Acting Director of Emergency Services, in the order
specified in the letter, until the City Manager is present and able to serve.
Such letter may delineate the circumstances and provide the parameters for
determining when the City Manager or other successors are absent or unable to
perform the duties of the Director of Emergency Services.
      2.   Such persons who serve as Acting Director of Emergency Services
shall be employees or officers of the City. An individual serving as Acting
Director of Emergency Services shall have the authority and powers of the
Director of Emergency Services.
      3.   The City's Emergency Plan may provide additional guidelines to
assist City personnel in determining when the City Manager, or his or her
successor, is absent or unable to perform the duties of the Director of
Emergency Services.
   B.   City Council. In the event of a State of War Emergency, or declaration
of a State of Emergency, or Local Emergency, City Council vacancies may be
filled and the City Council may be reconstituted using the methods provided in
Article 15 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the California Government Code (§§ 8635
et seq.) as amended from time to time and any replacement for that Article if
that Article is recodified or renumbered.
(Ord. Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.09.030 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.
    All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations,
and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons
impressed into service under the provisions of this Chapter, charged with
duties incident to the protection of persons, property and the environment in
the City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of
the City of Culver City.
('65 Code, § 12-7) (Ord. No. CS-696 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.09.035 EMERGENCY PLAN.
   The Culver City Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of
the City of Culver City Emergency Plan; such plan shall provide for the
effective mobilization of all of the resources of the City, both public and
private, to meet any condition constituting a Local Emergency, State of
Emergency, or State of War Emergency; and shall provide for the organization,
powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan
shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 12-8) (Ord. No. CS-696 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.09.040 EXPENDITURES.
   Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Culver
City.
('65 Code, § 12-9) (Ord. No. CS-696 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.09.045 TEMPORARY ANTENNA INSTALLATIONS.
   The City Manager, as the Director of Emergency Services, is authorized in
the event of a Local Emergency, State of Emergency or State of War Emergency to
accommodate all providers of wireless services whose antenna facilities can be
deployed immediately within the City for the purpose of implementing the City
of Culver City Emergency Plan, coordinating the emergency and disaster
functions of the City, and protecting persons, property and the environment.
The temporary deployment of such wireless antenna facilities may be authorized
at such locations, and for such period of time, as will afford maximum
protection for the public health, welfare, and safety.
(Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
§ 3.09.050 PUNISHMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6)
months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:
   A.   Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or
her by virtue of this chapter.
   B.   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to
give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants
of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection
thereof.
   C.   Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the Director of Emergency Services or specified in the city’s
Emergency Plan.
('65 Code, § 12-10) (Ord. No. CS-696 § 1 (part)); Ord. No. 2010-004 § 2 (part))
ANTI-PRICE GOUGING
§ 3.09.200 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   The City Council hereby finds that during emergencies and major disasters
elsewhere, including, but not limited to, earthquakes, fires, floods, or civil
disturbances, some merchants have taken unfair advantage of consumers by
greatly increasing prices for essential consumer goods and services. While the
pricing of consumer goods and services is generally best left to the
marketplace under ordinary conditions, when a declared state of emergency
results in abnormal disruptions of the market, the public interest requires
that excessive and unjustified increases in the prices of essential consumer
goods and services be prohibited. It is the intent of the City Council in
enacting this subchapter to protect citizens from excessive and unjustified
increases in the prices charged during or shortly after an emergency for goods
and services that are vital and necessary for the health, safety, and welfare
of consumers. Further it is the intent of the City Council that this Article be
liberally construed so that its beneficial purposes may be served.
(Ord. No. 2010-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.09.205 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   BUILDING MATERIALS.  Lumber, construction tools, windows, and anything else
used in the building or rebuilding of property.
   CONSUMER FOOD ITEM. Any article that is used or intended for use for food,
drink, confection, or condiment by a person or animal.
   DECLARED EMERGENCY.  A Local Emergency or State of Emergency as defined in §
3.09.010 of this Code.
   EMERGENCY SUPPLIES. Includes, but is not limited to, water, flashlights,
radios, batteries, candles, blankets, soaps, diapers, temporary shelters, tape,
toiletries, plywood, nails, and hammers.
   GASOLINE. Any fuel used to power any motor vehicle or power tool.
   GOODS.  Has the same meaning as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 1689.5
of the California Civil Code.
   HOUSING.  Any rental housing leased on a month-to-month term.
   MEDICAL SUPPLIES. Includes, but is not limited to, prescription and
nonprescription medications, bandages, gauze, isopropyl alcohol, and
antibacterial products.
   REPAIR OR RECONSTRUCTION SERVICES.  Services performed by any person who is
required to be licensed under the California Contractors' State License Law
(Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the California
Business and Professions Code), for repairs to residential or commercial
property of any type that is damaged as a result of an event that led to a
Declared Emergency or State of War Emergency.
   TRANSPORTATION, FREIGHT, AND STORAGE SERVICES.  Any service that is
performed by any company that contracts to move, store, or transport personal
or business property or rents equipment for those purposes.
(Ord. No. 2010-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.09.210 PROHIBITION AGAINST EXCESSIVE AND UNJUSTIFIED INCREASES IN CONSUMER
PRICES DURING A DECLARED EMERGENCY.
   A.   Consumer goods and services.
      1.   Upon the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or an event triggering
a State of War Emergency, and for a period of thirty (30) days following the
proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event that triggered a State of War
Emergency, it is unlawful for a person, contractor, business, or other entity
to sell or offer to sell any consumer food items or goods, goods or services
used for emergency cleanup, emergency supplies, medical supplies, home heating
oil, building materials, housing, transportation, freight, and storage
services, or gasoline or other motor fuels for a price of more than 10 percent
above the price charged by that person for those goods or services immediately
prior to the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event that triggered a
State of War Emergency.
      2.   Subject to subsection A.3 below, a person may only increase prices
in excess of the amount permitted in subsection A.1 as follows:
         (i)   The seller or vendor can demonstrate that the increase in price
is directly attributable to additional costs imposed on that person by the
supplier of the goods; or
         (ii)   The seller or vendor can demonstrate that the increase in price
is directly attributable to additional costs for labor or materials used to
provide the services.
      3.   In those situations where the increase in price is attributable to
additional costs imposed by the seller's supplier or additional costs of
providing the good or service during the Declared Emergency or State of War
Emergency, the price charge shall represent no more than ten percent (10%)
above the total of the cost to the seller, plus the markup customarily applied
by the seller for that good or service in the usual course of business
immediately prior to the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event that
triggered a State of War Emergency.
      4.   A business offering an item for sale at a reduced price immediately
prior to the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event triggering a
State of War Emergency may use the price at which it usually sells the item to
calculate the price increase permitted pursuant to this Section.
   B.   Construction, Repair, and Clean-up Services.
      1.   Upon the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or an event triggering
a State of War Emergency, and for a period of 180 days following the
proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event that triggered a State of War
Emergency, it is unlawful for a contractor to sell or offer to sell any repair
or reconstruction services, or any services used in emergency cleanup, for a
price of more than 10 percent above the price charged by that person for those
services immediately prior to the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the
event that triggered a State of War Emergency.
      2.   Subject to subsection B.3 below, a person may increase prices in
excess of the amount permitted in subsection B.1. as follows:
         (i)   The seller or vendor can demonstrate that the increase in price
is directly attributable to additional costs imposed on that person by the
supplier of the goods; or
         (ii)   The seller or vendor can demonstrate that the increase in price
is directly attributable to additional costs for labor or materials used to
provide the services.
      3.   In those situations where the increase in price is attributable to
the additional costs imposed by the contractor's supplier or additional costs
of providing the service during the Declared Emergency or State of War
Emergency, the price represents no more than ten percent (10%) above the total
of the cost to the contractor, plus the markup customarily applied by the
contractor for that good or service in the usual course of business immediately
prior to the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event that triggered a
State of War Emergency.
      4.   A contractor offering services at a reduced price immediately prior
to the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event triggering a State of
War Emergency may use the price usually charged for the services to calculate
the price increase permitted pursuant to this subchapter.
   C.   Hotel and motel rates.
      1.   Upon the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or an event triggering
a State of War Emergency, and for a period of thirty (30) days following the
proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event that triggered a State of War
Emergency, it is unlawful for an owner or operator of a hotel or motel to
increase the hotel or motel's regular rates, as advertised immediately prior to
the proclamation of a Declared Emergency or the event that triggered a State of
War Emergency, by more than ten percent (10%).
      2.   A hotel owner or operator may increase prices in excess of the
amount permitted by subsection C.1. if the owner or operator can prove that the
increase in price is directly attributable to additional costs imposed on it
for goods or labor used in its business, to seasonal adjustments in rates that
are regularly scheduled, or to previously contracted rates.
(Ord. No. 2010-005 § 1 (part))
§ 3.09.215 EXTENSION OF TIME PERIOD DURING WHICH PROHIBITION IS IN EFFECT.
   The provisions of this Article may be extended for additional thirty (30)-
day periods by the Director of Emergency Services or the City Council, if
deemed appropriate to protect public health, safety, or welfare.
(Ord. No. 2010-005 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 3.10: CITY POLICIES
Section
Claim Procedures  
   
3.10.005   Authorization for claims procedure
   
3.10.010   Delegation of functions
   
3.10.015   Presentation of claims by city officers and employees prohibited
   
3.10.020   Time for presentation of claim
   
3.10.025   Presentation of claim, amendment, or application for leave to
present late claim
   
3.10.030   Required contents of claim
   
3.10.035   Amendment of claim
   
3.10.040   Insufficiency of claim; notice; waiver of defense
   
3.10.045   Permission to present late claim
   
3.10.050   Time for City Council action on claim
   
3.10.055   City Council action on claim
   
3.10.060   Notice of action on claim
   
3.10.065   Re-examination of rejected claim
   
3.10.070   Manner, time and proof of mailing claim
   
3.10.075   Delivery or mailing of notice of action on claim
   
3.10.080   Suit in absence of presentation of claim and action thereon
prohibited
CLAIM PROCEDURES
§ 3.10.005 AUTHORIZATION FOR CLAIMS PROCEDURE.
   Claims against the City for money or damages, which are excepted by Cal.
Gov't Code § 905 from the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 900 et seq. and
which are not governed by any other regulations or statutes expressly relating
thereto shall be governed by the procedures established by this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 2-100) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.010 DELEGATION OF FUNCTIONS.
   Subject to Cal. Gov't Code § 935.4, any function of the City Council,
authorized by this Subchapter, may be delegated, by resolution, to a City
employee.
('65 Code, § 2-101) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.015 PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS BY CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES PROHIBITED.
   No city officer or employee shall, except for his own services or upon any
claim or contract personal to such officer or employee, present any claim or
demands for allowance against the City, or in any way, except in discharge of
official duty, advocate relief asked in the claim made by any other person.
('65 Code, § 2-102) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 17)
§ 3.10.020 TIME FOR PRESENTATION OF CLAIM.
   All claims for money or damages shall be presented within the applicable
time limits set forth in Cal. Gov't Code § 911.2.
('65 Code, § 2-103) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.025 PRESENTATION OF CLAIM, AMENDMENT, OR APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
PRESENT LATE CLAIM.
   A.   A claim, any amendment thereto, or an application for leave to present
a late claim shall be presented by:
      1.   Delivering it to the City Clerk at the Clerk's Office, City Hall,
9770 Culver Boulevard, Culver City, California, 90232-0507, Monday—Friday
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; or
      2.   Mailing it to: City Clerk of Culver City, City Hall, 9770 Culver
Boulevard, Culver City, California 90232-0507.
   B.   A claim, amendment or application shall be deemed to have been
presented in compliance with this Section even though it is not delivered or
mailed as provided in this Section only if it is actually received by the City
Clerk within the time prescribed for presentation thereof.
('65 Code, § 2-104) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.030 REQUIRED CONTENTS OF CLAIM.
   All claims may be presented upon forms approved by the City Council and
shall contain the information required by Cal. Gov't Code § 910, together with
such additional information as the City Council may require. Such claim shall
be signed by or on behalf of the claimant; provided that, claims for supplies,
materials, equipment, or services need not be signed by the claimant or on his
behalf, if presented on a billhead or invoice regularly used in the conduct of
the business of the claimant.
('65 Code, § 2-105) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.035 AMENDMENT OF CLAIM.
   A.   A claim may be amended at any time before the expiration of the period
designated in §
3.10.020 of this Subchapter or before final action thereon is taken by the City
Council, whichever is later, provided that an amendment shall be permitted only
if the claim, as amended, relates to the same transaction or occurrence which
gave rise to the original claim. The amendment shall be considered a part of
the original claim for all purposes.
   B.   A failure or refusal to amend a claim, whether or not notice of
insufficiency is given under §
3.10.040 A. of this Subchapter, shall not constitute a defense to any action
brought upon the cause of action for which the claim was presented if the Court
finds that the claim as presented complied substantially with §
3.10.025 of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 2-106) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.040 INSUFFICIENCY OF CLAIM; NOTICE; WAIVER OF DEFENSE.
   A.   Notice. If in the opinion of the City Council a claim, as presented,
fails to comply substantially with the requirements of §
3.10.030 of this Subchapter, the City Council may at anytime within twenty (20)
days after the claim is presented, give written notice of its insufficiency,
stating with particularity the defects or omissions therein. Such notice shall
be given in the manner prescribed by §
3.10.080 of this Subchapter. The City Council may not take action on the claim
for a period of fifteen (15) days after such notice is given.
('65 Code, § 2-107)
   B.   Waiver of defense. Any defense of insufficiency of the claim based upon
a defect or omission in the claim, as presented, is waived by failure to give
notice of insufficiency with respect to such defect or omission as provided in
Subsection A. of this Section, except that no notice need be given and no
waiver shall result when the claim as presented fails to state either an
address to which the person presenting the claim desires notice to be sent or
an address of claimant.
('65 Code, § 2-108)
(Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.045 PERMISSION TO PRESENT LATE CLAIM.
   When a claim required by §
3.10.020 of this Subchapter to be presented not later than six (6) months after
the accrual of a cause of action is not presented within such time, a written
application may be made for leave to present such claim, pursuant to Cal. Gov't
Code § 935(e).
('65 Code, § 2-109) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1; Ord. No. 88-023 § 1)
§ 3.10.050 TIME FOR CITY COUNCIL ACTION ON CLAIM.
   A.   The City Council shall act on a claim in the manner provided in §
3.10.055 of this Subchapter within forty-five (45) days after the claim has
been presented. If a claim is amended, the City Council shall act on the
amended claim within forty-five (45) days after the amended claim is presented.
   B.   The claimant and the City Council may extend the period within which
the City Council is required to act on the claim by written agreement made:
      1.   Before the expiration of such period; or
      2.   After the expiration of such period if an action based on the claim
has not been commenced and is not yet barred by the period of limitations
provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 945.6.
   C.   If the City Council fails or refuses to act on a claim within the time
prescribed by this Section, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by
the City Council on the last day of the period within which the City Council
was required to act upon the claim. If the period within which the City Council
is required to act is extended by agreement pursuant to this Section, whether
made before or after the expiration of such period, the last day of the period
within which the City Council is required to act shall be the last day of the
period specified in such agreement.
('65 Code, § 2-110) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.055 CITY COUNCIL ACTION ON CLAIM.
   The City Council may act on a claim in one of the following ways:
   A.   If the City Council finds the claim is not a proper charge against the
public entity, it may reject the claim.
   B.   If the City Council finds the claim is a proper charge against the
public entity and is for an amount justly due, it shall allow the claim.
   C.   If the City Council finds the claim is a proper charge against the
public entity but is for an amount greater than is justly due, it shall either
reject the claim or allow it in the amount justly due and reject it as to the
balance.
   D.   If legal liability of the City or the amount justly due is disputed,
the City Council may reject the claim or may compromise the claim.
('65 Code, § 2-111) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.060 NOTICE OF ACTION ON CLAIM.
   A.   Written notice of the action taken under §
3.10.055 of this Subchapter or the inaction which is deemed rejection under §
3.10.050 of this Subchapter shall be given in the manner prescribed by §
3.10.070 of this Subchapter. Such notice may be in substantially the following
form:
   Notice is hereby given that the claim which you presented to the City Clerk
of Culver City on (indicate date) was (indicate whether rejected, allowed,
allowed in the amount of $            and rejected as to the balance, rejected
by operation of law, or other appropriate language, whichever is applicable) on
(indicate date of action or rejection by operation of law).
   B.   If the claim is rejected in whole or in part, the notice required by
Subsection A. shall include a warning in substantially the following form:
WARNING
   Subject to certain exceptions, you have only six (6) months from the date
this notice was personally delivered or deposited in the mail to file a court
action on this Claim. (See Cal. Gov't Code § 945.6)
   You may seek the advice of an attorney of your choice in connection with
this matter. If you desire to consult an attorney, you should do so
immediately.
('65 Code, § 2-112) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.065 RE-EXAMINATION OF REJECTED CLAIM.
   The City Council may in its discretion, within the time prescribed by Cal.
Gov't Code § 945.6 for commencing an action on the claim, re-examine a
previously rejected claim in order to consider a settlement of the claim.
('65 Code, § 2-113) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.070 MANNER, TIME AND PROOF OF MAILING CLAIM.
   If a claim, amendment to a claim or application for leave to present a late
claim is presented or sent by mail under this Subchapter, or if any notice
under this Subchapter is given by mail, the claim, amendment, application or
notice shall be mailed in the manner prescribed in this Section. The claim,
amendment, application or notice must be deposited in the United States post
office, or a mailbox, sub-post office, substation, or mail chute, or other like
facility regularly maintained by the government of the United States in a
sealed envelope, properly addressed, with postage paid. A mailed claim,
amendment, application or notice shall be deemed to have been presented and
received at the time of the deposit. Proof of mailing may be made in the manner
prescribed by Cal. Code Civ. Proc.§ 1013a.
('65 Code, § 2-114) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.075 DELIVERY OR MAILING OF NOTICE OF ACTION ON CLAIM.
   A.   The notices provided for in §§
3.10.040 A. and
3.10.060 of this Subchapter shall be given by either of the following methods:
      1.   Personally delivering the notice to the person presenting the claim
or making the application.
      2.   Mailing the notice to the address, if any, stated in the claim or
application at the address to which the person presenting the claim or making
the application desires notices to be sent or, if no such address is stated in
the claim or application, by mailing the notice to the address, if any, of the
claim as stated in the claim or application.
   B.   No notice need be given where the claim or application fails to state
either an address to which the person presenting the claim or making the
application desires notices to be sent or an address of the claimant.
('65 Code, § 2-115) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
§ 3.10.080 SUIT IN ABSENCE OF PRESENTATION OF CLAIM AND ACTION THEREON
PROHIBITED.
   No suit for money or damages may be brought against the City on a cause of
action for which a claim is required to be presented in accordance with this
Subchapter until a written claim therefor has been presented to the City Clerk
in the form and manner required by this Subchapter and has been acted upon the
City Council or has, been deemed to have been rejected by the City Council, in
accordance with this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 2-116) (Ord. No. 85-012 § 1)
CHAPTER 3.11: ELECTRONIC FILING
Section
   
3.11.005   Electronic filing of campaign statements
   
3.11.010   Electronic filing of statements of economic interests
   
3.11.015   Procedures
§ 3.11.005 ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN STATEMENTS.
   Any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to file
statements, reports, or other documents required by Cal. Gov’t Code Chapter 4
(commencing with Section 841000), except an elected officer, candidate,
committee, or other person who receives contributions totaling less than two
thousand dollars ($2,000), and makes expenditures totaling less than two
thousand dollars ($2,000) in a calendar year, shall file those statements,
reports, or other documents online or electronically with the City Clerk.
(Ord. No. 2020-009 § 1 (part))
§ 3.11.010 ELECTRONIC FILING OF STATEMENTS OF ECONOMIC INTEREST.
   Any person holding a position listed in Cal. Gov’t Code § 87200 or
designated in the City’s local Conflict of Interest Code adopted pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code § 87300, shall file any required Statement of Economic Interest
reports (Form 700) online or electronically with the City Clerk.
(Ord. No. 2020-009 § 1 (part))
§ 3.11.015 PROCEDURES.
   A.   In any instance in which an original statement, report or other
document must be filed with the California Secretary of State and a copy of
that statement, report or other document is required to be filed with the City
Clerk, the filer may, but is not required to, file the copy electronically.
   B.   If the City Clerk’s electronic system is not capable of accepting a
particular type of statement, report or other document, an elected officer,
candidate, committee or other person shall file that document with the City
Clerk in an alternative format.
(Ord. No. 2020-009 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 3.12: EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES FOR CHALLENGES TO FEES,
CHARGES, AND ASSESSMENTS ON REAL PROPERTY.
Section
   
3.12.005   Scope
   
3.12.010   Duty to exhaust issues
   
3.12.015   Procedures
§ 3.12.005 SCOPE.
   A.   The duty to exhaust administrative remedies imposed by this Chapter
extends to:
      1.   Any fee or charge subject to articles XIII C or XIII D of the
California Constitution;
      2.   Any assessment on real property levied by the City; and
      3.   The methodology used to develop and levy such a fee, charge, or
assessment.
   B.   "Hearing" as used in this Chapter means the hearing referenced in §
3.12.015.A.4.
(Ord. No. 2025-011, § 1 (part))
§ 3.12.010 DUTY TO EXHAUST ISSUES.
   No person may bring a judicial action or proceeding alleging noncompliance
with the California Constitution or other applicable law for any new,
increased, or extended fee, charge, or assessment levied by the City, unless
that person submitted to the City Clerk a timely, written objection to that
fee, charge, or assessment specifying the grounds for alleging noncompliance.
The issues raised in any such action or proceeding shall be limited to those
raised in such an objection unless a court finds the issue could not have been
raised in such an objection by those exercising reasonable diligence.
(Ord. No. 2025-011, § 1 (part))
§ 3.12.015 PROCEDURES.
   A.   The City shall:
      1.   Make available to the public any proposed fee, charge, or assessment
to which this section is to apply no less than forty-five (45) days before the
deadline for a ratepayer or assessed property owner to submit an objection
pursuant to Subdivision 4. of this Subsection.
      2.   Post on its internet website a written basis for the fee, charge, or
assessment, such as a cost of service analysis or an engineer's report, and
include a link to the internet website in the written notice of the Hearing,
including, but not limited to, a notice pursuant to Subdivision (c) of Section
4 or Paragraph (1) of Subdivision (a) of Section 6 of Article XIII D of the
California Constitution.
      3.   Mail the written basis described in Subdivision 2. of this
Subsection A. to a ratepayer or property owner on request.
      4.   Provide at least forty-five (45) days for a ratepayer or assessed
property owner to review the proposed fee or assessment and to timely submit to
the City Clerk a written objection to that fee, charge, or assessment that
specifies the grounds for alleging noncompliance. Any objection shall be
submitted before the end of the public comment portion of a Hearing on the
rate, charge or assessment.
      5.   Include in a written notice of the Hearing, in bold-faced type of
twelve (12) points or larger:
         a.   A statement that all written objections must be submitted to the
City Clerk by the end of public comment period at the Hearing and that a
failure to timely object in writing bars any right to challenge that fee,
charge, or assessment in court and that any such action will be limited to
issues identified in such objections.
         b.   All substantive and procedural requirements for submitting an
objection to the proposed fee, charge, or assessment such as those specified
for a property-related fee under California Constitution, Article XIII D,
Section 6(a) or for an assessment on real property under California
Constitution, Article XIII D, Section 4(e).
   B.   Council consideration; City responses. Before or during the Hearing,
the City Council shall consider and the City shall respond in writing to, any
timely written objections. The City Council may adjourn the Hearing to another
date if necessary to respond to comments received after the agenda is posted
for the meeting at which the Hearing occurs. The City's responses shall explain
the substantive basis for retaining or altering the proposed fee, charge, or
assessment in response to written objections, including any reasons to reject
requested amendments.
   C.   City Council determinations. The City Council, in exercising its
legislative discretion, shall determine whether:
      1.   The written objections and the City's response warrant
clarifications to the proposed fee, charge, or assessment.
      2.   To reduce the proposed fee, charge, or assessment.
      3.   To further review the proposed fee, charge, or assessment before
determining whether clarification or reduction is needed.
      4.   To proceed with the Hearing, to continue it, or to abandon the
proposal.
(Ord. No. 2025-011, § 1 (part))
TITLE 5: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
5.01.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
         
5.02.   SEWERS
         
5.03.   WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SHORTAGE PROGRAM
         
5.04.   PUBLIC UTILITIES
         
5.05.   STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
         
5.06.   SAFE AND CLEAN WATER PROTECTION MEASURE
         
5.07.   WASTE REDUCTION REGULATIONS
         
5.08.   MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REDUCTION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5.01: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
   
5.01.005   Definitions
   
5.01.010   Municipal service exclusive
   
5.01.015   Handlers of recyclable materials
   
5.01.020   Temporary permits during emergencies
   
5.01.025   Ownership and handling of solid waste and recyclable material
   
5.01.030   Unauthorized storage of solid waste prohibited
   
5.01.035   Scattering of solid waste prohibited
   
5.01.040   Containers
   
5.01.045   Wrapping requirements
   
5.01.050   Time and manner of placement
   
5.01.055   Special collections
   
5.01.060   City Agent's authority to make regulations
   
5.01.065   Refusal to handle; tagging for violations
   
5.01.070   Charges for solid waste collection
   
5.01.075   Time of payment of charges
   
5.01.080   Delinquent account
   
5.01.085   Payment under protest
   
5.01.090   Disposal to be outside City
   
5.01.095   Permit for non-City service vehicles; containers
   
5.01.100   New construction requirements
   
5.01.105   Violations
§ 5.01.005 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever in this Chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meaning ascribed to them, unless it is apparent from the context thereof that
some other meaning is intended.
   CITY AGENT.    Any employee or agent of the City designated by the City
Manager or City Council, or any person under contract with the City, or agent
or employee of such person, with authority for directing the collection and
disposal of garbage, rubbish and other refuse.
   CONTAINER. Any vessel, tank, receptacle, box or bin used or intended to be
used for the purpose of holding solid wastes, recyclable materials, and
recyclable waste materials.
   CORPORATIONS. Corporations, copartner-ships, and all business enterprises,
associations or organizations, however designed.
   HANDLER. A person or corporation who collects, transports, or otherwise
disposes of solid wastes, recyclable materials, or recyclable waste materials.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may:
      1.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      2.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
   NON-COMBUSTIBLE SOLID WASTE. Ashes, bottles, broken crockery, glass, tin
cans and metallic substances which will not incinerate through contact with
flames of ordinary temperature.
   PROCESSING. Reduction, separation, recovery, conversion or recycling of
solid waste.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Materials that are segregated from other waste material
for the purpose of recycling. This includes, but is not limited to, paper,
glass, metals, wood, plastics, wastes, bulky goods, waste oil, and construction
and demolition materials that are sold by the owner thereof to a third party.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL HANDLING.  The collection, transportation, storage,
transfer, or processing of recyclable materials.
   RECYCLABLE WASTE MATERIAL.  Discarded materials such as, but not limited to,
newspapers, glass and metal cans, which are separated from other solid waste
for the purpose of recycling and which are not sold to a third party.
   RECYCLABLE WASTE MATERIAL HANDLING. The collection, transportation, storage,
transfer, or processing of recyclable waste materials.
   RECYCLING.  The process of collecting, sorting, cleaning, treating and
reconstituting materials that would otherwise be disposed of by landfilling or
transformation, and returning materials to the economic mainstream in the form
of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products.
   SOLID WASTE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and
liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes,
industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and
parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or
chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable
or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid or semisolid
wastes, but not including hazardous waste as defined herein, radioactive waste
regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control Law, and untreated medical
waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste Management Act. Materials
which are discarded and thereafter recycled are considered solid wastes for
purposes of this Chapter. Materials which are sold by the owner thereof to a
third party and thereafter recycled are not considered solid wastes for
purposes of this Chapter.
   SOLID WASTE HANDLING. The collection, transportation, storage, transfer,
disposal, or processing of solid wastes.
   TRANSFER STATION. The site where collected refuse may be transferred to
vehicles which will haul the refuse to a disposal site.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009
§ 22 (part))
§ 5.01.010 MUNICIPAL SERVICE EXCLUSIVE.
   A.   Solid waste handling and recyclable waste material handling shall be
performed exclusively by the City or its authorized agents. The City Council
may regulate, by ordinance or resolution, all aspects of solid waste handling
and recyclable waste material handling, including, but not limited to,
frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of
services, charges, fees, and nature, location, and extent of providing solid
waste handling services.
   B.   Any person performing solid waste handling and/or recyclable waste
material handling on the effective date of this Section, pursuant to a permit
issued by the City, may continue to operate pursuant to the conditions of the
permit until its expiration date.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.015 HANDLERS OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   A.   Handlers of recyclable materials within the City shall, in addition to
obtaining a business tax certificate, obtain a Recyclable Material Collection
and Disposal Permit from the City Agent prior to commencing such handling and
annually thereafter.
   B.   Persons operating under such permit shall, on a monthly basis or at
such times as determined by the City Agent, submit a report to the City Agent
specifying the amount of recyclable materials collected within the City, the
location(s) from which the recyclable materials were collected, and the
location(s) to which the recyclable materials were brought.
      1.   Such report shall be kept confidential unless otherwise provided by
law.
      2.   Failure to submit timely reports shall be a basis for revocation of
the Recyclable Material Collection and Disposal Permit.
   C.   The City Agent shall have the right to audit the records of handlers
who have received a permit pursuant to this Section.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.020 TEMPORARY PERMITS DURING EMERGENCIES.
   A.   In the event of breakdown of City equipment or other unforeseen or
unpreventable circumstances, the City Manager may issue limited or temporary
permits to private persons or corporations to perform any of the services
covered by this Chapter, subject to fees or charges agreed upon.
   B.   Charges for any period exceeding 30 days shall be approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009
§ 22 (part))
§ 5.01.025 OWNERSHIP AND HANDLING OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.
   A.   Ownership of solid waste or recyclable material placed in or near a
refuse container that has not been set out for collection shall remain vested
in the person for whom the material was placed in or near the container.
   B.   Ownership of solid waste and recyclable material set out for collection
shall be vested in the City.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to handle or remove solid waste or
recyclable material in or near a refuse or recycling container unless:
      1.   The ownership of the solid waste or recyclable material was or is
vested in the person; or
      2.   The person is acting at the request of the person in whom the
ownership was or is vested; or
      3.   The person is a City Agent acting within the course and scope of his
or her duties.
(Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.030 UNAUTHORIZED STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE PROHIBITED.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, place or bury
solid waste in or upon any lot, land, street, alley or public place, nor throw
such solid waste in any creek, stream, water or water way within the City.
   B.   Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby
prohibited and declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.035 SCATTERING OF SOLID WASTE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep or deposit
anywhere within the City any solid waste in such a manner that it may be
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer,
storm drain, parkway, or any other public place, or into any occupied premises
within the City.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.040 CONTAINERS.
   A.   All persons shall utilize containers provided by the City for the
disposal of solid waste and recyclable waste materials.
   B.   Persons operating pursuant to a Recyclable Material Collection and
Disposal Permit shall utilize containers which shall be water-tight,
constructed of metal or material of equal strength and durability, with handles
on the outside thereof and with a tight-fitting cover.
      1.   Non-combustible rubbish, with the exception of tin cans and
glassware, may be deposited in well-constructed wooden crates or boxes.
      2.   Tin cans and glassware shall be deposited in a separate water-tight
container and, unless so separated the City Agent, shall not be required to
remove same from the premises.
      3.   Such solid wastes which cannot be placed in a container may be
securely tied in bundles under 40 pounds in weight.
      4.   Tree limbs, trunks, hedge cutting, brush and lumber shall not exceed
four feet in length.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.045 WRAPPING REQUIREMENTS.
   Before placing in a receptacle, solid waste containing liquids shall be
drained, and matter subject to decomposition shall be wrapped in paper or other
combustible material.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.050 TIME AND MANNER OF PLACEMENT.
   City-provided containers shall be placed on the curb in front of the
premises occupied by person depositing same, unless another location has been
designated by the City Agent, not earlier than sunset of the date prior to that
established for collection on the particular route involved, and such
containers shall be removed from the place of collection no later than midnight
on the day of collection.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.055 SPECIAL COLLECTIONS.
   A.   Application. Upon application to the City Agent, junk and solid waste
exceeding the limitations set forth in this Chapter may be scheduled for
special collection, and charges therefor may be assessed by the City Agent.
   B.   Contagious disease solid waste. The removal of wearing apparel, bedding
or other refuse from homes, hospitals, or other places where highly infectious
or contagious diseases have prevailed, shall be performed under the supervision
and direction of the County Health Officer, and such solid waste shall neither
be placed in containers nor left for regular collection and disposal.
   C.   Inflammable, explosive, or radioactive solid waste. Highly inflammable
or explosive or radioactive solid waste shall not be placed in containers or
receptacles for regular collection and disposal, but shall be removed under the
supervision of the Fire Chief at the expense of the owner or possessor of the
material.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.060 CITY AGENT'S AUTHORITY TO MAKE REGULATIONS.
   The City Agent shall have the authority to make such other reasonable rules
and regulations concerning individual collection and disposal, and relating to
the hauling of solid waste over City streets by private persons, or relating to
the operation of a transfer station, as he or she shall find necessary, subject
to the right of appeal from his or her order to the City Manager, and from said
orders of the City Manager to the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009
§ 22 (part))
§ 5.01.065 REFUSAL TO HANDLE; TAGGING FOR VIOLATIONS.
   A.   Violation of the rules and regulations set forth in this Chapter may
result in refusal to handle solid waste and the placing thereon of a tag at
least 21/8" x 53/4" in size.
   B.   The reason for such refusal to handle shall be indicated on said tag.
   C.   If there is a refusal to handle pursuant to this Section, payment for
the attempted solid waste handling shall be required as well as for any
additional handling after the violation is rectified.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.070 CHARGES FOR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.
   A.   The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees for solid waste
handling.
   B.   Such fees may be collected by placement on property tax bills or by
monthly billing, as the City Council determines.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.075 TIME OF PAYMENT OF CHARGES.
   Unless the City Council determines otherwise, payment of charges for solid
waste handling services is due on or before the last day of the month following
the month in which the service was rendered.
(Ord. No. 2001-012, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.080 DELINQUENT ACCOUNT.
   A.   Late charge. If payment is not received in the office of the City
Treasurer on or before the due date established in §
5.01.075, the account shall be considered delinquent and a late charge of fifty
percent (50%) shall be added to the face amount of the bill prepared during the
month the account became delinquent.
   B.   Request for waiver.
      1.   The City Manager shall create written policies and procedures for
considering and approving a request for waiver of late charges.
      2.   The City Manager, or his/her designee, has the authority to approve
a request for waiver of late charges in amounts up to two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00).
      3.   The City Manager, or his/her designee, in consultation with the
Chief Financial Officer and the Public Works Directors, has the authority to
approve a request for waiver of late charges in amounts greater than two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) but less than five thousand dollars
($5,000).
      4.   Any request for waiver of late charges in amounts of five thousand
dollars ($5,000) or greater may only be approved by the City Council. The City
Council's determination regarding such request shall be final.
      5.   The City Manager's denial of a request for waiver may be appealed to
the City Council. Appeals shall be submitted in writing and filed with the City
Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the denial of such request.
   C.   Penalties. Delinquent accounts, including late charges, shall be
recoverable by civil action of the City. Willful failure to pay a delinquent
account shall be deemed a violation of this Code and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
   D.   Suspension of service. In addition to the penalties and remedies
established in this Section, the City Agent may suspend service to an account
which has been delinquent for longer than sixty (60) days, provided not less
than thirty (30) days written notice of the suspension has been given to the
account holder at the service address and full payment has not been received.
Solid waste collection services may be reinstated upon full payment of the
delinquent account.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2011-001
§ 1 (part))
§ 5.01.085 PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST.
   A.   Any business entity protesting charges billed for additional solid
waste handling shall make payment of such charges and, at the same time, file a
written protest with the City Accounting Department.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days thereafter the Department shall notify the
business entity of his or its decision.
   C.   The business entity may appeal the decision of the City Accounting
Department to the City Council, whose decision on such appeal shall be final.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.090 DISPOSAL TO BE OUTSIDE CITY.
   Disposal of solid waste shall be made outside of the City limits, unless
otherwise specifically authorized by the City Manager.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009
§ 22 (part))
§ 5.01.095 PERMIT FOR NON-CITY SERVICE VEHICLES; CONTAINERS.
   A.   A permit must be obtained from the City Agent by any handler desiring
to operate privately owned vehicles and containers on City streets for the
handling of solid wastes, recyclable materials and recyclable waste materials.
   B.   The permit must be prominently displayed on each vehicle at all times
it is within the City.
   C.   Vehicles other than containers must be water-tight, provided with a
tight cover, and so operated as to prevent the escape of offensive odors and
solid waste and recyclable materials from being blown, dropped or spilled.
   D.   Failure to display a permit as provided by this Section shall be a
violation of this Chapter.
   E.   Vehicles and containers without such permits which are left on the City
right-of-way may be removed by the City at the owner's expense.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.100 NEW CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Applicability of section. The regulations hereinafter set forth shall
apply to all construction within the City, including any construction wherein
an existing building is modified, altered or added to or pursuant to a building
or demolition permit.
   B.   Closure requirements. Every container, including compactors, used in
any residence of four (4) or more, and in any commercial, manufacturing or
industrial zone, shall be provided with and kept in an enclosed container area.
      1.   Areas for containers and compactors shall be of adequate size to
accommodate the required number and size containers and compactors as assigned
by the Sanitation Manager.
      2.   Location of container areas shall be jointly approved by the
Sanitation Manager and the Planning Director.
      3.   Each area shall be cement paved, enclosed with a six-foot high
masonry wall, using materials, color, and texture compatible with the building
(s) it services, and be provided with six-foot minimum width opaque doors for
ready removal of containers.
      4.   The intersection of the enclosure wall with both the cement floor
(internal) and with the external surface adjoining the wall, shall be radius a
minimum of 1.5 inches.
      5.   Each container shall remain in the enclosure with doors closed when
not in use.
      6.   The enclosure and doors shall be maintained as constructed and
remain in working order at all times.
   C.   Building and Demolition Permits.
      1.   City Building and Demolition Permits are issued with the condition
that the permittee agrees to abide by the provisions of this Chapter.
      2.   In addition to the provisions set forth in §
5.01.105, the City may stop work being performed pursuant to a building and/or
demolition permit issued to a person violating any provision of this Chapter.
   D.   Prevailing sections. Should there be any conflict between the
provisions of this Section and any other section of this Code, then this
Section shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
§ 5.01.105 VIOLATIONS.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to provide solid waste handling
services, recyclable material handling services, or recyclable waste material
handling services within the City without a permit.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle for providing
solid waste handling services, recyclable material handling services, or
recyclable waste handling services within the City unless a permit is issued
for that vehicle or container and affixed thereon. In addition to any other
remedies provided by law, the City may remove any vehicle operated or
maintained on a public right-of-way within the City without a permit.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize the services of a
handler who is not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize a container not in
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   E.   A violation of this Section or any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 2001-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-016 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 5.02: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
5.02.001   Definitions
   
5.02.005   Sewer permit required
   
5.02.007   Sewer lateral: operation and maintenance
   
5.02.010   [Reserved]
   
5.02.015   [Reserved]
   
5.02.020   Connection specifications
   
5.02.025   Connection to public disposal system mandatory; exceptions
   
5.02.030   Sewer excavation requirements
   
5.02.035   Sewer user's service charges
   
5.02.040   Notice of public hearing
   
5.02.045   Temporary connections to City of Los Angeles
Sewerage Facilities Connection Requirements
   
5.02.200   Definitions
   
5.02.205   Undedicated streets
   
5.02.210   House connection sewer requirement
   
5.02.215   Determining sewerage facilities charge for new tract developments
   
5.02.220   Sewerage facilities charge
   
5.02.225   House sewer and other types of connections; permit requirements
   
5.02.230   Permit exemptions
   
5.02.235   Duration and revocation of permits
   
5.02.240   Permit and inspection fees
   
5.02.245   Liability insurance and deposit requirements
   
5.02.250   Exemptions from liability insurance and deposit requirements
   
5.02.255   Sewerage facilities charge for sewer connections
   
5.02.260   Scope of permit; compliance
   
5.02.265   Bonded or special sewers; application and fees
   
5.02.270   Refund from bonded sewer charges
   
5.02.275   Sewerage Facilities Fund
   
5.02.280   Sewer Construction and Maintenance Fund
   
5.02.285   Tapping sewers, storm drains and catch basins
   
5.02.290   Emergency excavations
   
5.02.295   Accounts; issuance of refunds
   
5.02.300   Permit fee exemptions
   
5.02.305   Public school exemption
Industrial Sewage
   
5.02.400   Purpose
   
5.02.405   Definitions
   
5.02.410   Policy regarding liquid waste discharge and establishing industrial
waste discharge regulations and fees
   
5.02.415   Permit for industrial wastewater discharge
   
5.02.420   Violations; penalty
   
5.02.425   Liability for damages caused by prohibited wastewater discharge
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 5.02.001 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this Chapter.
   DIRECTOR. The City's Public Works Director/ City Engineer or his/her
designee.
   DIVISION. The Engineering Division of the Department of Public Works.
   SEWER LATERAL or HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER. The pipe, as described in §
5.02.020 and §
5.02.260, respectively, used for conveying sewage from a facility's plumbing to
the public sewer system, not including the connecting wye, "T", saddle or other
structure used to physically connect to the public sewer system.
(Ord. No. 2004-009 § 4 (part))
§ 5.02.005 SEWER PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain any connection with
a public sewer without a permit to make such connection, obtained from the
Division of Public Works.
('65 Code, § 29-1)
§ 5.02.007 SEWER LATERAL: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The owner of the facility and plumbing to which the sewer lateral is
connected is obligated to maintain the sewer lateral to ensure public health
and safety, and proper flow of sewerage from the facility.
(Ord. No. 2004-009 § 4 (part))
§ 5.02.010 [RESERVED]
§ 5.02.015 [RESERVED]
§ 5.02.020 CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   Every connection made with any public sewer shall be made in the following
manner, utilizing the materials specified:
   A.   All pipe shall be first-class, vitrified, salt-glazed, socket pipe four
or six inches in internal diameter, and in pieces of two feet in length as
specified in each permit.
   B.   Proper bends shall be used in connecting the pipe leading to the house
with the Y. Every such bend shall have an internal diameter of four or six
inches, as may be so specified.
   C.   The material used shall be equal in quality and the manner of laying
shall be the same as required by the specifications for public sewers in the
City.
   D.   The grade shall be straight from the property line to the public sewer
and shall have a fall of not less than one foot in fifty feet, unless otherwise
permitted by the Division of Public Works.
   E.   The pipe must be at least three and one-half feet (3½') below the
established grade of the street where such pipe crosses the property line. In
all cases the line of pipe must be straight from the property line to the bend
of the Y.
   F.   Where Y's cannot be found, a new Y provided with a sleeve or collar of
proper dimensions shall be inserted and carefully connected with the pipe sewer
by means of Oakum and cement or other material approved by the Division of
Public Works, where the diameter of such sewer does not exceed ten inches. All
work herein mentioned shall be done to the satisfaction of the Division of
Public Works, and all excavations and back-filling shall be as required by the
specifications for public sewers in the City.
('65 Code, § 29-2)
§ 5.02.025 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC DISPOSAL SYSTEM MANDATORY; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be mandatory to connect to an available public sewer, except where
an adequate private disposal system has been continuously in operation since
October 20, 1954, and has not been ordered abandoned by the Department of
Health. No private disposal system shall be permitted where a public disposal
system is available for use.
('65 Code, § 29-3) (Ord. No. CS-239)
§ 5.02.030 SEWER EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to excavate or construct any sewer treatment works or
to construct or maintain any sewer pipes or conduits used for the treatment of
sewage or for the discharge or conveyance of sewage, or related substance, so
that such sewage or other similar substance would be conveyed into any ditch,
stream, creek or channel or into any subterranean waters of the City, unless a
permit has been obtained therefor from the City Council upon a showing by the
Director of Public Works that such construction and operations will not be
materially detrimental to the public welfare.
('65 Code, § 29-4) (Ord. No. 516)
§ 5.02.035 SEWER USER'S SERVICE CHARGES.
   A.   The City Council by resolution shall establish a system of sewer user's
service charges which shall provide that each parcel of property shall pay its
proportionate share of the costs for operation, maintenance, repair and
improvements of the City sewerage system.
   B.   Annually, before July 1, the City Engineer shall make and file with the
City Clerk a report which sets forth the amount of money necessary to pay the
sewerage system costs and the proportionate share of the cost for each parcel
of property in the city.
   C.   The City Clerk shall mail written notice to each person, as disclosed
by the last equalized assessment roll, owning property described in the report
setting forth the sewer service charge for each person's property and the time
and place a public hearing will be held by the City Council to consider
objections and protests to the City Engineer's report. The notice shall be
mailed at least ten days before the hearing.
   D.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall allow or
overrule any objections and modify the report if it is deemed necessary. By
resolution the City Council shall then confirm the report and thereupon the
charge against each parcel shall be a special assessment and lien on that
parcel. The decision of the City Council as expressed in the resolution is
final.
   E.   By resolution the City Council may enact additional regulations for
further implementing the establishment and collection of the sewer user's
service charge for the purpose of properly assessing each parcel of real
property in the City its proportionate share of said costs, provided the City
Council may by such resolution make provisions to avoid payment of the
proportionate share by the Culver City Unified School District.
   F.   A certified copy of the resolution and report shall be filed with the
County Auditor on or before August 10. The County Auditor shall enter each
assessment on the County tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The assessment
shall be collected at the time and in the manner of county property taxes and
the laws relating to the levy collection and enforcement of County taxes apply
to such special assessments.
('65 Code, § 29-6) (Ord. CS-978 § 1)
§ 5.02.040 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   A.   If the City Council in a particular fiscal year has conducted public
hearings pursuant to notice as required by §
5.02.035 C. and confirmed the City Engineer's report in accordance with §
5.02.035 D. then the requirements for notice as set forth in §
5.02.035 C. shall not apply to hearings on report's prepared in subsequent
fiscal years, but notice by publication of the time and place of a public
hearing that will be held by the City Council to consider objections and
protests to the City Engineer's report shall be adequate.
   B.   Publication shall be in a newspaper generally circulated within the
City of Culver City and designated by the City Council, and shall be in
compliance with Cal. Govt. Code § 6066.
('65 Code, § 29-7) (Ord. No. CS-993 § 1)
§ 5.02.045 TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS TO CITY OF LOS ANGELES.
   When sewer lines to be constructed in any street, lane, alley, or other
public place within the City, and bordering on the City of Los Angeles, have
been completed, all house connections on property abutting on such street,
lane, alley or public place, temporarily connected to the sewer lines of the
City of Los Angeles under the terms of the Inter-City Sewer Contract between
the two cities, shall, within 30 days' notice so to do from the City Engineer's
Office of City, be disconnected from said sewer line of Los Angeles and
connected to the City sewer line.
('65 Code, § 30-51) (Ord. No. CS-183)
SEWERAGE FACILITIES CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 5.02.200 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, the following words and phrases are
defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set out, unless it shall be
apparent from the context that they have a different meaning:
   AVERAGE DAILY FLOW. The number of gallons of sewage discharged into the
public sewers during a 24-hour period.
   BONDED SEWER. Any public sewer within the territorial limits of the City of
Culver City as they now exist for which construction thereof was not directly
assessed against the property in accordance with benefits or paid for by the
present or prior owners of the connecting property.
   BONDED SEWER HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER. Any house connection sewer or portion
thereof from a lot, or part of a lot, to a bonded sewer located directly in
front, rear, or at the side of such lot, or part of such lot.
   CONSTRUCTION. The acquisition of any and all rights of way or real property
necessary for the performance and completion of the work referred to wherever
authority is given to the City for any construction under the provisions of
this Subchapter.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The area included within the exterior of the surrounding
walls of a building or portions thereof, exclusive of courts.
   HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER.  Any sewer pipe line, or portion thereof,
constructed in a street, alley, walk, or other public place or in a sewer
easement granted to the City and connecting, or proposed to connect, any lot or
part of a lot with any public sewer.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE SEWER CONNECTION.  Any house connection sewer, or portion
thereof, used in the disposal of any and all liquid or water borne waste from
industrial or commercial processes except domestic sewage.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE STORM DRAIN CONNECTION.  Any storm drain connection
carrying or intended to carry industrial waste from any industrial
manufacturing, processing, or servicing establishment within Culver City.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. An interceptor sewer is a collecting sewer that
intercepts and collects the sewage from a number of lateral or local public
sewers.
   LOT. Any piece or parcel of land, as bounded, defined or shown upon the
latest map, plat or deed recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Los
Angeles County, provided, however, that in the event any building or
improvements appurtenant to said building covers more area than a LOT as herein
defined, the term LOT shall be deemed to be and include all such pieces or
parcels of land upon which said buildings or improvements are wholly or partly
located.
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum five minute rate of sewage flow to be generated from
the premises as estimated by the City Engineer.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer, other than a house connection sewer, which has been
constructed in a public street, alley, walk, or other public place, or in a
sewer easement, and is a part of the public sewer system of the City of Culver
City.
   SPECIAL HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER. Any house connection sewer from a lot, or
part of a lot, which does not have a public sewer directly in front, rear, or
at the side of such lot, or part of such lot, and which has not been directly
assessed for a public sewer.
   SPECIAL DRAINAGE CONNECTION. Any house connection sewer or storm drain
connection from any swimming pool, wading pool, fountain, pond, tank, vat or
receptacle which receives or disposes of rain water or surface water for which
a permit is required.
   STORM DRAIN CONNECTION.  Any pipe line, or portion thereof, constructed in a
street, alley, walk, or other public place, or in an easement granted to the
City, and connecting or proposed to connect any lot or part of a lot with any
storm drain.
('65 Code, § 29-10) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(1))
§ 5.02.205 UNDEDICATED STREETS.
   No person shall connect any sewer which has been or may hereafter be
constructed in any street, prior to the dedication and acceptance of such
street by the City Council, with any public sewer unless such sewer has been
laid under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Works and in accordance with the specifications for public sewers adopted by
the City Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk, and in accordance
with plans and profiles approved by the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 29-11) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(2))
§ 5.02.210 HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER REQUIREMENT.
   Not more than one lot shall be connected to any one house connection sewer.
('65 Code, § 29-12) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(3))
§ 5.02.215 DETERMINING SEWERAGE FACILITIES CHARGE FOR NEW TRACT DEVELOPMENTS.
   A.   Whenever real property tributary to the City sewerage system that can
be served by existing sewers, or by the construction of an off-site sewer not
longer than one mile to an available assured outlet sewer, whether financed or
otherwise, is included within the borders of a new tract map, sewers, if not
existing, shall be constructed within or adjacent to the tracts to serve each
lot, and as a condition of the approval of the tentative map of each tract and
prior to recording of each such tract map, a fee which shall be determined by
the Director of Public Works based upon rates established in §
5.02.220 hereafter referred to as the sewerage facilities charge, shall be paid
by the owner thereof to the City. If the Director of Public Works determines
that it would be contrary to the public welfare and interest to assume the
responsibility of providing the necessary off-site or outlet sewers as required
herein, he shall so recommend to the City Council for its final determination.
Where a tract map for an industrial, commercial or multiple dwelling tract is
to be recorded but the tract is to be developed at some future time, the
Director shall charge a fee in accordance with a resolution adopted pursuant to
§
5.02.220 when such tract is developed. Provided, however, that where it is
determined by the Director of Public Works that a particular tract or parcel of
land is being subdivided or re-subdivided solely for the purpose of absorbing a
vacated street, for reverting an earlier tract to acreage, or for converting an
existing multiple dwelling to a condominium, and not for development purposes,
that tract or parcel of land shall be exempt from the requirement that a
sewerage facilities charge be paid therefor.
   B.   In determining the sewerage facilities charge, the Director of Public
Works shall:
      1.   Reduce the sewerage facilities charge when the owner demonstrates
that the property has paid special assessment for an interceptor sewer to which
it may connect directly or indirectly, by the amount of said special
assessment.
      2.   Reduce the charge by all or part of the amount paid as a
contributing property to the construction of an off-site sewer to serve the
property prior to the requirement by the City that such charge shall be paid.
      3.   Provide a credit for any amount previously paid as an acreage charge
or a sewerage facilities charge.
   C.   The Director may permit a subdivide to install off-site sewers in lieu
of all or part of the sewerage facilities charge based on the actual cost of
said off-site sewer. Should the actual cost of such off-site sewer be less than
the sewerage facilities charge required by Subsection A. hereof, the difference
between such actual cost and said sewerage facilities charge shall be paid by
the subdivide to the City for deposit in an account in the General Fund
expendable for the financing of the construction of outlet sewers for which the
City is obligated by accepting charges in accordance with this ordinance.
   D.   The Council may authorize the subdivide or other property owner, by
contract with the City, to construct off-site sewers costing in excess of the
sewerage facilities charge required by Subsection A. hereof and, subsequent to
the construction and acceptance of said off-site sewer, to reimburse said
subdivide or property owner the difference between the actual cost of said off-
site sewer and the sewerage facilities charge. If the sewerage facilities
charge has been paid by the subdivide or property owner prior to entering into
the contract with the City to construct an off-site sewer or prior to
submission by the owner of evidence justifying reduction of the charge for any
property in accordance with this section, the Council may authorize the refund
of all or part of the sewerage facilities charge previously paid.
   E.   Actual cost of off-site sewers as used in Subsections C. and D. shall
be determined from sealed bids, received and opened by the Director of Public
Works, after publicly advertising therefor, plus engineering and incidental
costs not to exceed ten (10) percent of the accepted bid price for the
performance of the work.
   F.   In those cases where a sewerage facilities charge is paid, the City
assumes the responsibility of providing the necessary off-site or outlet sewers
when sewage disposal facilities are available and when connection to the City
sewerage system is deemed to be necessary by the City.
   G.   Whenever good planning and engineering practice requires that sanitary
sewers of greater size or depth than those required for the servicing of the
property immediately concerned be constructed within or adjacent to the
subdivision, the additional cost of providing sewers within or adjacent to the
subdivision in accordance with the City's requirements of larger size or
greater depth than that required by the property immediately concerned shall be
considered the same as or in addition to the cost of constructing an off-site
sewer as provided in Subsections C. and D. hereof.
   H.   Subdivisions other than those included in Subsection A. hereof may be:
      1.   Approved without the construction of sewers or the payment of the
sewerage facilities charge where the County Health Officer and the City
Engineer determine that ample area is available for private sewage disposal,
where soil, ground water and other factors are favorable. The sewerage
facilities charge shall be applicable to lots and parcels in these subdivisions
when connections to future sewers are requested or required.
      2.   Permitted or required to construct sewers within the tract and pay
the sewerage facilities charge upon the determination by the Council, upon
advice of the Director of Public Works, that existing development or trends
justify the City assuming the responsibility of providing the connecting
sewers.
('65 Code, § 29-13) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(4); Ord. No. 2007-002 § 1)
§ 5.02.220 SEWERAGE FACILITIES CHARGE.
   A.   The City Council shall establish, by resolution, the sewerage
facilities charges required by this Subchapter, based upon a fair and equitable
system of charges representing the costs to have new connectors to the
wastewater system pay a proportionate share of the current value of the
existing system.
   B.   The sewerage facilities charges shall be reviewed annually, and if
deemed appropriate, may be adjusted by an increment based on changes in the
“Engineering News Record” Construction Cost Index or other recognized cost of
service allocation methodology.
   C.   The City Engineer may require the owner of property to submit plans and
such other information as necessary to determine the applicable sewerage
facilities charge.
('65 Code, § 29-14) (Ord. No. CS-776 § 1; Ord. No. 90-009 § 1)
§ 5.02.225 HOUSE SEWER AND OTHER TYPES OF CONNECTIONS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   No person shall make, construct, alter, or repair any house connection
sewer, bonded house connection sewer, special house connection sewer,
industrial waste sewer connection, industrial waste storm drain connection,
storm drain connection, or special drainage connection, or any portion of any
such sewer or storm drain connections, including sampling manholes, or connect
any house sewer, soil pipe, or plumbing to any such sewer or storm drain
connections or to a sewer or storm drain under the jurisdiction of the City of
Culver City, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the
Director of Public Works.
   B.   Persons desiring to obtain a permit for any of the purposes enumerated
in §§
5.02.225 to
5.02.285 inclusive, shall file with the Director a written application therefor
signed by the applicant, on printed forms, furnished by it for that purpose.
The application shall contain such information as the Director may require. If
it appears from the application that the work to be performed thereunder is to
be done according to the regulations contained or referred to in this
Subchapter, governing the doing of such work, a permit shall be issued upon
payment of the permit charges required or referred to in §
5.02.240.
   C.   The Director before granting any permit in accordance with the
provisions of §§
5.02.225 to
5.02.285 inclusive, which will necessitate any excavation in, upon or under any
State highway in this City or the making of a connection to a sewer or house
connection sewer for which a permit is also required from a County Sanitation
District, or a political subdivision other than this City, shall require such
permit to be presented for inspection.
   D.   Nothing in this Section shall be deemed or construed to require the
application for or the issuance of a permit for the purpose of removing
stoppages in any house connection sewer, except when it is necessary to replace
any part or all of such sewer connection or to excavate in any street or
sidewalk or sewer easement in connection therewith.
   E.   A permit under which an excavation, tunnel, or the laying of sewer or
storm drain pipe in any public street is contemplated will be issued only to
other departments of the City, other governmental agencies, or contractors
holding a valid contractor's license issued by the Contractors' License Board
of the State of California in the classification of A-1 General Engineering, B-
1 General Building, C-36 Plumbing, or C-42 Sewer, Sewage Disposal, Drain,
Cement Pipe Laying. Exception: A permit for making sewer connections at the
property line may be issued to any responsible person when in the opinion of
the Director, the granting of such permit will not endanger public property or
jeopardize the public's interests.
('65 Code, § 29-15) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(6))
§ 5.02.230 PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of §
5.02.225 requiring permits for the construction of house connection sewers
shall not be construed to apply to contractors constructing house connection
sewers under contracts entered into under proceedings had or taken pursuant to
any of the procedure ordinances of this City, or the County of Los Angeles, or
the Statutes of the State of California, or other contracts authorized by the
City Council, providing for the construction of such house connection sewers.
('65 Code, § 29-16) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1 (7))
§ 5.02.235 DURATION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   A.   If the work authorized by a permit issued pursuant to §§
5.02.225 to
5.02.285, inclusive, of this Subchapter, is not commenced within six (6) months
from the date of its issuance, such permit shall expire and be canceled unless
the time for commencement is extended pursuant to Subsection B. of this
Section, in which case the permit shall expire and be canceled, if the work is
not commenced, at the end of said extension of time. The City shall retain the
permit issuance fee and any charges for plan check, as set forth by resolution,
if the permit is revoked, canceled or expires. If the work authorized by a
permit is commenced, it must be prosecuted diligently to completion.
   B.   The Director may extend the time for starting or completing the work,
upon receipt of a written request. The Director may also suspend or revoke the
permit at any time in the public interest upon receipt of a written request
showing good and sufficient cause therefor by the permitted, the owner of the
affected property, or other interested party. Any such action shall not be
deemed to release any applicable insurance or surety filed pursuant to §
5.02.245.
   C.   If any person shall fail, refuse or neglect to complete all of the work
required to be done pursuant to any permit, in the time allowed thereby, or
within the period of any extension of time, if any such extension be granted,
then the Director may perform necessary work to protect the public interest and
complete the refilling and resurfacing of the excavation in the manner required
by §
5.02.260 and recover the cost of such work in any manner allowed by law.
('65 Code, § 29-17) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(8); Ord. No. 2007-002 § 2)
§ 5.02.240 PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.
   Before granting any permit pursuant to the provisions of §
5.02.225, except applications filed by a department of this City, the Director
shall require the payment by the applicant therefor such fees as are required
by City ordinances and/or resolutions.
('65 Code, § 29-18) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1 (9))
§ 5.02.245 LIABILITY INSURANCE AND DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Liability insurance.
      1.   Required. Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter, a permit
required by §
5.02.225 under which an excavation, tunnel or the laying of sewer or storm
drain pipe in any public street, public place or public easement is
contemplated, will not be issued until the applicant has filed with the City
Engineer a policy of protective liability insurance in which the City has been
named as insured or coinsured with the permitted. The policy of insurance shall
insure the City and its officers and employees while acting within the scope of
their duties, against all claims arising out of or in connection with the
operations of the permitted, or any contractor or subcontractor of the
permitted, pursuant to the permit.
      2.   Amounts. The policy of insurance shall provide coverage as follows:
         Bodily Injury      $100,000 each person
         Bodily Injury      $300,000 each accident
         Property Damage   $50,000 each accident
      3.   Coverage. Such policy of insurance shall provide coverage at least
as broad as that provided in the Standard Form approved by the National Bureau
of Casualty Underwriters, together with such endorsements as are required to
cover the risks involved.
   B.   Deposits.
      1.   Required. Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter, a permit
required by §
5.02.225 under which an excavation, tunnel or the laying of sewer or storm
drain pipe in any public street or public easement is contemplated, will not be
issued until the applicant has deposited with the Director of Public Works not
less than $500 in cash which shall remain on deposit with the Director for not
less than six months from the date of the last permit issued to the depositor
thereof. Such deposit will be held to insure the faithful performance of the
work and the payment of all charges required by §§
5.02.225 to
5.02.285 inclusive, and the Director is hereby empowered to deduct from the
cash deposit all sums due for charges hereunder and for any and all damages
accruing to this City by reason of faulty or defective work of the permitted.
      2.   Surety bond in lieu of deposit. Whenever in this Section a cash
deposit in the amount of $500 or over is required, the applicant may provide in
lieu of such cash deposit, a good and sufficient bond in an amount equal to the
amount of such cash deposit, payable to this City, by and executed by the
applicant as the principal and by a reliable surety company satisfactory to the
City. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the payment of all charges required
by §§
5.02.225 to
5.02.285 inclusive, and the faithful and proper performance of work upon the
same terms as those required by such cash deposit in lieu of which such bond is
executed. The Director is hereby empowered to enforce collections under said
bond for all sums due for charges hereunder and for any and all damages
accruing to this City by reasons of faulty or defective work of the permitted.
('65 Code, § 29-19) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(10))
§ 5.02.250 EXEMPTIONS FROM LIABILITY INSURANCE AND DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS.
   The Federal Government, the State, every county, city and county, municipal
corporation, irrigation district, school district, district established by law,
and any political or administrative subdivision of the State or Federal
Government, will not be required to make a deposit or to post a policy of
protective liability insurance as otherwise required by §§
5.02.240 and
5.02.245.
('65 Code, § 29-20) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(11))
§ 5.02.255 SEWERAGE FACILITIES CHARGE FOR SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   A.   Before granting a permit to connect any lot or parcel to a public sewer
or house connection sewer pursuant to the provisions of §
5.02.225, except applications filed by a department of this City and
applications for permits to repair or replace existing sewer connections which
repair or replacement is unrelated to any new construction or to new use or
occupancy, the Director shall require, in addition to all other charges and
fees imposed by §§
5.02.225 to
5.02.285 inclusive, the payment by the applicant therefor of a sewerage
facilities charge fixed in accordance with §
5.02.220. The Director shall provide a credit in the amount of any fee or
charge previously paid as outlet or off-site sewer charges, or sewerage
facilities charge, whether paid in money or by the construction of such off-
site sewer.
   B.   A sewerage facilities charge based upon the rates established in §
5.02.220 of this Subchapter, shall also be imposed as follows:
      1.   Addition to existing residence. Where an addition is made to an
existing residential occupancy except a single family dwelling or a duplex, a
charge shall be imposed for the additional dwelling units created and for the
existing dwelling units which are enlarged by the addition of bedrooms; no
charge shall be imposed for an addition to a single family dwelling or to a
duplex;
      2.   Addition to commercial building. Where an addition is made to an
existing commercial building, a charge shall be imposed for the additional
gross floor area created.
      3.   Addition to industrial building. Where an addition is made to an
existing industrial building, a charge shall be imposed based on the increased
peak flow;
      4.   Change of use or occupancy. Where the use or occupancy of an
existing building is changed, a sewerage facilities charge shall be imposed
based upon such new use or occupancy. Provided, however, that a credit shall be
allowed for any acreage fee or sewerage facilities charge previously paid for
such property, and for any off-site sewers previously paid for either in cash
or by construction thereof to serve such property, not to exceed the sewerage
facilities charge imposed for the new use or occupancy.
      5.    Replacement of building or structure.
         a.   Charge imposed. Where an existing building or structure is
completely or substantially replaced with a new building or structure, a
sewerage facilities charge shall be imposed thereon. Provided, however, that a
credit shall be allowed for any acreage fee or sewerage facilities charge
previously paid for such property, and for any off-site sewers previously paid
for either in cash or by construction thereof to serve such property, not to
exceed the sewerage facilities charge imposed on the new building or structure.
         b.   Exceptions. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply, and
no sewerage facilities charge for a replacement building or structure shall be
imposed, if each of the following conditions are established:
            (1)   The replacement is of a building or structure which was
wholly or substantially destroyed by fire, flood, landslide, earthquake or
other similar cause;
            (2)   The building or structure is replaced by the party who owned
the destroyed structure; and
            (3)   The replacing building or structure is for the same use and
is of approximately the same area or will contain approximately the same number
of units, dwelling units, rooms, seats, beds, or students, or will generate
approximately the same peak flow, whichever measure is applicable to the
particular occupancy as set forth in the table which is a part of §
5.02.220.
   C.   The Council, may, in the exercise of its sound discretion, and upon the
advice of the Director of Public Works, reduce the sewerage facilities charge
for any property for which off-site public sewers are constructed beyond the
limits of said property, by all or part of the actual cost of the construction
of said off-site public sewer.
('65 Code, § 29-21) (Ord. No. CS-666§ 1(12))
§ 5.02.260 SCOPE OF PERMIT; COMPLIANCE.
   A.   No person having obtained a permit from the Director of Public Works
shall construct, alter or repair any house connection sewer or any portion of
any house connection sewer, or make a connection to any public sewer, or house
connection sewer, pursuant to any such permit, at any place other than that
designated thereon, or fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any requirement
contained or referred to in the Culver City Municipal Code.
   B.   At all times, while the work under any such permit is in progress, the
original of such permit must be kept at the place of the work and must, on
demand, be exhibited to the Director or to his inspectors, agents or
representatives, or to any police officer.
('65 Code, § 29-22) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(13))
§ 5.02.265 BONDED OR SPECIAL SEWERS; APPLICATION AND FEES.
   A.   Persons desiring a permit to connect to or construct a Special House
Connection Sewer or Bonded Sewer House Connection Sewer shall make written
application to the Director of Public Works, giving such information as the
Director may require. The Director may issue a permit to make such sewer
connection upon payment of the fees provided in §
5.02.240 or this Subchapter.
   B.   When the shape of a lot is other than the usual rectangular shape or
unusual in area, and the strict adherence to the above mentioned provision
would require a property owner to pay an amount not commensurate with the
benefits to be received, the provisions of this Section as to the limits of the
frontage of a lot to be assessed may be modified by the City Council.
   C.   Nothing in this Section shall be deemed or construed to apply to the
issuing of a permit for the construction of Bonded Sewer House Connection
Sewers if the property sought to be connected, although abutting on a Bonded
Sewer, has been duly assessed for a public sewer constructed in the front, rear
or at the side of such property.
   D.   Upon giving such information as the Director may require on forms to be
furnished for the purpose, payment of the charges presently prescribed by
Subsection A. of this Section, may be made in advance of the application for,
or the issuance of, the permit to make such connection to any bonded sewer,
and, upon such payment having been made, the applicant for the permit to
connect shall be entitled to such permit upon payment of the fees prescribed in
City ordinances and/or resolutions.
('65 Code, § 29-23) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(14); Ord. No. 2007-002 § 3)
§ 5.02.270 REFUND FROM BONDED SEWERS.
   A.   In any case any special or bonded sewer charges as provided for in §
5.02.265 be paid and thereafter a public sewer is constructed to serve such lot
and such lot is assessed for the construction thereof, the owner of such lot,
upon presentation of a written application to the Director, shall be entitled
to have repaid to him from the City Treasury, in accordance with ordinance or
current provisions, the charge paid to the City under §
5.02.265. The original receipt for said charge must accompany the application
for refund, or if it is lost, an affidavit must be filed with the Director
setting up the circumstances thereof in a manner acceptable to the Director. If
it is found that a refund should be made, such refund shall be made by the City
Treasurer upon written instructions from the Director.
   B.   No refund shall be made of money collected pursuant to §
5.02.265 hereof, which must be paid to a school district or a department of
this City, other than the Department of Public Works, in accordance with any
ordinance of this City.
('65 Code, § 29-24) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(15))
§ 5.02.275 SEWERAGE FACILITIES FUND.
   A.   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Sewerage Facilities
Fund.
   B.   The Director is hereby authorized to use monies available in the
Sewerage Facilities Fund for financing the construction of outlet sewers for
which the City is obligated by accepting charges in accordance with §
5.02.220, subject to Council approval.
('65 Code, § 29-25) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(16))
§ 5.02.280 SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE FUND.
   There is hereby established a special fund in the City Treasury entitled
Sewer Construction and Maintenance Fund. The Council shall designate by
ordinance those monies which shall be deposited on a regular basis into such
fund. Monies deposited into the Sewer Construction and Maintenance Fund shall
not be subject to reversion to the Reserve Fund. All monies received and
deposited into the Sewer Construction and Maintenance Fund, except to the
extent their use is otherwise authorized by ordinance, shall be expended as
provided in the budget or as may be authorized by the City Council by
resolution for the purpose of financing the cost of acquisition, construction,
reconstruction, operation, maintenance, alteration, replacement and repair of
property and facilities for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage
for the City of Culver City. Provided, however, that whenever monies received
by the City subject to limitation imposed by the City upon the use thereof have
been placed into such fund, such monies may be expended only in accordance with
said limitations. The Director of Public Works shall cause the necessary
demands to be drawn upon the monies so approved for expenditure.
('65 Code, § 29-26) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(17))
§ 5.02.285 TAPPING SEWERS, STORM DRAINS AND CATCH BASINS.
   A.   When any person finds it necessary to construct any connection to a
sewer, storm drain, or catch basin at a point where no structural opening
exists for such connection, he shall apply to the Director of Public Works for
authorization to make or to have such connection made, accompanying such
application with the fee hereinafter specified.
   B.   Whenever the Director finds that it is necessary for any such person to
construct any such storm drain or catch basin connection at a point where no
structural opening exits therefor, the applicant must obtain permits and pay
applicable fees. Unless otherwise specified by the Director, the connection
shall be made in the presence of an inspector acting under the authority of the
Director, and shall conform to any special instruction of the City Engineer or
said inspector.
   C.   Whenever the Director finds that it is necessary for any such person to
construct a connection to any sewer of 18 inches or less in diameter, where no
“Y” or “T” spur branch, or other structural opening exists, the contractor or
person doing such work shall excavate to the sewer at the point where the
connection is to be made, and sewer maintenance forces of the City may then cut
the required hole in the sewer top and install a saddle furnished by the City
for the connection.
   D.   Tap connections to clay pipe sewers over 18 inches in diameter shall be
made as stated in Subsection C. In the tapping of any interceptor or outfall
sewer constructed of brick and concrete, or concrete, or any sewer with
protective lining, the permitted shall pay to the City the total cost of the
work done in connection therewith.
   E.   All work herein referred to shall be done in a good, workmanlike manner
under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
   F.   The provisions of Subsection C. and D. of this Section shall be
applicable only to connections authorized by permits issued in accordance with
§
5.02.225 of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 29-27) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(18); Ord. No. 2007-002 § 4)
§ 5.02.290 EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS.
   Nothing in this Subchapter shall be construed to prevent any person
maintaining any house connection sewer in any street, by virtue of any law,
ordinance or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for the
preservation of life or property, when such necessity arises during such hours
as the offices of the City are closed; provided, that the person making such
excavation shall obtain a permit therefor within four (4) hours after the
offices of the City are first opened subsequent to the making of such
excavation.
('65 Code, § 29-28) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(19))
§ 5.02.295 ACCOUNTS; ISSUANCE OF REFUNDS.
   If it is found that a refund should be made pursuant to the provisions of §§
5.02.215 to
5.02.285 inclusive, such refund shall be authorized by the Director from the
fund in which the amount to be refunded was deposited, subject to City Council
approval.
('65 Code, § 29-29) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(20))
§ 5.02.300 PERMIT FEE EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   Waiver of fee; war purposes only. Whenever any officer, agency or
instrumentality of the United States of America, engaged in the performance of
duties directly related to the prosecution of a war in which the United States
is engaged, applies to the Director for a permit for any of the purposes
mentioned in §§
5.02.225 to
5.02.285 inclusive, the Director shall waive the payment of any permit or
inspection fees, deposits or special charges otherwise required by this
Subchapter, and may modify the requirements of §
5.02.260, if the Director finds that the proposed installation is designed and
intended to be used to serve premises or facilities owned or operated by the
Federal Government and used principally for purposes directly related to the
prosecution of a war.
   B.   Effect of grant. The grant of permission to make any such installation,
extended under this Section, shall not be construed to confer any permanent or
vested right to the use of the streets or public property of this City, or to
maintain, for a period of more than six (6) months after the termination of a
war, any installation made hereunder or any connection with a public sewer,
except with the consent of the City Council, which may be withdrawn, or
extended, upon such terms as the Council may then or at any time thereafter
impose. The use, directly or indirectly of any installation made pursuant to
this section by anyone other than the applicant and those persons, firms or
corporations which have equitably participated with the Federal Government in
the cost of said sewer construction or installation as determined by the
Director from certified copies of existing contracts between said parties and
the Federal Government, shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the
City Council may at any time impose.
   C.   Conveyance of title to right-of-way public sewer. In the event that the
Federal Government and the other parties in interest, as mentioned in
Subsection B. above, shall offer to convey all their respective right, title
and interest to any sewer constructed hereunder, including all necessary rights
of way for sewer purposes, without cost to the City of Culver City, and if the
Director finds that the sewer may properly be used as a public sewer, to the
substantial advantage of the City, then the Director is authorized to accept
said sewer as a public sewer at such time as the City Council has accepted all
necessary easements therefor and the parties in interest, above-mentioned, will
be entitled to continue to use said sewer facilities without the payment to the
City of any permit or other special fees or charges except those required by §
5.02.240.
   D.   City Engineer approval required. No permit shall be granted hereunder
unless plans and specifications of the proposed installation have first been
submitted to and approved by the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 29-30) (Ord. No. CS-666 § 1(21))
§ 5.02.305 PUBLIC SCHOOL EXEMPTION.
   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Subchapter and specifically
notwithstanding §
5.02.220, public schools shall be exempt from the sewerage facilities charges
set forth in §
5.02.220 of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 29-31) (Ord. No. CS-719 § 1)
INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE
§ 5.02.400 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subchapter is to provide for the maximum possible
beneficial public use of the City's facilities through adequate regulation of
industrial wastewater discharges, and to provide procedures for complying with
requirements, including Federal pretreatment requirements, placed upon the City
by other regulatory agencies.
('65 Code, § 29-5 A.) (Ord. No. CS-535; Ord. No. CS-969 § 1)
§ 5.02.405 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water carried wastes produced from non-commercial
or non-industrial activities and which result from normal human living
processes.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. All water carried wastes and wastewater of the
community excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water, and shall
include all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing,
institutional, commercial, agricultural, or other operation where the
wastewater discharged includes significant quantities of wastes of nonhuman
origin.
('65 Code, § 29-5 B.) (Ord. No. CS-535; Ord. No. CS-969 § 1)
§ 5.02.410 POLICY REGARDING LIQUID WASTE DISCHARGE AND ESTABLISHING INDUSTRIAL
WASTE DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND FEES.
   The following policies apply to all liquid waste discharges within the
City's boundaries and to other discharges that are tributary to the City's
facilities.
   A.   Generally, liquid wastes originating within the City will be removed by
the City's sewerage system provided the wastes will not:
      1.   Damage structures;
      2.   Create nuisances such as odors;
      3.   Menace public health;
      4.   Impose unreasonable collection, treatment or disposal costs on the
City;
      5.   Interfere with wastewater treatment processes;
      6.   Exceed quality requirements set by regulatory governmental agencies;
or
      7.   Detrimentally affect the local environment.
   B.   The highest and best use of the City sewerage system is the conveyance,
treatment and disposal of domestic wastewater. The use of the City's sewerage
system for industrial wastewater discharges is subject to additional regulation
by the City.
   C.   To comply with stated policies of the State and Federal Government and
to permit the City (or its contracted disposal agency) to meet increasingly
higher standards of treatment plant effluent quality, provisions of the County
of Los Angeles Code, Title 20, Chapter 20.20, Sections 20.20.010 though
20.20.420, Definitions; Chapter 20.24, Sections 20.24.010 though 20.24.210,
General Provisions; Chapter 20.32, Sections 20.32.440 and 20.32.640 through
20.32.690, Sanitary Sewers; and Chapter 20.36, Sections 20.36.010 though
20.36.550, Industrial Waste, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be
referred to as the "Industrial Waste Code of the City of Culver City." One copy
of the Industrial Waste Code of the City of Culver City shall be kept on file
in the Culver City Clerk's Office for public inspection. In addition, whenever
the Industrial Waste Code of the City of Culver City identifies the "County
Engineer" as having the authority to make a determination, interpretation and/
or vary from the provisions of the Code, no action shall be taken until the
Culver City Public Works Director/City Engineer or her/his designee has
expressly approved such modification.
   D.   Recovery and reuse procedures established by industrial wastewater
dischargers to meet the limitations set on their discharges will be preferred
by the City over those procedures designed solely to meet wastewater discharge
limitations.
   E.   Optimum use of the facilities of the City may require that certain
industrial wastewater be discharged during periods of low flow in the sewerage
system of the City.
('65 Code, § 29-5 C.) (Ord. No. CS-535; Ord. No. CS-969 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-018
§ 2)
§ 5.02.415 PERMIT FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE.
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial
wastewater directly or indirectly to sewerage facilities owned by the City
without a valid unsuspended and unprovoked permit for industrial waste
discharge issued in accordance with regulations and procedures established by
the Industrial Waste Code of the City of Culver City.
   B.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial
wastewater directly or indirectly to sewerage facilities owned by the City in
violation of any condition of a permit for industrial waste discharge or in
violation of any regulation for industrial waste discharge established by the
Industrial Waste Code of the City of Culver City.
('65 Code, § 29-5 D.) (Ord. No. CS-535; Ord. No. CS-969 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-018
§ 3)
§ 5.02.420 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   Every person who violates any provision of this Subchapter or any regulation
of industrial wastewater discharge established by a resolution of the City
Council, including any condition of any permit issued in accordance with such
regulations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months or a
fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or both.
('65 Code, § 29-5 E.) (Ord. No. CS-535; Ord. No. CS-969 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-018
§ 4)
§ 5.02.425 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES CAUSED BY PROHIBITED WASTEWATER DISCHARGE.
   Any industrial wastewater discharger who discharges or causes the discharge
of prohibited waste waters which cause damage to City facilities, detrimental
effects on treatment processes or any other damages to the City shall be liable
to the City for all damages occasioned thereby, including any penalty assessed
against the City pursuant to Federal law and as a result of such prohibited
discharge.
('65 Code, § 29-5 F.) (Ord. No. CS-535; Ord. No. CS-969 § 1)
Editor's note:
   The Subchapter (§§ 5.02.500 - 5.02.555) entitled "Stormwater Management and
Discharge Control" was rescinded pursuant to City Council action, dated
November 11, 2002. In its place, two weeks later, on November 25, 2002, the
City Council approved and adopted Ord. No. 2002-014, which added to the Code
Chapter 5.05, entitled "Stormwater and Urban Runoff Pollution Control."
CHAPTER 5.03: WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE PROGRAM
Section
   
5.03.005   Title
   
5.03.010   Findings
   
5.03.015   Declaration of purpose and intent
   
5.03.020   Definitions
   
5.03.025   Application
   
5.03.030   Permanent water conservation requirements; prohibition against waste
   
5.03.035   Level 1 Water Supply Shortage
   
5.03.040   Level 2 Water Supply Shortage
   
5.03.045   Level 3 Water Supply Shortage; emergency conditions
   
5.03.050   Procedures for determination and notification of water supply
shortage
   
5.03.055   Hardship waiver
   
5.03.060   Penalties and violations
§ 5.03.005 TITLE.
   This Chapter will be known as the Culver City Water Conservation and Water
Supply Shortage Program.
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part))
§ 5.03.010 FINDINGS.
   A.   A reliable minimum supply of potable water is essential to the public
health, safety and welfare of the people and economy of the southern California
region.
   B.   Southern California is a semi-arid region and is largely dependent upon
imported water supplies. A growing population, climate change, environmental
concerns, and other factors in other parts of the state and western United
States, make the region highly susceptible to water supply reliability issues.
   C.   Careful water management that includes active water conservation
measures not only in times of drought, but at all times, is essential to ensure
a reliable minimum supply of water to meet current and future water supply
needs.
   D.   Cal. Const. Art. X, § 2 declares that the general welfare requires that
water resources be put to beneficial use, waste or unreasonable use or
unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and conservation of water be
fully exercised with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof.
   E.   Cal. Const. Art. X, § 7 declares that a city or county may make and
enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary and other ordinances and
regulations not in conflict with general laws.
   F.   The adoption and enforcement of a water conservation and supply
shortage program is necessary to manage the City's potable water supply in the
short- and long-term, and to avoid or minimize the effects of drought and
shortage within the City. Such program is essential to ensure a reliable and
sustainable minimum supply of water for the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part))
§ 5.03.015 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   A.   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a water conservation and
supply shortage program that will reduce water consumption within the City
through conservation, enable effective water supply planning, assure reasonable
and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient
use of water within the City to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of
water shortage to the greatest extent possible.
   B.   This Chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards
intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency at all times, and
further establishes three levels of water supply shortage response actions to
be implemented during times of declared water shortage or declared water
shortage emergency, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to
worsening drought or emergency conditions and decreasing supplies.
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part))
§ 5.03.020 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning defined in this Section:
   CITY. The City of Culver City, California.
   LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION SYSTEM. An irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray
heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated
system.
   LARGE LANDSCAPE AREAS. A lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or
combination thereof, equal to more than one acre of irrigable land.
   PERSON. Any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private
entity, governmental agency or institution, including all agencies and
departments of the City, or any other user of water provided by the Golden
State Water Company and/or the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power.
   POTABLE WATER.  Water that is suitable for drinking.
   RECYCLED WATER. The reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for
beneficial use as defined in Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 22.
   SINGLE-PASS COOLING SYSTEMS. Equipment where water is circulated only once
to cool equipment before being disposed.
('65 Code, § 29-38) (Ord. No. 90-022 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part))
§ 5.03.025 APPLICATION.
   A.   The provisions of this Chapter apply to any person within the
geographical boundaries of the City in the use of any potable water provided by
the Golden State Water Company and/or the Los Angeles Department of Water and
Power.
   B.   The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary
to protect public health and safety or for essential government services.
   C.   The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to the use of recycled
water.
   D.   The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to the use of water by
commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs,
crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale.
   E.   This Chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water.
It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or local
statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or
control of drainage or runoff.
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part))
§ 5.03.030 PERMANENT WATER CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITION AGAINST
WASTE.
   The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and
are permanent. Violations of this Section will be considered waste and an
unreasonable use of water.
   A.   Limits on watering hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or
other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Pacific Standard Time, on any day, except by use of a hand-
held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive,
self-closing, water-shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of
time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.
Watering outdoor landscaping within 48 hours after measurable precipitation is
prohibited.
   B.   Limit on watering duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape
or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system
or a watering device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more
than 10 minutes of watering per day, per station. This Subsection does not
apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very-low-flow, drip-
type irrigation systems, when no emitter produces more than two gallons of
water per hour, and weather-based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that
meet a 70% efficiency standard. Public parks and public and school playing
fields may be watered in a frequency and duration that maintains their
usability, without limitation, however, watering is prohibited between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Pacific Standards Time, on any day.
   C.   No excessive water flow or runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn,
landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive
water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley,
gutter or ditch is prohibited.
   D.   No washing down hard or paved surfaces. Washing down hard or paved
surfaces, including but not limited to, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking
areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to
alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held
bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive, self-
closing, water-shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine
equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume, high-pressure water broom.
   E.   Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or
escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user's
plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of
water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected, and in no event
more than seven days of receiving notice from the City, is prohibited.
   F.   Re-circulating water required for decorative water fountains and
decorative water features. Operating a decorative water fountain or other
decorative water feature that does not use re-circulated water is prohibited.
   G.   Limits on washing vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle,
including but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat
or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited, except by use of a hand-
held bucket or similar container, or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive,
self-closing, water-shut-off nozzle or device. This Subsection does not apply
to any commercial car washing facility.
   H.   Drinking water served upon request only. Eating or drinking
establishments, including but not limited to, a restaurant, hotel, café,
cafeteria, bar, or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or
offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person
unless expressly requested.
   I.   Commercial lodging establishments must provide guests option to decline
daily linen services. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging
establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen
laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display
notice of this option in each guest room, using clear and easily understood
language.
   J.   No installation of single-pass cooling systems.  Installation of
single-pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water
service.
   K.   No installation of non-re-circulating water systems in commercial car
wash and laundry systems. Installation of non-re-circulating water systems is
prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry
systems.
   L.   Restaurants required to use water-conserving, dish-wash spray valves.
Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, are prohibited
from using non-water-conserving, dish-wash spray valves.
   M.   Commercial car wash systems. Effective on January 1, 2012, all
commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed operational re-
circulating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement
from the City.
   N.   Pool and spa covers required. All swimming pools and spas shall be
equipped with a cover of the type that will reduce evaporation.
   O.   Irrigation prohibition. Watering ornamental turf on public street
medians is prohibited.
('65 Code, § 29-39) (Ord. No. 90-022 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part);
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2016-010 § 1)
§ 5.03.035 LEVEL 1 WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE.
   A.   Determination and declaration. A Level 1 Water Supply Shortage exists
when the City determines, at its sole discretion, that, due to drought or other
water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists
and a consumer-demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of
water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon its
declaration of a Level 1 Water Supply Shortage condition, the City will
implement the mandatory Level 1 conservation measures identified in this
Section.
   B.   Additional water conservation measures. In addition to the prohibited
uses of water identified in §
5.03.030, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared
Level 1 Water Supply Shortage:
      1.   Limits on watering days.  Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape
or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week,
on a schedule that may be established and posted by the City, at the discretion
of the Director of Public Works. This provision does not apply to landscape
irrigation zones that exclusively use very-low-flow, drip-type irrigation
systems, when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This
provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held
bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive, self-
closing, water-shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for
the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.
      2.   Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks,
or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must
be repaired within 72 hours of notification by the City, unless other
arrangements are made with the City.
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2016-010 § 2)
§ 5.03.040 LEVEL 2 WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE.
   A.   Determination and declaration. A Level 2 Water Supply Shortage exists
when the City determines, at its sole discretion, that, due to drought or other
water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists
and a consumer-demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of
water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon its
declaration of a Level 2 Water Supply Shortage condition, the City will
implement the mandatory Level 2 conservation measures identified in this
Section.
   B.   Additional conservation measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of
water identified in §§
5.03.030 and
5.03.035, the following additional water conservation requirements apply during
a declared Level 2 Water Supply Shortage:
      1.   Limits on watering days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape
or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two days per week, on
a schedule that may be established and posted by the City, at the discretion of
the Director of Public Works. This provision does not apply to landscape
irrigation zones that exclusively use very-low-flow, drip-type irrigation
systems, when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This
provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held
bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive, self-
closing, water-shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for
the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.
      2.   Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks,
or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must
be repaired within 48 hours of notification by the City, unless other
arrangements are made with the City.
      3.   Limits on filling ornamental lakes or ponds.  Filling or refilling
ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain
aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant value and have been
actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a supply
shortage level under this Chapter.
      4.   Limits on washing vehicles at commercial car washing facilities.
Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to, any
automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or
not, is prohibited at a commercial car washing facility that does not utilize a
re-circulating water system to capture or reuse water.
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2015-003 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-010 § 3)
§ 5.03.045 LEVEL 3 WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE; EMERGENCY CONDITION.
   A.   Determination and declaration. A Level 3 Water Supply Shortage
condition is also referred to as an “emergency” condition. A Level 3 condition
exists when the City declares a water shortage emergency and notifies its
residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand is
necessary to maintain sufficient water supplies for public health and safety.
Upon its declaration of a Level 3 Water Supply Shortage condition, the City
will implement the mandatory Level 3 conservation measures identified in this
Section.
   B.   Additional conservation measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of
water identified in §§
5.03.030,
5.03.035, and
5.03.040, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared
Level 3 Water Supply Shortage Emergency:
      1.   No watering or irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape
or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction does
not apply to the following categories of use, unless the City has determined
that recycled water is available and may be applied to the use:
         a.   Maintenance of vegetation, including trees and shrubs, that are
watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped
with a positive, self-closing, water-shut-off nozzle or device;
         b.   Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection;
         c.   Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control;
         d.   Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential
to the well-being of protected species;
         e.   Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing
fields, day care centers, golf course greens, and school grounds, provided that
such irrigation does not exceed two days per week, according to the time
restrictions in §
5.03.030A. and B.;
         f.   Actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects.
      2.   Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks,
or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must
be repaired within 24 hours of notification by the City, unless other
arrangements are made with the City.
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part))
§ 5.03.050 PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINATION AND NOTIFICATION OF WATER SUPPLY
SHORTAGE.
   Declaration and notification of water supply shortage. The existence of
Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 Water Supply Shortage conditions may be declared by
resolution of the City, adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in
accordance with state law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable
to Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 conditions will take effect on the tenth day
after the date the shortage level is declared. Within five days following the
declaration of the shortage level, the City must publish a copy of the
resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices.
(Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part))
§ 5.03.055 HARDSHIP WAIVER.
   A.   Undue and disproportionate hardship. If, due to unique circumstances, a
specific requirement of this Chapter would result in undue hardship to a person
using water, or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate
to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of
water users, then the person may apply for a waiver to the requirements as
provided in this Section.
   B.   Written finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted
only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue
hardship to a person using water, or to property upon which water is used, that
is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar
property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of
the user or the user's property.
      1.   Application. Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed
by the City, and accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee in an amount
set by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   Supporting documentation. The application must be accompanied by
photographs, maps, drawings, and other information, including a written
statement of the applicant.
      3.   Required findings for waiver. An application for a waiver will be
denied unless the City Manager, or his or her designee, finds, based on the
information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such
additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for
the property, as shown by the records of the City or its agent, all of the
following:
         a.   That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege
inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses;
         b.   That because of special circumstances applicable to the property
or its use, the strict application of this Chapter would have a
disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to
residents and businesses generally;
         c.   That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of
the City to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter, and will not be detrimental
to the public interest; and
         d.   That the condition or situation of the subject property or the
intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common,
recurrent or general in nature.
      4.   Approval authority. The City Manager or his or her designee must act
upon any completed application no later than ten days after submittal, and may
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting
the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless
specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to
the subject property during the period of the mandatory water supply shortage
condition. The decision of the City Manager or his or her designee will be
final.
('65 Code, § 29-40) (Ord. No. 90-022 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part);
Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part) )
§ 5.03.060 PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of this Chapter may be prosecuted pursuant to and in
accordance with
Chapter 1.02 of the Culver City Municipal Code.
('65 Code, § 29-41) (Ord. No. 90-022 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2009-009 § 1 (part) )
CHAPTER 5.04: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section
   
5.04.005   Definitions
   
5.04.010   Public hearing by Council
   
5.04.015   Report by Public Works Director
   
5.04.020   Authority of Council to designate underground utility district
   
5.04.025   Unlawful acts
   
5.04.030   Exception for emergency or unusual circumstances
   
5.04.035   Other exceptions
   
5.04.040   Notice to property owners and utility companies
   
5.04.045   Responsibility of utility companies
   
5.04.050   Responsibility of property owners
   
5.04.055   Responsibility of city
   
5.04.060   Extension of time
   
5.04.065   Under grounding public utilities; new construction
   
5.04.070   Location of electrical transmission lines
§ 5.04.005 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this Section
defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions:
   COMMISSION. The Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their
agents and employees.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES and ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES. Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossbars, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a District
and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT. That area in the City within which
poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as
such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
5.04.020.
   UTILITY. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
('65 Code, § 35A-1) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 1)
§ 5.04.010 PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL.
   The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether
the public health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City
and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying
electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall
notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment
roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at
least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open
to the public and will be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all
persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of
the Council shall be final and conclusive.
('65 Code, § 35A-2) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 2)
§ 5.04.015 REPORT BY PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   Prior to holding such public hearings, the Public Works Director may consult
all affected utilities and may prepare a report for a submission at such
hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities'
participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected
property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time
required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead
facilities. Failure to consult affected utilities and/or to prepare such a
report shall have no effect on any action of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 35a-3) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 3)
§ 5.04.020 AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL TO DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT.
   If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public health,
safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation
within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such
designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and
underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the
area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal
and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected
property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time
shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due
regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for
such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be
occasioned thereby. Immediately following its adoption, the City Clerk shall
cause a certified copy of such resolution to be recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder.
('65 Code, § 35A-4) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 4)
§ 5.04.025 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in §
5.04.020 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect,
construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures in the District after the date when
said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except
as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or
occupant of property prior to the performance of such owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive
utility service as provided in §
5.04.050 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove said
facilities after said work has been performed, end except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 35A-5) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 5)
§ 5.04.030 EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained in order to provide emergency service, not to exceed
ten (10) days without permission of the City Manager; however, the City Manager
may, if he finds the need exists, extend, in writing, such emergency operating
permit for an additional thirty (30) days. No additional extension may be
authorized without the approval of the City Council. The Council may grant
special permission, on such terms as the Council may deem appropriate, in cases
of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility,
to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires
and associated overhead structures.
('65 Code, § 35A-6) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 6; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 5.04.035 OTHER EXCEPTIONS.
   A.   This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to §
5.04.020 hereof shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply
to the following types of facilities:
      1.   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.
      2.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited.
      3.   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used for
such antennae by a utility for furnishing communication services.
      4.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts.
      5.   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects and to remain in
place only during construction.
   B.   In any resolution adopted pursuant to §
5.04.020 hereof, the City Council may authorize any or all of the following
exceptions:
      1.   Poles, overhead wires and assorted overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts.
      2.   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision of and to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director of the City
of Culver City.
      3.   Overhead wires connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a
District when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires
and associated overhead structures are not prohibited.
      4.   Overhead wires attached to the surface of a building by means of a
bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to
another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street.
('65 Code, § 35a-7) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 7)
§ 5.04.040 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.
   A.   Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to §
5.04.020 hereof, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all
persons owning real property within the District created by said resolution of
the adoption thereof. Said City Clerk shall further notify such affected
property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such
property desire to continue to receive electric communication, or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
Commission.
   B.   Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to §
5.04.020 hereof, together with a copy of the ordinance published herein, to
affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment
roll and to the affected utilities.
('65 Code, § 35A-8) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 8)
§ 5.04.045 RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.
   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to §
5.04.020 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the
conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
Commission.
('65 Code, § 35A-9) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 9)
§ 5.04.050 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   A.   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a District shall perform construction and provide
that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in §
5.04.045 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure
being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs
of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.
   B.   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, or renting said
property does not comply with the provisions of Subsection A. of this Section
within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to §
5.04.020 hereof, the Public Works Director shall post written notice on the
property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter shall have the authority
to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires
and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property.
   C.   In the event that the Public Works Director shall determine that the
method of enforcing this Section hereof is not an efficient or effective method
of enforcement, he is authorized to pursue the following method of enforcement:
      1.   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a District shall perform construction and provide
that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in §
5.04.045 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure
being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs
of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. If the
above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the
resolution enacted pursuant to §
5.04.020 hereof, the Public Works Director shall give notice in writing to the
person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner
thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required
underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice.
      2.   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be
given by personal service or by mail. In the case of service by mail on either
of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the Untied States mail in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of
such premises at such premises and the notice must be addressed to the owner
thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's
last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll,
and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Culver City,
California. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have
been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48)
hours after mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or
occupant of such premises, the Public Works Director shall, within forty-eight
(48) hours after mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not
less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size, to be posted in a
conspicuous place on said premises.
      3.   The notice given by the Public Works Director to provide the
required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is
required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within
thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the Public Works Director will
provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and
expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a
lien upon such property.
      4.   If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said
required underground facilities have not been provided, the Public Works
Director shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such
premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being
furnished thereto, the Public Works Director shall, in lieu of providing the
required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection
and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities
supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the
Public Works Director, he shall file a written report with the City Council
setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been
provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the
property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon
fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of
such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten (10)
days thereafter.
      5.   The Public Works Director shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing
such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner herein above provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.
      6.   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council
shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
      7.   If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its
confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made by the Public Works
Director, and the Public Works Director is directed to turn over to the
Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which
the assessment has not been paid, and said Assessor and Tax Collector shall add
the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against
the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be
due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable,
and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six
percent (6%) per annum.
('65 Code, § 35a-10) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 10)
§ 5.04.055 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.
   City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles
required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of
such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution
enacted pursuant to §
5.04.020.
('65 Code, § 35A-11) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 11)
§ 5.04.060 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to §
5.04.020 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of
materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances,
civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor,
then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for
a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
('65 Code, § 35A-12) (Ord. No. CS-612 § 12)
§ 5.04.065 UNDER GROUNDING PUBLIC UTILITIES; NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   A.   A new, or replacement, public utility service entrance installed for
permanent use in connection with, or required for, a new building or structure,
and the service connections on the property between the utility source and the
termination facility on the building or structure shall be placed underground.
The owner shall be responsible for making arrangements for such installations
and shall perform necessary construction, subject to applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the utility company.
   B.   Transformers and other equipment appurtenant to the underground service
may be installed aboveground if the Planning Department approves and determines
that the equipment will be placed at a location where a minimum impact on the
environment will result.
   C.   Upon application of the owner, the City Manager, or the City Council
upon an appeal from an adverse determination of the City Manager, may grant an
exception to the requirements of this Section if findings are made, to be
placed with the electrical permit, that these requirements, together with the
particular circumstances, will require an additional utility pole or otherwise
increase or perpetuate visual pollution of the environment.
   D.   The application shall be in writing and contain a complete statement of
all pertinent data, including an accurate sketch showing pertinent property
lines, buildings, structures, utility poles and lines.
('65 Code, § 35A-20) (Ord. No. CS-908 § 1; Ord. No. CS-674 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-
009 § 22 (part))
§ 5.04.070 LOCATION OF ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION LINES.
   Henceforth any person, corporation, utility or grantee of any franchise that
desires to construct, install or maintain any poles, wires, conduits or
appurtenances other than underground for the purpose of transmitting
electricity within the City of Culver City, whether distribution of said
electricity is to be made within Culver City or elsewhere, shall locate said
above ground poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances at least 125 feet from
the boundary line of any residential zone within the City; as such zone is
designated in the City Zoning Ordinance; such distance shall be measured from
the nearest structure, wire or appurtenance to the nearest residential zone
boundary by a straight line.
('65 Code, § 35A-31) (Ord. No. CS-795 § 1; Ord. No. CS-818 § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Code, see
Title 17
CHAPTER 5.05: STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
Section
   
5.05.005   Title
   
5.05.010   Findings
   
5.05.015   Purpose and intent
   
5.05.020   Definitions
   
5.05.025   Prohibited activities
   
5.05.030   Requirements for existing properties; good housekeeping provisions
   
5.05.035   Requirements for industrial/commercial and construction activities
   
5.05.040   Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) requirements for
new development and redevelopment projects
   
5.05.045   Enforcement
   
5.05.050   Fees
§ 5.05.005 TITLE.
   This Chapter shall be known as the "City of Culver City Stormwater
Management and Discharge Control Program.”
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.010 FINDINGS.
   A.   The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) provides for the
regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of the United
States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
requirements to stormwater and urban runoff discharge into municipal storm
drain systems. The City of Culver City is authorized by Article XI, § 5 and § 7
of the State Constitution to exercise the police power of the State by adopting
regulations to promote public health, public safety and general prosperity. The
City of Culver City has authority under the California Water Code to adopt and
enforce ordinances imposing conditions, restrictions and limitations with
respect to any activity which might degrade the quality of waters of the State.
   B.   Stormwater and urban runoff flow from individual properties onto
streets, then through storm drains passing through the City into Ballona Creek
and Marina del Rey Harbor. Urbanization has led to increased impervious surface
areas resulting in increased water runoff causing the transport of pollutants
to downstream receiving waters. The City of Culver City is committed to a
stormwater management program that protects water quality and water supply by
employing watershed-based approaches that balance environmental, social, and
economic considerations.
   C.   The City of Culver City is a permittee under the "Waste Discharge
Requirements for Municipal Stormwater and Urban Runoff Discharges within the
County of Los Angeles," issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Los Angeles Region (Order No. R4-2012-0175), dated December 28, 2012,
which also serves as a NPDES permit under the Federal Clean Water Act (NPDES
Permit No. CAS004001), as well as Waste Discharge Requirements under California
law (the Municipal NPDES Permit), and, as a permittee under the Municipal NPDES
Permit, the City is required to adopt ordinances and implement procedures with
respect to the entry of non-stormwater discharges into the Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer System (MS4).
   D.   Part III, "Discharge Prohibitions," of the Municipal NPDES Permit
requires the City to prohibit non-stormwater discharges through the MS4 (which
it owns or operates) and to receiving waters, except where such discharges are:
      1.   Authorized non-storm water discharges separately regulated by an
individual or general NPDES permit; or
      2.   Temporary non-storm water discharges authorized by United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) pursuant to §§ 104(a) or 104(b) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA)
that either: (i) will comply with water quality standards as applicable or
relevant and appropriate requirements ("ARARs") § Section 121(d)(2) of CERCLA;
or (ii) are subject to either (a) a written waiver of ARARs by USEPA pursuant
to § 121(d)(4) of CERCLA or (b) a written determination by USEPA that
compliance with ARARs is not practicable considering the exigencies of the
situation pursuant to 40 CFR § 300.415(i); or
      3.   Authorized non-storm water discharges from emergency firefighting
activities (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property);
discharges from vehicle washing, building fire suppression system maintenance
and testing (e.g., sprinkler line flushing), fire hydrant maintenance and
testing, and other routine maintenance activities are not considered emergency
firefighting activities; or
      4.   Natural flows, including:
         a.   Natural springs;
         b.   Flows from riparian habitats or wetlands;
         c.   Diverted stream flows, authorized by the State or Regional Water
Board;
         d.   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined by 40 CFR
35.2005(20));
         e.   Rising ground waters, where ground water seepage is not otherwise
covered by a NPDES permit; or
      5.   Either of the following three types of conditionally exempt non-
storm water discharges, provided they meet all required conditions specified
below, or as otherwise approved by the Regional Water Board Executive Officer.
         a.   Discharges from essential non-emergency firefighting activities
provided appropriate BMPs are implemented based on the CAL FIRE, Office of the
State Fire Marshal's Fire Protection Systems Discharge Best Management
Practices Manual (September 2011) for water-based fire protection system
discharges or equivalent Best Management Practice (BMP) manual for fire
training activities and post-emergency firefighting activities;
         b.   (1)   Discharges from drinking water supplier distribution
systems, where not otherwise regulated by an individual or general NPDES
permit, provided appropriate BMPs are implemented based on the American Water
Works Association (California-Nevada Section) Guidelines for the Development of
Your Best Management Practices (BMP) Manual for Drinking Water System Releases
(2005) or equivalent industry standard BMP manual.
            (2)   For all discharges greater than one hundred thousand
(100,000) gallons:
               (i)   Notification at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to a
planned discharge and ASAP after an unplanned discharge;
               (ii)   Monitoring of any pollutants of concern in the drinking
water supplier distribution system release; and
               (iii)   Record keeping by the drinking water supplier.
                  (a)   Name of discharger, date and time of notification (for
planned discharges), method of notification, location of discharge, discharge
pathway, receiving water, date of discharge, time of the beginning and end of
the discharge, duration of the discharge, flow rate or velocity, total number
of gallons discharged, type of dechlorination equipment used, type of
dechlorination chemicals used, concentration of residual chlorine, type(s) of
sediment controls used, pH of discharge, type(s) of volumetric and velocity
controls used, and field and laboratory monitoring data.
                  (b)   Records shall be retained for five (5) years and made
available upon request by the City or Regional Water Board.
         c.   Discharges that fall within one (1) of the categories below,
provided that the discharge itself is not a source of pollutants and meets all
required conditions:
            (1)   Dewatering of lakes;
            (2)   Landscape irrigation;
            (3)   Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool/spa discharges,
where not otherwise regulated by a separate NPDES permit;
            (4)   Dewatering of decorative fountains;
            (5)   Non-commercial car washing by residents or by non-profit
organizations;
            (6)   Street/sidewalk wash water.
               (i)   Conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges of street/
sidewalk wash water only include those discharges resulting from use of high
pressure, low volume spray washing using only potable water with no cleaning
agents at an average usage of 0.006 gallons per square feet of sidewalk area in
accordance with Regional Water Board Resolution No. 98-08.
               (ii)   Conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges of
street/sidewalk wash water do not include hosing of any sidewalk or street with
a garden hose with a pressure nozzle.
   E.   The Municipal NPDES Permit requires the City to develop and implement
procedures to ensure proper discharges of stormwater and non-stormwater.
Dischargers must comply with Part III.A.4. of the Municipal NPDES Permit.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.015 PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
   A.   The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure the future health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the City, and the water quality of Ballona
Creek, Marina del Rey Harbor, Santa Monica Bay and surrounding coastal areas
by:
      1.   Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent
practicable;
      2.   Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges and thereby
reducing the level of contamination of stormwater and urban runoff into the
municipal stormwater system; and
      3.   Regulating non-stormwater discharges to the municipal stormwater
system.
   B.   This Chapter also sets forth requirements for the construction and
operation of certain commercial development, new development and redevelopment
and other projects (as further defined herein) which are intended to ensure
compliance with the Planning and Land Development Program, also known as
Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan (SUSMP), measures prescribed in the
current version of the Municipal NPDES Permit.
      1.   This Chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to define
and adopt applicable best management practices and other stormwater pollution
control measures, to grant waivers from SUSMP requirements, as provided herein,
to cite infractions and to impose fines pursuant to this Chapter.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided herein, the authorized enforcement
officer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Section.
   C.   The intent of this Chapter is to protect and enhance the quality of
watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands within the City in a manner consistent
with the Federal Clean Water Act and the NPDES Permit.
   D.   This Chapter also is intended to provide the City with the legal
authority necessary to control discharges to and from those portions of the
municipal stormwater system over which it has jurisdiction, as required by the
Municipal NPDES Permit, and to hold dischargers to the municipal stormwater
system accountable for their contributions of pollutants and flows.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.020 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as specifically provided herein, any term used in this Chapter shall
be defined as that term is defined in the current Municipal NPDES Permit
(Attachment A of Order No. R4-2012-0175), or, if it is not specifically defined
in the Municipal NPDES Permit, then as such term is defined in the Federal
Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person designated by the City to conduct
inspections and follow investigations.
   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE FACILITIES. A facility that is categorized in any one (1)
of the following Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC): 5013, 5014, 5511,
5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539.
   BASIN PLAN. The Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region, Basin Plan
for the Coastal Watershed of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the
Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994 and subsequent amendments.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). BMPs are practices or physical devices
designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from storm water or non-storm
water discharged to the receiving waters.
   BIOFILTRATION. A Low Impact Development (LID) BMP that reduces stormwater
pollutant discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through
incidental infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Incidental
infiltration is an important factor in achieving the required pollutant load
reduction. Therefore, the term BIOFILTRATION as used in this chapter is defined
to include only systems designed to facilitate incidental infiltration or
achieve the equivalent pollutant reduction as biofiltration BMPs with an
underdrain (subject to approval by the Regional Board's Executive Officer).
Biofiltration BMPs include bioretention systems with an underdrain and
bioswales.
   BIORETENTION. A LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by intercepting
rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration and infiltration.
The bioretention system typically includes a minimum two (2)-foot top layer of
a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a gravel-filled temporary
storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. As defined in the Municipal NPDES
Permit, a bioretention BMP may be designed with an overflow drain, but may not
include an underdrain. When a bioretention BMP is designed or constructed with
an underdrain it is regulated by the Municipal NPDES Permit as biofiltration.
   BIOSWALE. A LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with grass or
other dense, low-growing vegetation. Bioswales are designed to collect
stormwater runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the dense
vegetation for a period of several minutes.
   CITY. The City of Culver City.
   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted in
1972, by Public Law 92-500, and amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987. The
Clean Water Act prohibits the discharge of pollutants to Waters of the United
States unless the discharge is in accordance with an NPDES permit.
   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any development on private land that is not heavy
industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to:
hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions,
recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities, mini-malls and
other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public
warehouses and other light industrial complexes.
   COMMERCIAL MALLS. Any development on private land comprised of one (1) or
more buildings forming a complex of stores which sells various merchandise,
with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to
store, along with parking area(s). A commercial mall includes, but is not
limited to: mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and enclosed
shopping malls or shopping centers.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Construction activity includes any construction or
demolition activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other
activity that results in land disturbance. Construction does not include
emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health
and safety or routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity
of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work, maintain the
original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purposes of the
facility. See "Routine Maintenance" definition for further explanation. Where
clearing, grading or excavating of underlying soil takes place during a
repaving operation, State General Construction Permit coverage is required if
more than one acre is disturbed or the activities are part of a larger plan.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or
reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-
family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail
and other non-residential projects, including public agency projects, or mass
grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to
maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to
immediately protect public health and safety.
   DIRECTLY ADJACENT. Situated within two hundred (200) feet of the contiguous
zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability
of the significant ecological areas.
   DIRECTOR. The City's Director of Public Works/City Engineer or the
Director's representative.
   DISCHARGE. Any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or
disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance.
   FLOW-THROUGH BMPS. Modular, vault type "high flow biofiltration" devices
contained within an impervious vault with an underdrain or designed with an
impervious liner and an underdrain.
   GOOD HOUSEKEEPING PROVISIONS. Common practices related to the storage, use,
or clean-up of materials, performed in a manner that minimizes the discharge of
pollutants. Examples include, but are not limited to: purchasing only the
quantity of materials to be used at a given time, use of alternative and less
environmentally harmful products, cleaning up spills and leaks, and storing
materials in a manner that will contain any leaks or spills.
   GREEN ROOF. A LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to intercept
rainfall on the roof surface. Rainfall is intercepted by vegetation leaves and
through evapotranspiration. Green roofs may be designed as either a
bioretention BMP or as a biofiltration BMP. To receive credit as a bioretention
BMP, the green roof system planting medium shall be of sufficient depth to
provide capacity within the pore space volume to contain the design storm depth
and may not be designed or constructed with an underdrain.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material(s) defined as hazardous by Division 20,
Chapter 6.95 of the Cal. Health & Safety Code.
   HILLSIDE. Property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions,
where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is twenty-
five percent (25%) or greater, and where grading contemplates cut or fill
slopes.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any man-made conveyance that is connected to the storm
drain system without a permit, excluding roof-drains and other similar type
connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets
that are connected directly to the storm drain system.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge into the MS4 or from the MS4 into a
receiving water that is prohibited under local, state or federal statutes,
ordinances, codes or regulations. The term ILLICIT DISCHARGE includes all non-
stormwater discharges, except authorized non-storm water discharges;
conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges; and non-storm water discharges
resulting from natural flows specifically identified in Part III.A.1.d of the
Municipal NPDES Permit.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any man-made or modified surface that prevents or
significantly reduces the entry of water into the underlying soil, resulting in
runoff from the surface in greater quantities and/or at an increased rate, when
compared to natural conditions prior to development. Examples of places that
commonly exhibit impervious surfaces include parking lots, driveways, roadways,
storage areas, and rooftops. The imperviousness of these areas commonly results
from paving, compacted gravel, compacted earth, and oiled earth.
   INDUSTRIAL PARK. Land development that is set aside for industrial
development. Industrial parks are usually located close to transport
facilities, especially where more than one (1) transport modalities coincide:
highways, railroads, airports, and navigable rivers. It includes office parks,
which have offices and light industry.
   INFILTRATION. The downward entry of water into the surface of the soil.
   INSPECTION. Entry and the conduct of an on-site review of a facility and its
operations, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with specific
municipal or other legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an
inspection include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Pre-inspection documentation research;
      2.   Request for entry;
      3.   Interview of facility personnel;
      4.   Facility walk-through;
      5.   Visual observation of the condition of facility premises;
      6.   Examination and copying of records as required;
      7.   Sample collection (if necessary or required);
      8.   Exit conference (to discuss preliminary evaluation); and
      9.   Report preparation and, if appropriate, recommendations for coming
into compliance.
In the case of restaurants, the City may conduct an inspection from the
curbside, provided that such "curbside" inspection provides the City with
adequate information to determine an operator's compliance with BMPs that must
be implemented per requirements of the Municipal NPDES Permit, Regional Water
Board Resolution No. 98-08, County and municipal ordinances, and the Stormwater
Quality Management Plan.
   LID. Low Impact Development. LID consists of building and landscape features
designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff.
   MATERIAL. Any substance including, but not limited to: garbage and debris,
lawn clippings, leaves and other vegetation, biological and fecal waste,
sediment and sludge, oil and grease, gasoline, paints, solvents, cleaners, and
any fluid or solid containing chemicals.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP). This means choosing effective BMPs, and
rejecting applicable BMPs only where other effective BMPs will serve the same
purpose, the BMPs would not be technically feasible, or the cost would be
prohibitive. The following factors may be useful to consider:
      1.   Effectiveness: Will the BMP address a pollutant of concern?
      2.   Regulatory compliance: Is the BMP in compliance with storm water
regulations as well as other environmental regulations?
      3.   Public acceptance: Does the BMP have public support?
      4.   Cost: Will the cost of implementing the BMP have a reasonable
relationship to the pollution control benefits to be achieved?
      5.   Technical feasibility: Is the BMP technically feasible considering
soils, geography, water resources, etc.?
After selecting a menu of BMPs, it is of course the responsibility of the
discharger to insure that all BMPs are implemented.
   MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT. The Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal
Stormwater and Urban Runoff Discharges within the County of Los Angeles, issued
by the Regional Board, and any successor permit to that permit.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):
      1.   Owned or operated by a State, city, town, borough, county, parish,
district, association or other public body (created pursuant to State law)
having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water, or
other wastes, including special districts under State law such as a sewer
district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an
Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and
approved management agency under § 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of
the United States;
      2.   Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water;
      3.   Which is not a combined sewer; and
      4.   Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as
defined in 40 CFR § 122.2.
(40 CFR § 122.26(b)(8))
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The national
program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring
and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements,
under CWA §§ 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an "approved program".
   NATURAL DRAINAGE SYSTEM. A drainage system that has not been improved (e.g.,
channelized or armored). The clearing or dredging of a natural drainage system
does not cause the system to be classified as an improved drainage system.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Land-disturbing activities, structural development,
including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of
impervious surfaces and land subdivision.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge into the MS4 or from the MS4 into a
receiving water that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
   PARKING LOT. Land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor
vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot
size of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with
twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, state, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
   PLANNING PRIORITY PROJECTS. Development projects subject to the City's
conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-
construction controls to mitigate stormwater pollution, prior to completion of
the project(s).
   POLLUTANT. Those "pollutants" defined in CWA § 502(6) (33 U.S.C. § 1362(6)),
and incorporated by reference into Cal. Water Code § 13373. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to the following:
      1.   Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents,
detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides,
slag, ash, and sludge).
      2.   Metals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel,
chromium, and non-metals such as phosphorus and arsenic).
      3.   Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants,
waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease).
      4.   Excessive eroded soil, sediment, and particulate materials in
amounts that may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters,
flora, or fauna of the State.
      5.   Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities,
kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities).
      6.   Substances having a pH less than six (6) or greater than nine (9),
or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or
fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus.
   PROJECT. All development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities. The
term is not limited to "Project" as defined under CEQA (Pub. Resources Code §
21065).
   RAINFALL HARVEST AND USE. A LID BMP system designed to capture runoff,
typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from elsewhere within
the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the harvested water can be
used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested water may also be used
for potable water uses if the system includes disinfection treatment and is
approved for such use by the local building department.
   RECEIVING WATER. "Water of the United States" into which waste and/or
pollutants are or may be discharged.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Land-disturbing activity that results in the creation,
addition, or replacement of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of
impervious surface area on a site previously developed as a single family home
or the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet
or more of impervious surface area on any other previously developed sites.
REDEVELOPMENT includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building
footprint; addition or replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious
surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity (as that term is
defined in this Chapter), and land disturbing activities related to structural
or impervious surfaces. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance as
that term is defined in this Chapter.
   REGIONAL BOARD. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los
Angeles Region.
   RESTAURANT. A facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption,
including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared
foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC code 5812).
   RETAIL GASOLINE OUTLET. Any facility engaged in selling gasoline and
lubricating oils.
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. Routine maintenance projects include, but are not
limited to projects conducted to:
      1.   Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of the facility.
      2.   Replace impervious surfaces, such as the reconstruction of parking
lots and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the
original grade and alignment.
      3.   Perform restoration work needed to preserve the original design
grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities.
      4.   Perform road shoulder work, regrade dirt or gravel roadways and
shoulders and perform ditch cleanouts.
      5.   Update existing lines* and facilities to comply with applicable
codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in
increased capacity.
      6.   Repair leaks.
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE does not include construction of new** lines or
facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and
regulations.
      * Update existing lines includes replacing existing lines with new
materials or pipes.
      ** New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities
and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines.
   RUNOFF. Any runoff including stormwater and dry weather flow from a drainage
area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it
is typically comprised of base flow, either contaminated with pollutants or
uncontaminated, and nuisance flows.
   SIGNIFICANT ECOLOGICAL AREAS (SEAs). An area that is determined to possess
an example of biotic resources that cumulatively represent biological
diversity, for the purposes of protecting biotic diversity. Areas are
designated as SEAs, if they possess one (1) or more of the following criteria:
      1.   The habitat of rare, endangered, and threatened plant and animal
species.
      2.   Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and habitat of plant
and animal species that are either one of a kind, or are restricted in
distribution on a regional basis.
      3.   Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and habitat of plant
and animal species that are either one of a kind or are restricted in
distribution in Los Angeles County.
      4.   Habitat that at some point in the life cycle of a species or group
of species, serves as a concentrated breeding, feeding, resting, migrating
grounds and is limited in availability either regionally or within Los Angeles
County.
      5.   Biotic resources that are of scientific interest because they are
either an extreme in physical/geographical limitations, or represent an unusual
variation in a population or community.
      6.   Areas important as game species habitat or as fisheries.
      7.   Areas that would provide for the preservation of relatively
undisturbed examples of natural biotic communities in Los Angeles County.
      8.   Special areas (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).
   SITE. Land or water area where any "facility or activity" is physically
located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the
facility or activity.
   SOURCE CONTROL BMP. Any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices,
maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim
to prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at
the source of pollution.
   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM. Any facilities or any part of those facilities,
including streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels,
and watercourses that are used for the purpose of collecting, storing,
transporting or disposing of stormwater and are located within the City of
Culver City.
   STORM EVENT. A rainfall event that produces more than one-tenth (0.1) inch
of precipitation in twenty-four (24) hours unless specifically stated
otherwise.
   STORM WATER OR STORMWATER. Water that originates from atmospheric moisture
(rain or snow) and that falls onto land, water, or other surfaces. Without any
change in its meaning, this term may be spelled or written as one word or two
separate words.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff
and drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 CFR § 122.26(b)
(13); 55 Fed. Reg. 47990, 47995 (Nov. 16, 1990)).
   STRUCTURAL BMP. Any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate
the adverse impacts of stormwater and urban runoff pollution (e.g. canopy,
structural enclosure). The category may include both Treatment Control BMPs and
Source Control BMPs.
   SUSMP. The Los Angeles Countywide Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan
was required as part of the previous Municipal NPDES Permit (Order No. 01-182,
NPDES No. CAS004001) and required plans that designate BMPs that must be used
in specified categories of development projects.
   TREATMENT. The application of engineered systems that use physical,
chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include,
but are not limited to: filtration, gravity settling, media absorption,
biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation and UV radiation.
   TREATMENT CONTROL BMP. Any engineered system designed to remove pollutants
by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological
uptake, media absorption or any other physical, biological or chemical process.
   URBAN RUNOFF. Non-stormwater surface flow produced by residential,
commercial and industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-
potable water.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.025 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   A.   Illicit discharges and connections.
      1.   It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain, or continue illicit
connections to the municipal stormwater system, or to commence or continue any
illicit discharges to the municipal stormwater system.
      2.   This prohibition against illicit connections is expressly
retroactive: it applies to connections made in the past, but excludes permitted
improvements to real property over which uncontaminated stormwater runoff
flows.
   B.   Littering.
      1.   No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep, or
permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, maintained or kept, any refuse,
rubbish, garbage or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or
accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet,
catch basin conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any or
private plot of land in the City, so that the same might be or become a
pollutant.
      2.   This Subsection shall not apply to refuse, rubbish or garbage
deposited in containers bags or other appropriate receptacles that are placed
in designated locations for regular solid waste pick up and disposal.
   C.   Disposal of landscape debris. No person shall intentionally dispose of
leaves, dirt, or other landscape debris into the City's storm drain system.
   D.   Industrial activities.
      1.   No person shall conduct any industrial activity in the City without
obtaining all permits required by state or federal law, including a NPDES
General Industrial Activity Stormwater Permit when required.
      2.   Persons conducting industrial activities within the City shall refer
to the most recent edition of the Industrial/Commercial Best Management
Practices Handbook, produced and published by the Stormwater Quality Task
Force, for specific guidance on selecting BMPs for reducing pollutants in
stormwater discharges from industrial activities.
   E.   1.   Non-stormwater discharges.
      2.   The following non-stormwater discharges into the municipal
stormwater system are prohibited, unless in compliance with a separate NPDES
permit or pursuant to a discharge exemption by the Regional Board, the Regional
Board's executive officer, or the State Water Resources Control Board:
         a.   The discharge of wash waters when gas stations, auto repair
garages, or similar facilities are cleaned;
         b.   The discharge of runoff from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning,
mobile carpet cleaning, and other such mobile commercial and industrial
operations;
         c.   Discharges from areas where repair of machinery and equipment,
including motor vehicles visibly leaking oil, fluid or antifreeze, is
undertaken;
         d.   Discharges of runoff from areas where materials containing
grease, oil or other hazardous substances (e.g., motor vehicle parts) are
stored, and discharges from uncovered receptacles containing hazardous
materials;
         e.   The discharge of chlorinated/ brominated swimming pool water and
filter backwash;
         f.   Discharges of runoff from the washing of toxic materials from
paved or unpaved areas;
         g.   Discharges to the municipal stormwater system from washing
impervious surfaces in industrial/commercial areas that results in a discharge
of untreated runoff to the municipal stormwater system;
         h.   Discharges from the washing out of concrete or cement-laden wash
water from concrete trucks, pumps, tools and equipment;
         i.   Discharges of any pesticide, fungicide or herbicide banned by the
USEPA or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation;
         j.   Discharge of any food or food processing wastes;
         k.   Discharge of any fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes,
garbage, batteries, and other materials that have potential adverse impacts on
water quality; and
         l.   The disposal of hazardous wastes into trash containers that
causes a direct or indirect discharge to the municipal stormwater system.
   F.   Discharges in violation of the Municipal NPDES Permit.
      1.   Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of
the Municipal NPDES Permit, either separately or in combination with other
discharges, is prohibited.
      2.   Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the
person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person(s) shall
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City from all losses, liabilities,
claims, or causes of actions in any administrative or judicial action relating
to such discharge.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.030 REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING PROPERTIES; GOOD HOUSEKEEPING PROVISIONS.
   Owners and occupants of property within the City shall implement BMPs to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to the municipal stormwater
system to the maximum extent practicable. Treatment and structural BMPs shall
be properly operated and maintained to prevent the breeding of vectors.
Implementation includes, but is not limited to the following:
   A.   Septic waste. No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or
otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste to precipitation in an area where
discharge to City streets or storm drains system may or does occur.
   B.   Use of water.
      1.   Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be minimized to
the maximum extent practicable.
      2.   Runoff of water from the permitted washing down of paved areas shall
be minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
      3.   Sweeping and collection of debris is encouraged for trash disposal.
   C.   Storage of materials, machinery, and equipment. Machinery or equipment
that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to or exposed to
stormwater, shall be placed in a manner so that pollutants are not discharged
to the municipal stormwater system.
   D.   Removal and disposal of debris and residue and other materials.
      1.   Non-residential motor vehicle parking lots with more than twenty-
five (25) parking spaces that generate runoff shall be swept regularly or other
equally effective measures will be utilized to remove debris from such parking
lots.
      2.   Food wastes generated by non-residential food service and food
distribution sources shall be disposed of in a manner so such wastes are not
discharged to the municipal stormwater system.
      3.   BMPs shall be used in areas exposed to stormwater for the removal
and lawful disposal of all fuels, chemicals, fuel and chemical wastes, animal
wastes, garbage, batteries, or other materials that have potential adverse
impacts on water quality.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.035 REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL AND CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   A.   Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction
activity, or other discharger described in any general stormwater permit
addressing such discharges, as may be granted by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional
Board shall comply with all requirements of such permit.
      1.   Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit shall
comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit.
      2.   Proof of compliance with any such permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Director, prior to the issuance of any grading or building
permit, or any other type of permit or license issued by the City.
   B.   Stormwater runoff containing sediment, construction materials or other
pollutants from the construction site and any adjacent staging, storage or
parking areas shall be reduced to the MEP. The following requirements shall
apply to all construction projects within the City and shall be required from
the time of land clearing, demolition or commencement of construction until
receipt of a Final Inspection or Certificate of Occupancy, whichever is the
last required City approval:
      1.   Sediment, construction waste, trash and other pollutants from
construction activities shall be reduced to the MEP.
      2.   Structural controls, such as sediment barriers, plastic sheeting,
detention ponds, filters, berms and similar controls, shall be utilized to the
MEP in order to minimize the escape of sediment and other pollutants from the
site.
      3.   Between October 1st and April 15th of each year, all excavated soil
shall be located on-site in a manner that minimizes the amount of sediment
running onto the street, drainage facilities or adjacent properties. Soil piles
shall be bermed or covered with plastic or similar materials until the soil is
either used or removed from the site.
      4.   No washing of construction or other vehicles is permitted adjacent
to a construction site. No water from the washing of construction vehicles or
equipment on the construction site is permitted to run off the construction
site and enter the municipal storm drain system.
      5.   Trash receptacles must be situated at convenient locations on
construction sites, and must be maintained in such a manner that trash and
litter does not accumulate on-site nor migrate off site.
      6.   Erosion from slopes and channels must be controlled through an
effective use of BMPs.
   C.   The property owner or his or her authorized representative must
certify, in a form acceptable to the Director, that BMPs to control runoff from
construction activities will be implemented to the MEP prior to the issuance of
any building or grading permit.
   D.   A Local Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and Wet Weather Erosion
Control Plan for construction activities shall be submitted to the Director
consistent with the Municipal NPDES Permit. Such plans must be reviewed and
approved by the Director prior to the issuance of any building or grading
permit.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.040 STANDARD URBAN STORMWATER MITIGATION PLAN (SUSMP) REQUIREMENTS FOR
NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   A.   The provisions of this Section contain requirements for construction
activities and facility operations of development and redevelopment projects to
comply with the current Municipal NPDES Permit, lessen the water quality
impacts of development by using smart growth practices, and integrate LID
design principles to mimic predevelopment hydrology through infiltration,
evapotranspiration and rainfall harvest and use.
   B.   This Section contains requirements for stormwater pollution control
measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the City of
Culver City to further define and adopt stormwater pollution control measures,
to develop LID principles and requirements, including but not limited to the
objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies, and to grant
alternative compliance as allowed by the Municipal NPDES Permit.
   C.   The following development and redevelopment projects, termed "Planning
Priority Projects," shall comply with the requirements of the most recent
Municipal NPDES Permit:
      1.   All development projects equal to one (1) acre or greater of
disturbed area that add more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
impervious surface area.
      2.   Industrial parks with ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of
surface area.
      3.   Commercial malls with ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of
surface area.
      4.   Retail gasoline outlets with five thousand (5,000) square feet or
more of surface area.
      5.   Commercial car washes with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more
of surface area.
      6.   Restaurants (SIC of 5812) with five thousand (5,000) square feet or
more of surface area.
      7.   Parking lots with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of
impervious surface area, or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces.
      8.   Street and road construction of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
more of impervious surface area.
      9.   Automotive service facilities (SIC of 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-
7534 and 7536-7539) with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface
area.
      10.   Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging
directly to an Significant Ecological Area, where the development will:
         a.   Discharge stormwater runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive
biological species or habitat; and
         b.   Create two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more of
impervious surface area.
      11.   Single-family hillside homes.
      12.   Redevelopment of any Planning Priority Project. Provided, further,
that:
         a.   Where redevelopment results in alteration to more than fifty
percent (50%) of the impervious surface of a previously existing Planning
Priority Project and the existing Planning Priority Project was not subject to
post-construction stormwater quality control requirements, the entire project
must be brought into compliance with the most recent Municipal NPDES Permit.
         b.   Where redevelopment results in alteration of less than fifty
percent (50%) of the impervious surface of a previously existing Planning
Priority Project and the existing Planning Priority Project was not subject to
post-construction stormwater quality control requirements, only the alteration
must be brought into compliance with the most recent Municipal NPDES Permit.
      13.   Any other project as deemed appropriate by the Director of Public
Works/City Engineer.
   D.   Stormwater Pollution Control Requirements. The site for every Planning
Priority Project shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and
runoff volume to the maximum extent practicable by minimizing impervious
surface area and controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through
infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use.
More specifically:
      1.   A single-family hillside home development shall include mitigation
measures to:
         a.   Conserve natural areas;
         b.   Protect slopes and channels;
         c.   Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;
         d.   Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the
diversion would result in slope instability; and
         e.   Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless
the diversion would result in slope instability.
      2.   Street and road construction of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
more of impervious surface shall follow USEPA guidance regarding Managing Wet
Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-
009) to the maximum extent practicable.
      3.   The remainder of Planning Priority Projects shall prepare a LID Plan
to comply with the following requirements of the most recent Municipal NPDES
Permit:
         a.   (1)   Retain stormwater runoff onsite for the Stormwater Quality
Design Volume (SWQDv), defined as the runoff from:
            (2)   The eighty-fifth (85th) percentile twenty- four (24)-hour
runoff event as determined from the Los Angeles County eighty-fifth (85th)
percentile precipitation isohyetal map.
         b.   Minimize hydromodification impacts to natural drainage systems as
defined in the Municipal NPDES Permit. Hydromodification requirements are
further specified in Southern California Coastal Water Research Project's
Hydromodification Assessment and Management in California and California
Stormwater Quality Association's Municipal BMP Handbook.
         c.   When, as determined by the City of Culver City and/or the Los
Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board, one hundred percent (100%) onsite
retention of the SWQDv is technically infeasible, partially or fully, the
infeasibility shall be demonstrated in the submitted LID Plan. The technical
infeasibility may result from conditions that may include, but are not limited
to:
            (1)   The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than
three-tenths (0.3) inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend
the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable
performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDv onsite.
            (2)   Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within five (5)
to ten (10) feet of surface grade;
            (3)   Locations within one hundred (100) feet of a groundwater well
used for drinking water;
            (4)   Brownfield development sites or other locations where
pollutant mobilization is a documented concern;
            (5)   Locations with potential geotechnical hazards;
            (6)   Smart growth and infill or redevelopment locations where the
density and/or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for
compliance with the onsite volume retention requirement.
         d.   If partial or complete onsite retention is technically
infeasible, the project site may biofiltrate one and a half (1.5) times the
portion of the remaining SWQDv that is not reliably retained onsite.
Biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the design specifications provided in the
Municipal NPDES Permit and/or the LID Manual.
            (1)   The remaining SWQDv that cannot be retained or biofiltered
onsite must be treated onsite to reduce pollutant loading. BMPs must be
selected and designed to meet pollutant-specific benchmarks as required per the
Municipal NPDES Permit. Flow-through BMPs may be used to treat the remaining
SWQDv and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of two-tenths (0.2)
inches per hour or the one (1)-year, one (1)-hour rainfall intensity as
determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal map, whichever is
greater.
            (2)   BMPs must be maintained according to their submitted
Maintenance Covenant and Agreement.
         e.   A Multi-Phased Project may comply with the standards and
requirements of this Section for all of its phases by: (a) designing a system
acceptable to the City of Culver City to satisfy these standards and
requirements for the entire site during the first phase, and (b) implementing
these standards and requirements for each phase of development or redevelopment
of the site during the first phase or prior to commencement of construction of
a later phase, to the extent necessary to treat the stormwater from such later
phase. For purposes of this Section, MULTI-PHASED PROJECT shall mean any
Planning Priority Project implemented over more than one phase and the site of
a Multi-Phased Project shall include any land and water area designed and used
to store, treat or manage stormwater runoff in connection with the development
or redevelopment, including any tracts, lots, or parcels of real property,
whether Developed or not, associated with, functionally connected to, or under
common ownership or control with such development or redevelopment.
   E.   Post-development stormwater mitigation. A site-specific plan to
mitigate post-development stormwater pollution for new development and
redevelopment projects not requiring a SUSMP, but which may potentially have
adverse impacts on post-development stormwater quality shall be required where
one (1) or more of the following project characteristics exist:
      1.   Vehicle or equipment fueling areas;
      2.   Vehicle or equipment maintenance areas, including washing and
repair;
      3.   Commercial or industrial waste handling or storage;
      4.   Outdoor handling or storage of hazardous materials;
      5.   Outdoor manufacturing areas;
      6.   Outdoor food handling or processing;
      7.   Outdoor animal care, confinement, or slaughter; or
      8.   Outdoor horticulture activities.
   F.   Issuance of permits. No permit may be issued for any new development or
redevelopment project until the Director confirms that the project plans comply
with the applicable stormwater mitigation and numerical design criteria
requirements.
   G.   Final Inspection or Occupancy Permit. As a condition for conducting a
Final Inspection or issuing any Occupancy Permit, whichever is applicable, for
a project subject to this Section, the Director shall require facility
operators and/or owners to construct all the stormwater pollution control BMPs
and structural and/or treatment control BMPs that are shown on the approved
project plans, and to submit a signed certification statement stating that the
site and all structural and/or treatment control BMPs shall be maintained in
compliance with the SUSMP and other applicable regulatory requirements.
   H.   Transfer of properties subject to requirements for maintenance of
structural and treatment control BMPs.
      1.   The transfer of ownership, sale or lease of a property subject to
requirements for maintenance of structural and/or treatment control BMPs shall
include provisions requiring the new owner and his or her successors to:
         a.   Assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural
or treatment control BMP; or
         b.   Replace any existing structural or treatment control BMP with new
control measures or BMPs meeting the most current standards of the City and the
SUSMP.
      2.   Such requirements shall be included in any sale, lease agreement or
deed for the property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision that
the new owner and his or her successors conduct routine maintenance inspections
of all structural and/or treatment control BMPs to ensure they are in good
working order at all times, and retain proof of inspection.
      3.   For residential properties where the structural and/or treatment
control BMPs are located within a common area that will be maintained by a
homeowner's association, language regarding the responsibility for maintenance
shall be included in the project's conditions, covenants and restrictions
(CC&Rs).
         a.   Printed educational materials will be required to accompany the
first deed transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to
provide information on: what stormwater management facilities are present,
signs that maintenance is needed, and how the necessary maintenance can be
performed.
         b.   The transfer of this information shall also be required with any
subsequent sale of the property.
      4.   If structural and/or treatment control BMPs are located within an
area proposed for dedication as an easement or fee title to the City or
Redevelopment Agency, the BMPs shall remain the property and responsibility of
the developer/owner until the dedication is accepted by the City Council and
recorded with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office.
   I.   California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Provisions of this Section
shall be complimentary to, and shall not replace, any applicable requirements
for stormwater mitigation required under CEQA.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.045 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Basis for initiation of enforcement activities. Any condition caused or
permitted by a permittee that is in violation of the following requirements may
serve as the basis for enforcement actions by the City or other regulatory
agency.
      1.   Any of the provisions of this Chapter;
      2.   Any failure to comply with any applicable requirement of either the
SUSMP or an approved stormwater mitigation plan with respect to a property;
      3.   Any false certification or verification, or any failure to comply
with a certification or verification provided by a project applicant or the
applicant's successor in interest; or
      4.   Any failure to properly operate and maintain any structural and/or
treatment control BMP on a property in accordance with an approved stormwater
mitigation plan or the SUSMP, may be a threat to the public health, safety and
welfare, and may be abated or restored by any authorized enforcement officer,
and a civil or criminal action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the
cessation of the violation of this Code or the terms of any related permit, by
one (1) of any appropriate remedy available to the City.
         a.   The determination of whether the property owner or the permittee
is the responsible party may be a matter between those parties.
         b.   For enforcement purposes, either party or both parties may be
held liable.
      5.   The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the
owner of the property or the permittee, or both, and the cost thereof shall be
invoiced to the applicable-parties, as provided by law or ordinance for the
recovery of abatement costs.
   B.   Declaration of seasonal and recurrent violations.
      1.   If any violation of this Chapter constitutes a seasonal and
recurrent violation, the Director shall so declare.
      2.   The failure of any person to take appropriate annual precautions to
prevent stormwater pollution, after written notice of a determination under
this paragraph, shall constitute a public nuisance and a violation of this
Chapter.
   C.   Inspections. The Director may enter and inspect any private premises
during any reasonable time for the purpose of verifying compliance with the
terms and conditions of this Chapter. Such inspections may include, but are not
limited to the following:
         1.   Inspecting efficiency or adequacy of construction or post-
construction BMPs;
         2.   Inspection, sampling and testing any area runoff, soils in areas
subject to runoff, and/or treatment system discharges;
         3.   Inspection of the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer
systems, including the use of smoke and dye tests and video survey of such
pipes and conveyance systems;
         4.   Inspection of all records of the owner, contractor, developer or
occupant of public or private property relating to BMP inspections conducted by
the owner, contractor, developer or occupant, and obtaining copies of such
records as necessary;
         5.   Identifying points of stormwater discharge from the premises,
whether surface or subsurface, and locating any illicit connection or
discharge.
   D.   Concealment. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a
violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a violation of such
provision.
   E.   Administrative enforcement powers. In addition to the other enforcement
powers and remedies established by this Chapter, any authorized enforcement
officer has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies:
      1.   Cease and desist orders. When an authorized enforcement officer
finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation
of this Chapter, the officer may issue an order to cease and desist such
discharge, practice or operation likely to cause such discharge, and to direct
those persons not complying to:
         a.   Comply with the requirement;
         b.   Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and
         c.   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the
violation from recurring.
      2.   Notice to clean.
         a.   Whenever an authorized enforcement officer finds any oil, earth,
debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other
material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel
of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in pollutants
entering the municipal storm drain system or a non-stormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, he or she may give notice to the owner or occupant of the
adjacent property to remove such oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees,
tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or
she may reasonably provide.
         b.   The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as
described in the notice.
      3.   Permit revocation. To the extent the City makes a provision of this
Chapter or any identified BMP a condition of approval to the issuance of a
permit or license, any person in violation of such condition is subject to the
permit revocation procedures set forth in this Code.
      4.   Citation. When an authorized enforcement officer finds that a
violation has not been corrected, the officer may issue a citation.
   F.   Remedies.
      1.   Remedies under this Chapter are in addition to and do not supersede
or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal.
      2.   The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
§ 5.05.050 FEES.
   Fees to recover plan checking, inspections and other costs of this program
shall be established by resolution.
(Ord. 2014-008 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 5.06: SAFE AND CLEAN WATER PROTECTION MEASURE
Section
   
5.06.005   Title
   
5.06.010   Definitions
   
5.06.015   Necessity, authority and purpose
   
5.06.020   Tax levy
   
5.06.025   Additional tax rate classification information
   
5.06.030   Appeals process
   
5.06.035   Purposes and uses of tax
   
5.06.040   Exemptions
   
5.06.045   Computation and collection of tax - interest and penalties
   
5.06.050   Senior discount and assistance
   
5.06.055   Accountability
   
5.06.060   Examination of books and records and annual audit
   
5.06.065   Refund of tax, penalty or interest paid more than once, or
erroneously or illegally collected
   
5.06.070   Savings clause
   
5.06.075   Regulations
   
5.06.080   Increase appropriations limit
§ 5.06.005 TITLE.
   This Chapter may be cited as the "Culver City Safe and Clean Water
Protection Measure."
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.010 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases whenever used in this Chapter shall be
construed and defined by this Section. The definition of a word or phrase
applies to any variants thereof.
   CFO. The Chief Financial Officer of the City of Culver City, or his or her
designee.
   CITY. The City of Culver City.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Culver City.
   DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the City of Culver City, or his or
her designee.
   IMPROVED PARCEL. A parcel improved with a structure (including a parking
structure) and/or a parcel improved with man-made ground covering, such as
pavement or other similar surfaces (including parking lots).
   LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD. A household in the City that meets the low-income
limit of 80% of the Area Median Income (AMI) or lower for Los Angeles County,
as determined annually by the California Department of Housing and Community
Development.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PARCEL. A parcel containing more than one
residential dwelling unit, including condominiums, townhouses, mobile home
parks, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, apartments, and any other residential
parcel containing more than one residential dwelling unit.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL PARCEL. All improved parcels that do not meet the definition
of a single-family residential parcel or multi-family residential parcel and
are not otherwise exempted by this Chapter.
   PARCEL. The smallest, separately segregated lot, unit or plot of land having
an identified property owner, boundaries and surface area which is documented
for property tax purposes and given an assessor's identification number by the
County of Los Angeles Assessor.
   PARCEL TAX. A special tax, entitled the City of Culver City Safe and Clean
Water Protection Measure, approved by the voters of the City at the
consolidated State general election held on November 8, 2016.
   PARCEL TAX PROCEEDS. The proceeds of the parcel tax, including any interest
and penalties thereon.
   POSSESSORY INTEREST. Possession of, claim to, or right to the possession of,
land or improvements, including any exclusive right to the use of such land or
improvements.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The legal owner of any parcel of real property, except when
the legal owner of the real property is such due to the holding of a mortgage,
note or other security, in which case the "owner" shall be deemed to be the
beneficial owner of said parcel of real property.
   SENIOR CITIZEN. A person 65 years of age or older, both owning and residing
on a single-family residential parcel or multi-family residential parcel within
the City.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PARCEL. A parcel of land improved with a single
residential dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.015 NECESSITY, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   A.   The City Council hereby determines as follows:
      1.   That the cost to implement the City of Culver City Enhanced
Watershed Management Program Plan (the "EWMP Plan") throughout the City at the
level required to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the City;
      2.   That the cost to implement the EWMP exceeds the amount of revenues
from available sources;
      3.   That additional revenues are needed to fund a portion of the cost of
implementing the EWMP Plan, including financing the operation, administration,
maintenance, improvement, environmental restoration, upgrade and replacement of
the existing and future storm drainage system, on-site storm water management
systems, storm drain conveyance system upgrades, storm water infiltration
galleries, green street projects and other multipurpose capital improvement
projects;
      4.   That the levy of a City-wide parcel tax as hereinafter provided is
necessary to fund a portion of the foregoing municipal improvements and
services.
   B.   The Ordinance codified in this Chapter was approved by the voters of
the City at the consolidated State General Election held on November 8, 2016 by
the following vote:
      Yes:                  No:                  
   C.   Accordingly, the parcel tax is levied under this Chapter pursuant to
the City's Charter, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 50075 et seq., and other applicable
laws. It is hereby expressly provided that, as an exercise of municipal affairs
powers, the City shall be authorized to use all or a portion of the tax
allocated for capital improvements to pay installments of principal and
interest on bonded indebtedness or with respect to leases, or similar
instruments for the purposes of providing financing for any capital
improvements hereunder.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.020 TAX LEVY.
   A.   For each fiscal year beginning in Fiscal Year 2017-2018, a parcel tax
shall be levied on all improved property within the City of Culver City as
follows:
      1.   Each Improved single-family residential parcel shall be taxed $99
per parcel.
      2.   Each Improved Multi-Family Residential Parcel shall be taxed at $69
per residential dwelling unit.
      3.   Each improved non-residential parcel shall be taxed $1,096 per acre
of land or portion thereof.
      4.   All publicly owned parcels shall be exempt from the parcel tax.
Publicly owned parcels include, but are not limited to, parcels owned by the
City, County, State, Federal government, public school district, water
district, or flood control district. However, a possessory interest in a
publicly owned parcel may be taxed pursuant to the rates above based on the
actual use of such parcel, as long as the possessory interest holder is not
otherwise exempt pursuant to this Chapter. If a parcel is owned by an entity
that can be taxed using the Los Angeles County's utility roll, such parcel
shall be taxed as a non-residential parcel.
      5.   All parcels that do not receive a secured property tax bill for ad
valorem taxes shall be exempt from the parcel tax.
      6.   Each multi-use improved parcel shall be taxed the sum of the parcel
tax rate for the various applicable parcel tax classifications described
herein.
   B.   The number of units and acreage used for purposes of calculating the
parcel tax shall be as shown on the Los Angeles County Assessor's most recent
secured property tax roll, or as otherwise known to the City.
   C.   For the purposes specified in §
5.06.035 of this Chapter, the parcel tax shall be levied so long as it is
necessary to pay for any financing of capital improvements, and so long as
necessary for services as specified in §
5.06.035.
   D.   The parcel tax is levied pursuant to the City's Charter, Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 50075 et seq., and other applicable laws, and is a tax upon each parcel
of property or possessory interest. The amount of the parcel tax is not
measured by the assessed value.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.025 ADDITIONAL TAX RATE CLASSIFICATION INFORMATION.
   The following table shows the parcel tax rates by parcel tax classification
and corresponding Los Angeles County Assessor's land use codes. Only improved
parcels are subject to the parcel tax.
 
Parcel Tax Classificati on1 Typical County Land Use    Special Tax Rate
                            Codes
Single- Family Residential  Use codes beginning with
Parcel                      01, excluding condominium  $99 per parcel
                            and townhouse use codes
                            Use codes 010C, 010D, 010E
                            Use codes in the following
                            ranges:
                            0200 - 0299
Multi-Family Residential    0300 - 0399
Parcel                      0400 - 0499                $69 per dwelling unit
                            0500 - 0599 (excluding
                            0541)
                            0700 - 07992
                            0800 - 0899
                            0900 - 09992
                            Use Code 0541 (homes for
                            the aged)
                            Use codes in the following
                            ranges:
                            1000 - 1999                $1,096 per acre of land
Non- Residential Parcel     2000 - 2999                (or portion thereof)
                            3000 - 3999
                            4000 - 4999
                            5000 - 5999
                            6000 - 6999
                            7000 - 7999
                            Use code in the following
Public                      range:                     Exempt
                            8000 - 8899
Parcels exempt from ad      Any                        Exempt
valorem taxes
 
   1   The parcel tax classification shall be assigned based on data from the
Los Angeles County Assessor's most recent secured property tax roll, or on data
otherwise known to the City.
   2   Assessor's parcel numbers ("APNs") with land use codes beginning with 07
(mobile home) in the City currently represent only the mobile home itself, and
not the underlying land. The underlying land has a separate APN with a land use
code beginning with 09 and is assigned multiple dwelling units. It is
anticipated that the parcel tax for multi-family residential parcels will be
levied on the APN with the land use code beginning with 09. If no underlying
land APN exists, the parcel tax for the multi-family residential parcel will be
levied on the APN with a land use code beginning with 07.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.030 APPEALS PROCESS.
   A.   If any property owner believes there is an error in either the Los
Angeles County Assessor's assigned land use code, dwelling units, or acreage or
if there are unique characteristics particular to the parcel in question that
could warrant an adjustment to the land use type, dwelling units, or taxable
acreage, the property owner may file an appeal with the Director. The Director
shall review the appeal and make a final decision.
   B.   Appeals for any upcoming fiscal year shall be submitted to the Director
prior to March 1 preceding such fiscal year. Appeals for parcel taxes
previously placed on the secured property tax roll and paid in full shall be
submitted to the Director within six months of payment being made and the
Director may correct the database based on his or her findings and, if
applicable, issue a refund.
   C.   Appeals for parcel taxes previously placed on the secured property tax
roll and not paid in full shall be submitted to the Director, and, if
applicable and permitted by the Los Angeles County Auditor-Controller, the
Director may correct the secured property tax roll based on his or her
findings. The property owner shall be responsible for the payment of all
processing costs related to the correction of the secured property tax roll.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.035 PURPOSES AND USES OF TAX.
   A.   There is hereby established a special fund entitled "Culver City Safe
and Clean Water Protection Measure" to be maintained by the City. Parcel tax
proceeds shall be collected each fiscal year and deposited in said special
fund, and shall be used exclusively for the implementation of the EWMP Plan,
including but not limited to, financing the operation, administration,
maintenance, improvement, environmental restoration, upgrade and replacement of
the existing and future storm drainage system, on-site storm water management
systems, storm drain conveyance system upgrades, and multipurpose capital
improvement projects, improving the quality of storm water, as well as
complying with local, state, and federal storm water regulations and paying
for, or securing the payment of, any indebtedness incurred for these purposes,
and any and all other purposes as more fully discussed therein. The following
are goals of the EWMP Plan:
      1.   Reduce urban runoff pollution;
      2.   Reduce urban flooding;
      3.   Increase water reuse and conservation;
      4.   Increase recreational opportunities and open space;
      5.   Increase wildlife and marine habitat.
   B.   Parcel tax proceeds may also be used to enforce and administer the
parcel tax, including costs for submission of any measure to the voters for the
establishment or alteration of the parcel tax, including but not limited to the
calculation and submittal of the parcel tax to the Los Angeles County Assessor,
fees for the placement and collection of the parcel tax on the secured property
tax roll, and any costs for consultants and legal counsel.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.040 EXEMPTIONS.
   The parcel tax imposed by this Chapter shall not be construed as imposing a
tax upon any person when the imposition of such tax upon that person would be
in violation of either the Constitution of the United States or the
Constitution of the State of California. In addition to the exemptions set
forth in §
5.06.025, the City Council is authorized to establish by resolution other
exemption procedures and eligibility criteria for natural persons based on
income, age or disability. The parcel tax imposed by this Chapter shall be
subject to the exemptions set forth in this Section or adopted by resolution as
authorized herein.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.045 COMPUTATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX - INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   A.   The Director or his or her designee or employee is hereby authorized
and directed each fiscal year, commencing with the fiscal year 2017-2018, to
determine the parcel tax amount to be levied for each ensuing fiscal year for
each taxable parcel of real property within the City, in the manner and as
provided in §
5.06.020. The Director, in conjunction with the CFO, is hereby authorized and
directed to provide all necessary information to the Los Angeles County
Auditor-Controller to effect proper billing and collection of the parcel tax,
so that the installments of the parcel tax shall be included on the secured
property tax roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor. Unless otherwise required
by the City Council, no City Council action shall be required to authorize the
annual collection of the parcel tax as herein provided.
   B.   The parcel tax shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary ad
valorem taxes are collected and shall have the same lien priority, and be
subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in cases of
delinquency as provided for ad valorem taxes collected by the Los Angeles
County Assessor; provided, however, that the City Council may provide for other
appropriate methods of collection of the parcel tax by appropriate resolution
(s) of the City Council.
   C.   The parcel Tax shall constitute a lien upon the parcel upon which it is
levied until it has been paid. Any unpaid parcel tax due under this Chapter
shall be subject to all remedies provided under the Culver City Municipal Code
and as provided by law.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.050 SENIOR DISCOUNT AND ASSISTANCE.
   A.   Senior citizens that qualify as a Low Income Household shall be
eligible for a 50% reduction of the parcel tax if they own and reside on a
single-family residential parcel or multi-family residential parcel within the
City. Eligible senior citizens meeting the criteria to qualify for the
reduction shall complete and submit annually to the City a Parcel Tax Reduction
Claim Form. The Parcel Tax Reduction Claim Form must be submitted to CFO on an
annual basis and no later than March 1 of each tax year. An applicant must
become a senior citizen prior to July 1 of the fiscal year for which the
reduction is requested.
   B.   This parcel tax is a property tax and qualified property owners and
renters shall be entitled to the benefits of the Gonsalves-Deukmejian-Petris
Senior Citizen's Property Tax Assistance Law (Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§
20501 et seq.) and the Senior Citizens and Disabled Property Tax Postponement
Law (Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 20581 et seq.), as provided by law.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.055 ACCOUNTABILITY.
   A.   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 50075.1 and 50075.3, the specific
purposes of the Parcel Tax, the requirement that the parcel tax proceeds be
applied to such purposes, and the establishment of a special fund for the
parcel tax proceeds are set forth in §
5.06.035. So long as the parcel tax is collected hereunder, commencing no later
than January 1, 2019, and annually thereafter, the CFO is hereby authorized and
directed to cause to be prepared and filed with the City Council a report that
shows the amount of parcel tax collected and expended and the status of any
projects funded with the parcel tax proceeds. For purposes of this Section, the
CFO is authorized to retain such consultants, accountants or agents as may be
necessary or convenient to accomplish the foregoing.
   B.   On an annual basis, the City's Finance Advisory Committee shall review
the revenues and expenditures of the parcel tax proceeds consistent with the
City Council Adopted Budget, and submit a report of its findings to the City
Council.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.060 EXAMINATION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS AND ANNUAL AUDIT.
   A.   The CFO or Director is hereby authorized and directed to examine
assessment rolls, property tax records, records of the Los Angeles County
Recorder and any other records of the County of Los Angeles deemed necessary in
order to determine ownership of parcels and computation of the tax.
   B.   A certified public accounting firm retained by the City will perform an
annual audit to assure accountability of the proper disbursement of the parcel
tax proceeds in accordance with the objectives stated herein.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.065 REFUND OF TAX, PENALTY OR INTEREST PAID MORE THAN ONCE, OR
ERRONEOUSLY OR ILLEGALLY COLLECTED.
   Unless otherwise covered under §
5.06.030 of this Chapter, when the amount of the parcel tax, any penalty, or
any interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the City under this Chapter, it may be refunded
provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon
which the claim is founded, is filed with the CFO within six months from the
date of payment. If the claim is approved by the CFO, the excess amount
collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited against any amounts then
due and payable from the person from whom it is collected or by whom it has
been paid, and the balance may be refunded to such person or his or her
administrators or executors.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.070 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any person, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of the City to impose the
tax herein provided. If any provision, sentence, clause, Section or part of
this Chapter is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such provision,
sentence, clause, Section or part of this Chapter and shall not affect or
impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, Sections or parts of this
Chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City that the
Ordinance codified in this Chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision, sentence, clause, Section or
part thereof not been included herein.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.075 REGULATIONS.
   The City Council is hereby authorized to promulgate such regulations as it
shall deem necessary in order to implement the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
§ 5.06.080 INCREASE APPROPRIATIONS LIMIT.
   Pursuant to California Constitution Article XIIIB, the appropriations limit
for the City of Culver City is hereby increased by the aggregate sum authorized
to be levied by this parcel tax for the fiscal year 2017-2018 and each year
thereafter.
(Ord. 2016-013 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 5.07: WASTE REDUCTION REGULATIONS
Section
   
5.07.005   Purpose
   
5.07.010   Definitions
   
5.07.015   Polystyrene prohibitions
   
5.07.020   Proof of compliance
   
5.07.025   Certification of compliance
   
5.07.030   Plastic regulations
   
5.07.035   Packing material regulations
   
5.07.040   Polystyrene meat, fish or poultry tray, produce tray and egg carton
regulations
   
5.07.045   Food service ware regulations for on-premises dining
   
5.07.050   Take-out and delivery regulations
   
5.07.055   Exemptions
   
5.07.060   Enforcement and violation—penalty
§ 5.07.005 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to promote environmentally sustainable
practices in the City. These practices include, but are not limited to,
regulations that reduce solid waste and the use of certain plastics.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   BEVERAGE. Any liquid, slurry, frozen, semi-frozen or any other form of
refreshment drink.
   CITY FACILITY. Any building, structure, property, park, open space, or
vehicle owned or leased by the City, or any of its agents, agencies or
departments.
   CITY-SPONSORED EVENT. Any event, activity or meeting organized or sponsored,
in whole or in part, by the City or any department of the City.
   EGG CARTON. A container used to hold eggs, in the shell, sold to consumers.
   FOOD SERVICE WARE. Any item used to hold, store, serve, consume or transport
any food or beverage, including, but not limited to, any container, bowl,
plate, tray, glass, carton, box, cup, utensil, straw, stirrer, lid, sleeve,
condiment container, spill plug, liner and paper or foil wrapper.
   MEAT, FISH OR POULTRY TRAY. Any item used to sell or deliver meat, fish or
poultry to a consumer.
   PLASTIC. Any material made of either 1) petrochemical polymeric compounds
and additives or, 2) petroleum- or biologically-based polymers (such as com or
other plants).
   POLYSTYRENE. A thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing the styrene
monomer including, but not limited to, rigid polystyrene or expanded
polystyrene. Those POLYSTYRENE items which do contain an International Resin
Identification Code will contain an International Resin Identification Code
consisting of either a "6," an "EPS" or a "PS."
   POLYSTYRENE COOLER. Any ice chest or similar device made of polystyrene
foam, where such foam is not fully encased in another material.
   POLYSTYRENE PACKING MATERIAL. A polystyrene product used to hold, cushion or
protect items packed in a container for shipping, transport or storage.
   PRODUCE TRAY. Any item used to sell or deliver vegetables, fruit or eggs to
a consumer.
   REGULATED ENTITY. Any business (regardless of whether it consists of a sole
proprietor, corporation, partnership or any other manner of organization) or
association, group or organization (regardless of the manner of organization
and regardless of whether conducted on a profit or not-for-profit basis).
   STIRRER. A device used to mix beverages or to plug the opening of a beverage
container lid (i.e., a splash stick).
   STRAW. A tube used to transfer a beverage from its container to the mouth of
the drinker.
   UTENSIL. Any eating implement including, but not limited to, forks, spoons,
knives, sporks, spifes, cutlery and disposable flatware.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.015 POLYSTYRENE PROHIBITIONS.
   A.   No person or regulated entity shall use or distribute polystyrene food
service ware.
   B.   No person or regulated entity shall sell polystyrene coolers.
   C.   No person or regulated entity shall use, distribute or sell polystyrene
food service ware at City facilities that have been rented, leased or are
otherwise being used with permission of the City. This Subsection
5.07.015.C. is limited to use of City facilities for which a person has entered
into an agreement with, or obtained a permit from, the City to rent, ease or
otherwise occupy a City facility. All facility rental agreements for any City
facility shall include a provision requiring contracting parties to assume
responsibility for preventing the use, sale and/or distribution of polystyrene
food service ware while using City facilities. The facility rental agreement
shall indicate that a violating contracting party's security deposit will be
forfeited if the City Manager or their designee determines that polystyrene
food service ware was used, sold or distributed in violation of the rental
agreement.
   D.   No person or regulated entity shall use, sell or distribute polystyrene
food service ware at City-sponsored events, events that are open to the public,
City-managed concessions or at City meetings.
   E.   Effective January 1, 2023, no person or regulated entity shall sell any
polystyrene food service ware.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.020 PROOF OF COMPLIANCE.
   For the purpose of complying with §
5.07.015.A. of this Chapter, in any instance when any plastic food service ware
does not contain an International Resin Identification Code, the person or
regulated entity using, distributing or selling the plastic food service ware
shall maintain acceptable documentation about the composition of the plastic
food service ware being used, distributed or sold. Acceptable documentation
includes information provided by the plastic food service ware's supplier or
manufacturer, information provided on the plastic food service ware's bulk
packaging or any other relevant information establishing that the involved
plastic food service ware is not composed of polystyrene.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.025 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE.
   Any regulated entity required by this Code to have a business tax
certificate shall certify compliance with this Chapter upon obtaining a
business tax certificate and every time that this business tax certificate is
renewed.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.030 PLASTIC REGULATIONS.
   A.   Effective September 1, 2021:
      1.   No City officer, official, employee, representative or agent who is
acting on behalf of the City shall purchase, use, sell or distribute any
plastic utensils, plastic stirrers, plastic straws or polystyrene products
while acting on behalf of the City.
      2.   No contractor who is acting pursuant to any contract or agreement
with the City shall purchase, use, sell, distribute or otherwise acquire any
plastic utensils, plastic stirrers, plastic straws or polystyrene products
while acting pursuant to such contract or agreement.
      3.   While acting as an agent of the City, any agent of the City may only
use, sell, distribute, purchase or otherwise acquire utensils, stirrers or
straws made from materials which are accepted by the City's organics collection
program. However, such City agent may provide plastic straws as an
accommodation to a person with a disability who requests a straw in order to
enjoy equal access to the food or beverages being provided by that City agent.
      4.   No City officer, official, employee, representative, contractor or
agent, shall use, sell, distribute or otherwise provide any plastic water
bottles while acting on behalf of the City or while acting pursuant to a
contract or agreement with the City.
   B.   Effective January 1, 2022, any regulated entity shall only use, sell or
distribute utensils, stirring sticks or straws made from materials which are
acceptable by the City's organics collection program and only upon a customer's
request for any of those items. Anyone, however, may provide a plastic straw as
an accommodation to a person with a disability who requests a plastic straw in
order to enjoy equal access to the food or beverages being provided by the
regulated entity subject to this provision.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.035 PACKING MATERIAL REGULATIONS.
   Effective January 1, 2022:
   A.   No regulated entity shall sell, distribute or use polystyrene packing
material, including, but not limited to, foam, peanuts, packing peanuts, foam
popcorn, packing noodles or shipping boxes; provided, however, that the
disposal of any polystyrene packing materials which were part of any shipment
originating outside of the City shall not constitute a prohibited use under
this provision.
   B.   Packing materials which are reusable, acceptable to the City's
recycling program or acceptable to the City's organics collection program are
allowed.
   C.   Any regulated entity using polystyrene packing material for shipping
medical devices is exempt from the requirement of §
5.07.035.A.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.040 POLYSTYRENE MEAT, FISH OR POULTRY TRAY, PRODUCE TRAY AND EGG CARTON
REGULATIONS.
   Effective January 1, 2022, no regulated entity may sell, offer for sale or
otherwise distribute, within the City, any meat, fish or poultry tray, produce
tray or egg carton made, in whole or in part, from polystyrene. This
prohibition shall be applicable to the actual selling, offering for sale or
distribution of any such polystyrene item, as well as to the distributing of
any of such polystyrene item in conjunction with the selling, offering for sale
or distribution of meat, fish, poultry, vegetable, fruit or eggs.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.045 FOOD SERVICE WARE REGULATIONS FOR ON-PREMISES DINING.
   Effective January 1, 2023, food or beverages served for consumption on the
premises of any regulated entity shall only be served on or in food service
ware that is reusable. However, paper liners, paper napkins or foil wrappers
acceptable to the City's recyclables and/or organics collections program may be
used when the food item being served requires paper liners, paper napkins or
foil wrappers to contain and/or form the food item being served. To be deemed
"reusable" under this provision, food service ware must be manufactured of
durable materials specifically designed and manufactured to be safely and
repeatedly washed, sanitized and reused over an extended period of time.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.050 TAKE-OUT AND DELIVERY REGULATIONS.
   A.   No regulated entity shall provide any utensils, stirrers, straws or
napkins with take-out or delivery orders unless the customer requests such
items.
   B.   Effective January 1, 2022, disposable food service ware used by any
regulated entity for take-out or delivery must be acceptable to the City's
organics collection program and be free of fluorinated chemicals, as certified
by the Biodegradable Product Institute or other independent, third-party
certifying organization or agency recognized by the City However, paper liners,
paper napkins or foil wrappers acceptable to the City's recyclables and/or
organics collections program may be used when the food item being served
requires paper or foil to contain and/or form the food item being served.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.055 EXEMPTIONS.
   The City Manager or their designee may exempt any person from any of the
regulations of this Chapter, subject to all of the following:
   A.   Any exemption shall only be granted, for up to a one-year period, upon
a showing that compliance with a regulation of this Chapter would cause undue
hardship. An "undue hardship" shall be found only in situations where
compliance with any regulation of this Chapter would cause significant economic
hardship to the person seeking the exemption.
   B.   Any person granted an undue hardship exemption by the City must reapply
prior to the end of the exemption period and demonstrate continued undue
hardship, if they wish to have the exemption extended beyond the existing
exemption period.
   C.   An undue hardship exemption application shall include all information
necessary for the City Manager to make a decision, including, but not limited
to, documentation establishing the undue hardship. The City Manager or their
designee may require the applicant to provide additional information to permit
them to determine facts regarding the exemption application.
   D.   The City Manager or their designee may approve the undue hardship
exemption application, in whole or in part, with or without conditions.
   E.   Undue hardship exemption decisions are effective immediately.
   F.   Decisions of the City Manager may be appealed, by the person applying
for the undue hardship exemption, to the City Council. Appeals shall be filed,
in writing, with the City Clerk, no later than ten (10) days after the
applicant receives written notice of the City Manager's decision and shall be
accompanied by any applicable fee set by resolution of the City Council.
   G.   If the City Council determines an evidentiary hearing is necessary,
then notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing. The City Council shall review the appeal based on a
substantial evidence standard and make its final decision no later than thirty
(30) days after having concluded any such hearing. The formal rules of evidence
shall not be applicable to the hearing and the City Council's decision shall be
based on the record of the City Manager's decision, provided by staff, and on
any written information provided by the appellant.
   H.   If the City Council determines no evidentiary hearing is required, then
it shall make a decision regarding the appeal within thirty (30) days after
holding a public meeting, hearing from the appellant and considering any oral
or written reports or other documentation received as part of that meeting.
   I.   The City Council's decision on such appeals shall be final.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
§ 5.07.060 ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   A.   A violation of any provision of this Chapter is unlawful.
   B.   A violation of any provision of this Chapter is subject to the
penalties and remedies set forth in
Chapters 1.01, General Provisions, and
1.02, Administrative Citations, of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2021-010 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 5.08: MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REDUCTION REGULATIONS
Section
   
5.08.005   Definitions
   
5.08.010   Requirements for single-family generators
   
5.08.015   Requirements for commercial businesses
   
5.08.020   Waivers for generators
   
5.08.025   Requirements for commercial edible food generators
   
5.08.030   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services
   
5.08.035   Requirements for facility operators and community composting
operators
   
5.08.040   Compliance with CALGreen recycling requirements
   
5.08.045   Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance requirements
   
5.08.050   Procurement requirements for City, direct service providers and
vendors
   
5.08.055   Inspections and investigations by City
   
5.08.060   Enforcement
§ 5.08.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLACK CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as gray container and shall be used
for the purpose of storage and collection of black container waste.
   BLACK CONTAINER WASTE. Solid waste that is collected in a black container
that is part of a three-container organic waste collection service that
prohibits the placement of organic waste in the black container in the same
manner that 14 CCR §§ 18984.1(a) and (b) prohibit the placement of organic
waste in a gray container.
   BLUE CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(5) and shall be
used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated recyclable
materials.
   BROWN CONTAINER. A brown container which shall be used by commercial
businesses for the purpose of discarding and collecting of source separated
organic waste.
   CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS or CCR. The State of California Code of
Regulations. CCR references in this Chapter are preceded with a number that
refers to the relevant title of the CCR (e.g., "14 CCR" refers to Title 14 of
CCR).
   CALRECYCLE. California's Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery,
which is the department designated with responsibility for developing,
implementing, and enforcing SB 1383 regulations.
   CITY. The City of Culver City.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL. A firm, partnership, proprietorship,
joint-stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-profit or
nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or a multi-family residential
dwelling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(6).
   COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. Includes a tier one or a tier two
commercial edible food generator, as defined in this Chapter, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR §§ 18982(a)(73) and (74). For the purposes of this
definition, food recovery organizations and food recovery services are not
COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   COMMUNITY COMPOSTING. Any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination, and the total amount of feedstock and compost on-site at any one
time does not exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards and seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet, as specified in 14 CCR § 17855(a)(4) or as otherwise defined
by 14 CCR § 18982(a)(8).
   COMPLIANCE REVIEW. A review of records to determine compliance with this
Chapter.
   COMPOST. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 17896.2(a)(4), which provided,
as of the effective date of this Chapter, that COMPOST means the product
resulting from the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid wastes
that are source separated from the municipal solid waste stream, or which are
separated at a centralized facility.
   CONTAINER CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINATED CONTAINER. A container, regardless
of color, that contains prohibited container contaminants, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(55).
   C&D. Construction and demolition debris.
   DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. As defined in 14 CCR §
18982(14.5), a solid waste facility that accepts a source separated organic
waste collection stream as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(26.6) and complies with
one of the following:
      1.   The facility is a "transfer/processor," as defined in 14 CCR §
18815.2(a)(62), that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR
§ 18815.5(d), and meets or exceeds an annual average source separated organic
content recovery rate of fifty percent (50%) between January 1, 2022 and
December 31, 2024 and seventy- five percent (75%) on and after January 1, 2025
as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR § 18815.5(f) for organic waste received from
the source separated organic waste collection stream.
         a.   If a transfer/processor has an annual average source separated
organic content recovery rate lower than the rate required in Paragraph 1 of
this definition for two (2) consecutive reporting periods, or three (3)
reporting periods within three (3) years, the facility shall not qualify as a
DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY.
      2.   The facility is a composting operation or composting facility, as
defined in 14 CCR § 18815.2(a)(13), that pursuant to the reports submitted
under 14 CCR § 18815.7 demonstrates that the percent of the material removed
for landfill disposal that is organic waste is less than the percent specified
in 14 CCR §§ 17409.5.8(c)(2) or (3), whichever is applicable, and, if
applicable, complies with the digestate handling requirements specified in 14
CCR § 17896.5.
   DESIGNEE. An entity that the City contracts with or otherwise arranges to
carry out any of the City's responsibilities of this Chapter as authorized in
14 CCR § 18981.2. A DESIGNEE may be a government entity, a hauler, a private
entity, or a combination of those entities.
   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this Chapter or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(18), EDIBLE FOOD is not solid waste if it is recovered and
not discarded. Nothing in this Chapter or in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12
requires or authorizes the recovery of edible food that does not meet the food
safety requirements of the Cal. Retail Food Code.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of the City to address noncompliance with this
Chapter including, but not limited to, issuing administrative citations, fines,
penalties, or using other remedies.
   EXCLUDED WASTE. Hazardous substances, hazardous waste, infectious waste,
designated waste, volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious, regulated
radioactive waste, and toxic substances or material that facility operator(s),
which receive materials from the City and its generators, reasonably believe(s)
would, as a result of or upon acceptance, transfer, processing, or disposal, be
a violation of local, state, or federal law, regulation, or ordinance
(including land use restrictions or conditions; waste that cannot be disposed
of in Class III landfills or accepted at the facility by permit conditions;
waste that would, in the reasonable opinion of the City or its designee,
present a significant risk to human health or the environment, cause a nuisance
or otherwise create or expose the City, or its designee, to potential
liability; but not including de minimis volumes or concentrations of waste of a
type and amount normally found in single-family or multi-family solid waste
after implementation of programs for the safe collection, processing,
recycling, treatment, and disposal of batteries and paint in compliance with
Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 41500 and 41802).
   FOOD DISTRIBUTOR. A company that distributes food to entities including, but
not limited to, supermarkets and grocery stores, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(22).
   FOOD FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
113789.
   FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to collect and distribute food for human consumption
that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(24).
   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION. An entity that engages in the collection or
receipt of edible food from commercial edible food generators and distributes
that edible food to the public for food recovery either directly or through
other entities or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25), including, but
not limited to:
      1.   A food bank as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113783;
      2.   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 113841; and
      3.   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 113842.
A FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION is not a commercial edible food generator for the
purposes of this Chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25) for FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION
differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25) shall
apply to this Chapter.
   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food recovery
organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(26). A FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this Chapter and implementation of 14 CCR,
Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD SCRAPS. All food such as, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meat,
poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta, bread, cheese, and
eggshells. FOOD SCRAPS excludes fats, oils, and grease when such materials are
source separated from other FOOD SCRAPS.
   FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity primarily engaged in providing food
services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations of
others based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations, or
as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(27).
   FOOD WASTE. Food scraps and food-soiled paper.
   FOOD-SOILED PAPER. Compostable paper material that has come in contact with
food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper
coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes and milk cartons.
   GRAY CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(28).
   GREEN CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(29) and shall
be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated green
container organic waste.
   GROCERY STORE. A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned food;
dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any
area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is prepared
and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(30).
   HAULER ROUTE. The designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each segment
of a jurisdiction's collection service area, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
§ 18982(a)(31.5).
   HIGH DIVERSION ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY. A facility that is in
compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR § 18815.5(d) and meets or
exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic content recovery rate of fifty
percent (50%) between January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2024, and seventy-five
percent (75%) after January 1, 2025, as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR § 18815.5
(e) for organic waste received from the mixed waste organic collection stream,
as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(11.5); or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(33).
   INSPECTION. A site visit where the City reviews records, containers, and an
entity's collection, handling, recycling, or landfill disposal of organic waste
or edible food handling to determine if the entity is complying with
requirements set forth in this Chapter, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(35).
   JURISDICTION ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. Either an inspector from the City's
Public Works Department or an officer from the City's Enforcement Services
Division.
   LARGE EVENT. An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a
flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency,
and serves an average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals per day of
operation of the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a
public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street
system, or other open space when being used for an event. If the definition in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(38) shall apply to this Chapter.
   LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals within the grounds of the
facility per day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this
Chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a venue facility
includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or
operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or
civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts
center, fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For
purposes of this Chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12,
a site under common ownership or control that includes more than one LARGE
VENUE that is contiguous with other LARGE VENUES in the site, is a single LARGE
VENUE If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) differs from this definition,
the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) shall apply to this Chapter.
   LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCY. A school district, charter school, or county office
of education that is not subject to the control of city or county regulations
related to solid waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(40).
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING or MULTI-FAMILY. Of, from, or pertaining
to residential premises with five (5) or more dwelling units. Multi-family
premises do not include hotels, motels, or other transient occupancy
facilities, which are considered commercial businesses.
   MWELO. The Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, 23 CCR, Division 2,
Chapter 2.7.
   NON-COMPOSTABLE PAPER. Includes paper that is not approved by the City’s
composting facility because material will not breakdown in the composting
process, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(41).
   NON-ORGANIC RECYCLABLES. Non-putrescible and non-hazardous recyclable wastes
including but not limited to bottles, cans, metals, plastics and glass, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(43).
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice that a violation has occurred that includes a
compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties, or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR § 18995.4.
   ORGANIC WASTE. Solid wastes containing material originated from iving
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including but not limited to
food, green material, landscape and pruning waste, food-soiled paper products,
or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(46).
   ORGANIC WASTE GENERATOR. A person or entity that is responsible for the
initial creation of organic waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(48).
   PAPER PRODUCTS. Include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial supplies,
cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated boxes,
tissue, and toweling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(51).
   PRINTING AND WRITING PAPERS. Include, but are not limited to, copy,
xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper,
white wove envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing tablets,
newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards, calendars,
brochures, reports, magazines, and publications, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(54).
   PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS. Either: (i) discarded materials placed in
the blue container that are not identified as acceptable source separated
recyclable materials; (ii) discarded materials placed in a green container or a
brown container that are not identified as acceptable source separated green
container organic waste; (iii) discarded materials placed in the black
container that are acceptable source separated recyclable materials or source
separated green container organic wastes that should be placed in the City's
blue container, brown container or green container; or (iv) excluded waste
placed in any container.
   RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCTS. Products made from California landfill-
diverted recovered organic waste processed in a permitted or otherwise
authorized facility, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(60).
   RECOVERY. Any activity or process described in 14 CCR § 18983.1(b), or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(49).
   RECYCLED-CONTENT PAPER. Paper products or printing and writing papers that
consist of at least thirty percent (30%), by fiber weight, post-consumer fiber,
or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(61).
   REGIONAL AGENCY. Regional agency as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code §
40181.
   REMOTE MONITORING. The use of the internet of things (IoT) and/or wireless
electronic devices to visualize the contents of blue containers, green
containers, and black containers for purposes of identifying the quantity of
materials in containers (level of fill) and/or presence of prohibited container
contaminants.
   RENEWABLE GAS. Gas derived from organic waste that has been diverted from a
California landfill and processed at an in-vessel digestion facility that is
permitted or otherwise authorized by 14 CCR to recycle organic waste, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(62).
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   A person who causes a violation of this Chapter to occur;
      2.   A person who maintains or allows a violation of this Chapter to
continue, by his or her action or failure to act;
      3.   A person whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a
violation of this Chapter by his or her action or failure to act;
      4.   A person who is the owner and/or a lessee or sub-lessee, with the
current right of possession, of real property where a violation of this Chapter
occurs or exists;
      5.   A person who is the on-site manager of a business and who regularly
works at the site when the business is open and who is responsible for the
activities on the business's premises;
      6.   Any person with actual or apparent authority, possession or control
of real or personal property; or any other person, who creates maintains,
permits or allows a violation of this Chapter.
For the purposes of this definition, PERSON includes a natural person or a
legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers,
trustees and general partners of a legal entity.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(64).
   ROUTE REVIEW. A visual inspection for the purpose of determining container
contamination, and may include mechanical inspection methods such as the use of
cameras, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(65).
   SB 1383. Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on September 19,
2016, which added Sections 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7, and 39730.8 to the Cal.
Health and Safety Code, and added Chapter 13.1 (commencing with § 42652) to
Part 3 of Division 30 of the Cal. Public Resources Code, establishing methane
emissions reduction targets in a statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-
lived climate pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced
from time to time.
   SB 1383 REGULATIONS or SB 1383 REGULATORY. The Short-Lived Climate
Pollutants: Organic Waste Reduction regulations developed by CalRecycle and
adopted in 2020 that created 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 and amended
portions of regulations of 14 CCR and 27 CCR.
   SINGLE-FAMILY. Of, from, or pertaining to any residential premises with
fewer than five (5) units.
   SOLID WASTE. Defined similarly to the definition that term is given in Cal.
Public Resources Code § 40191, which defines SOLID WASTE as all putrescible and
non-putrescible solid, semi-solid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash,
refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction
wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial
appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not
hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and
other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes. However, for purposes of this
Chapter, SOLID WASTE is defined to include only non-recyclable paper and non-
recyclable demolition and construction wastes. Consistent with Cal. Public
Resources Code § 40191, SOLID WASTE does not include any of the following
wastes:
      1.   Hazardous waste, as defined in the Cal. Public Resources Code §
40141.
      2.   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control
Law (Chapter 8 (commencing with § 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code).
      3.   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste
Management Act (Part 14 (commencing with § 117600) of Division 104 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a
SOLID WASTE landfill, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code § 40195.1.
Medical waste that has been treated and deemed to be SOLID WASTE shall be
regulated pursuant to Division 30 of the Cal. Public Resources Code.
   SOURCE SEPARATED. Materials, including commingled recyclable materials, that
have been separated or kept separate from the solid waste stream, at the point
of generation, for the purpose of additional sorting or processing those
materials for recycling or reuse in order to return them to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted
products, which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402.5(b)(4). For the
purposes of this Chapter, SOURCE SEPARATED shall include separation of
materials by the generator, property owner, property owner's employee, property
manager, or property manager's employee into different containers for the
purpose of collection such that SOURCE SEPARATED materials are separated from
the black container waste or other solid waste for the purposes of collection
and processing.
   SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE. Source separated organic
waste that can be placed in a green container or a brown container that is
specifically intended for the separate collection of organic waste by the
generator but excludes source separated recyclable materials, carpets, non-
compostable paper and textiles.
   SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Source separated non-organic
recyclables, printing and writing papers (but excluding cotton fiber) and paper
products (but excluding wrapping, tissue and toweling).
   STATE. The State of California.
   SUPERMARKET. A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales
of two million dollars ($2,000,000) or more and which sells a line of dry
grocery, canned goods, or non- food items and some perishable items, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(71).
   TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
      1.   Supermarket;
      2.   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet;
      3.   Food service provider;
      4.   Food distributor;
      5.   Wholesale food vendor.
If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) of TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD
GENERATOR differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73)
shall apply to this Chapter.
   TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
      1.   Restaurant with two hundred fifty (250) or more seats, or a total
facility size equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet;
      2.   Hotel with an on-site food facility and two hundred (200) or more
rooms;
      3.   Health facility with an on-site food facility and one hundred (100)
or more beds;
      4.   Large venue;
      5.   Large event;
      6.   A State agency with a cafeteria with two hundred fifty (250) or more
seats or total cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than five thousand
(5,000) square feet;
      7.   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(74) of TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD
GENERATOR differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(74)
shall apply to this Chapter.
   WHOLESALE FOOD VENDOR. A business or establishment engaged in the merchant
wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is
received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse,
distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(76).
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.010 REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY GENERATORS.
   Single-family organic waste generators:
   A.   Shall subscribe to the City's organic waste collection services for all
organic waste generated as described below in §
5.08.010.B. The City shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type
of collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; and single-family generators shall adjust their service level for
its collection services as requested by the City. Generators may additionally
manage their organic waste by preventing or reducing their organic waste,
managing organic waste on site, and/or using a community composting site
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c);
   B.   Shall participate in the City's organic waste collection service(s) by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described below, and
shall not place prohibited container contaminants in collection containers:
      1.   Generator shall place source separated green container organic
waste, including food waste, in the green container; source separated
recyclable materials in the blue container; and black container waste in the
black container. Generators shall not place materials designated for the black
container into either the green container or the blue container.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.015 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES.
   Generators that are commercial businesses shall:
   A.   Subscribe to City's three-container collection services and comply with
requirements of those services as described below in §
5.08.015.B. The City shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers and frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of
capacity provided for each type of collection service for proper separation of
materials and containment of materials; and commercial businesses shall adjust
their service level for their collection services as requested by the City;
   B.   Participate in the City's organic waste collection service(s), unless
otherwise notified by the City, by placing designated materials in designated
containers as described below:
      1.   Generator shall place source separated green container organic
waste, including food waste, in either a green container or a brown container;
source separated recyclable materials in the blue container; and black
container waste in the black container. Generator shall not place materials
designated for the black container into either the green container, the brown
container or the blue container.
   C.   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors for employees,
contractors, tenants, and customers, consistent with the City's three-container
collection service;
   D.   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, provide containers for
the collection of source separated green container organic waste and source
separated recyclable materials in all indoor and outdoor areas where disposal
containers are provided for customers, for materials generated by that
business. Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a
commercial business does not generate any of the materials that would be
collected in one type of container, then the business does not have to provide
that particular container in all areas where disposal containers are provided
for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the
business shall have either:
      1.   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by the City, with either lids
conforming to the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color
requirements or both lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A
Commercial business is not required to replace functional containers, including
containers purchased prior to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the
requirements of this subsection prior to the end of the useful life of those
containers, or prior to January 1, 2036, whichever comes first; or
      2.   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.8, the container labeling requirements
are required on new containers commencing January 1, 2022.
   E.   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, to the extent practical
(through education, training, inspection, and/or other measures), prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials per the City's three-container collection service;
   F.   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, periodically inspect blue
containers, green containers, and black containers for contamination and inform
employees if containers are contaminated and of the requirements to keep
contaminants out of those containers pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b)(3);
   G.   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper sorting of
source separated green container organic waste and source separated recyclable
materials;
   H.   Provide education information before or within fourteen (14) days of
occupation of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep
source separated green container organic waste and source separated recyclable
materials separate from black container waste (when applicable) and the
location of containers and the rules governing their use at each property;
   I.   Provide or arrange access to their properties in order for the City or
its agent(s) to access these properties during all inspections conducted in
accordance with this Chapter or conducted to confirm compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter;
   J.   Nothing in this §
5.08.015 prohibits a generator from preventing or reducing waste generation,
managing organic waste on site, or using a community composting site pursuant
to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c);
   K.   Commercial businesses that are tier one or tier two commercial edible
food generators shall comply with food recovery requirements, pursuant to §
5.08.025.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.020 WAIVERS FOR GENERATORS.
   A.   De minimis waivers. The City may waive a commercial business'
obligation to comply with some or all of the organic waste requirements of this
Chapter if the commercial business provides documentation that the business
generates below a certain amount of organic waste material as described in §
5.08.020.A.2., below. Commercial businesses requesting a de minimis waiver
shall:
      1.   Submit an application specifying the services that they are
requesting a waiver from and provide documentation as noted in §
5.08.020.A.2., below;
      2.   Provide documentation that either:
         a.   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
two (2) cubic yards or more per week and organic waste subject to collection in
a blue container, green container or brown container comprises less than twenty
(20) gallons per week per applicable container of the business' total waste; or
         b.   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
less than two (2) cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection
in a blue container, green container or brown container comprises less than ten
(10) gallons per week per applicable container of the business' total waste.
      3.   Notify the City if circumstances change such that the commercial
business's organic waste exceeds threshold required for waiver, in which case
such waiver will be rescinded;
      4.   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis waiver
every five (5) years, if the City has approved a de minimis waiver.
   B.   Physical space waivers. The City may waive a commercial business' or
commercial property owner's obligations to comply with organic waste collection
service requirements if the City has evidence from its own staff, a hauler,
licensed architect, or licensed engineer demonstrating that the premises lacks
adequate space for the collection containers required for compliance with the
organic waste collection requirements of §
5.08.015.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.025 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS.
   A.   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this §
5.08.025 commencing January 1, 2022, and tier two commercial edible food
generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024, pursuant to 14 CCR §
18991.3.
   B.   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this §
5.08.025, commencing January 1, 2024.
   C.   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed;
      2.   Contract or enter into a written agreement with the City, food
recovery organizations or food recovery services for: (i) the collection of
edible food for food recovery; or (ii) acceptance of the edible food that the
commercial edible food generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization
for food recovery;
      3.   At least annually, or as often as determined by the City, submit
receipt to the City of food donated to the City, a food recovery organization
or a food recovery service;
      4.   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service;
      5.   Allow City's designated enforcement entity or designated third party
enforcement entity to access the commercial edible food generator's premises
and review records pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.4;
      6.   Keep records that include the following information, or as otherwise
specified in 14 CCR § 18991.4:
         a.   A list of each food recovery service or food recovery
organization that collects or receives the commercial edible food generator's
edible food pursuant to a contract or written agreement established under 14
CCR § 18991.3(b);
         b.   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR § 18991.3(b);
         c.   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            i.   The names, addresses and contact information of any food
recovery services or food recovery organizations to whom the commercial edible
food generator donated food during the previous calendar year;
            ii.   The types of food that was donated to any food recovery
services or food recovery organizations during the previous calendar year;
            iii.   The frequency that food were collected or self-hauled;
            iv.   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
      7.   Starting on March 1, 2023 for tier one commercial edible food
generators, March 1, 2025 for tier two commercial edible food generators and no
later than March 1 of each subsequent year, commercial edible food generators
shall provide an annual food recovery report to the City. These reports shall
contain data relating to the prior calendar year. For example, the report
received on March 1, 2023, shall contain data relating to the period between
January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2022. The data in these annual food recovery
reports shall include:
         a.   The names, addresses and contact information of any food recovery
service or food recovery organization to whom the commercial edible food
generator donated food during the prior calendar year;
         b.   The types of food donated to each particular food recovery
service or food recovery organization during the prior calendar year;
         c.   The frequency that food was collected by or self-hauled to any
particular food recovery service or food recovery organization during the prior
calendar year;
         d.   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to any particular food recovery service or food
recovery organization for food recovery during the prior calendar year.
   D.   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor of the
State of California on September 25, 2017, which added Article 13 (commencing
with § 49580) to Chapter 9 of Part 27 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Education
Code, and to amend Cal. Health and Safety Code § 114079, relating to food
safety, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to time).
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.030 REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS AND SERVICES.
   A.   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or
as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(1):
      1.   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food;
      2.   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each commercial
edible food generator per month;
      3.   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month;
      4.   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   B.   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food from
commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or
as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(2):
      1.   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization receives edible food;
      2.   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month;
      3.   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   C.   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services shall inform new
generators with whom they have never worked with before about California and
Federal Good Samaritan Food Donation Act protection in written communications,
such as in their contract or agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
   D.   No later than April 1, 2023, food recovery organizations and food
recovery services that are located in the City and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) shall report, on a quarterly basis, to the City the
total pounds of edible food recovered in the prior quarter from the tier one
and tier two commercial edible food generators they have established a contract
or written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
   E.   Food recovery services' and food recovery organizations' capacity
planning obligations. In order to support edible food recovery capacity
planning assessments or other studies conducted by Los Angeles County, the
City, its designee or by a special district that provides solid waste
collection services, food recovery services and food recovery organizations
operating in the City shall provide information and consultation to the City,
upon request, regarding existing, or proposed new or expanded, food recovery
capacity that could be accessed by the City and its commercial edible food
generators. A food recovery service or food recovery organization contacted by
the City shall respond to such request for information within sixty (60) days,
unless a shorter timeframe is otherwise specified by the City.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.035 REQUIREMENTS FOR FACILITY OPERATORS AND COMMUNITY COMPOSTING
OPERATORS.
   A.   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover organic
waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel digestion
facilities, and publicly-owned treatment works shall, upon request of the City,
provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded capacity
at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information about
throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes. Entities
contacted by the City for these purposes shall respond within sixty (60) days.
   B.   Community composting operators, upon City request, shall provide
information to the City to support organic waste capacity planning, including,
but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste anticipated to
be handled at the community composting operation. Entities contacted by the
City for these purposes shall respond within sixty (60) days.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.040 COMPLIANCE WITH CALGREEN RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Persons or business entities applying for a permit from the City for
new construction and building additions and alterations shall comply with the
requirements of this §
5.08.040 and all required components of the Cal. Green Building Standards Code,
Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11, (CALGreen), as amended, if their
project is covered by the scope of CALGreen or by more stringent requirements
of the City. If the requirements of CALGreen are more stringent than the
requirements of this § 5.08.040, the CALGreen requirements shall apply.
   B.   Project applicants shall refer to relevant building and/or planning
provisions in this Code for complete CALGreen requirements.
   C.   For projects covered by CALGreen or by more stringent requirements of
the City, the applicants must, as a condition of the City's permit approval,
comply with the following:
      1.   Where five (5) or more multi-family dwelling units are constructed
on a building site, provide readily accessible areas that serve occupants of
all buildings on the site and are identified for the storage and collection of
blue container, black container and green or brown container materials,
consistent with the three-container collection program offered by the City, or
comply with provision of adequate space for recycling for multi-family and
commercial premises pursuant to §§ 4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of
CALGreen, as amended (provided any amended requirements are more stringent than
the CALGreen requirements for adequate recycling space found in §§ 4.408.1,
4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the 2019 Cal. Green Building Standards Code,
Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11 as amended July 1, 2019 and
effective January 1, 2020).
      2.   New commercial construction or additions resulting in an increase of
more than thirty percent (30%) of the floor area shall provide readily
accessible areas identified for the storage and collection of blue container,
black container and green or brown container materials, consistent with the
three-container collection program offered by the City, or shall comply with
provision of adequate space for recycling for multi-family and commercial
premises pursuant to §§ 4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of CALGreen, as
amended (provided any amended requirements are more stringent than the CALGreen
requirements for adequate recycling space found in §§ 4.408.1, 4.410.2,
5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the 2019 Cal. Green Building Standards Code, Cal. Code
of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11 as amended July 1, 2019 and effective January
1, 2020).
      3.   Comply with CALGreen requirements and applicable law related to
management of C&D, including diversion of organic waste in C&D from disposal.
Comply with City's C&D ordinance, if any, and all written and published City
policies and/or administrative guidelines regarding the collection, recycling,
diversion, tracking, and/or reporting of C&D.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.045 MODEL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Property owners or their building or landscape designers, including
anyone requiring a building or planning permit, plan check, or landscape design
review from the City, who are constructing a new (single-family, multi-family,
public, institutional, or commercial) project with a landscape area greater
than five hundred (500) square feet, or rehabilitating an existing landscape
with a total landscape area greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet, shall comply with §§ 492.6(a)(3)(B), (C), (D) and (G) of MWELO,
including sections related to use of compost and mulch as delineated in this §
5.08.045.
   B.   Property owners or their building or landscape designers that meet the
threshold for MWELO compliance outlined in §
5.08.045.A., above, shall comply with §§ 492.6(a)(3)(B), (C), (D) and (G) of
MWELO, which requires the submittal of a landscape design plan with soil
preparation, mulch and amendments sections which include the following:
      1.   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four
(4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area shall be
incorporated to a depth of six (6) inches into the soil. Soils with greater
than six percent (6%) organic matter in the top six (6) inches of soil are
exempt from adding compost and tilling.
      2.   For landscape installations, a minimum three (3)-inch layer of mulch
shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf
areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers or in direct seeding applications where
mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other
wildlife, up to five percent (5%) of the landscape area may be left without
mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan
as such.
      3.   Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer
materials shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest
products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally
available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel
modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
   C.   MWELO compliance items listed in this §
5.08.045 are not an inclusive list of MWELO requirements; therefore, property
owners or their building or landscape designers that meet the threshold for
MWELO compliance outlined in §
5.08.045.A. shall consult MWELO for all requirements.
   D.   If, after the adoption of this Chapter, the California Department of
Water Resources, or its successor agency, amends 23 CCR, Division 2, Chapter
2.7, §§ 492.6(a)(3)(B), (C), (D) and (G) of the MWWELO September 15, 2015
requirements in a manner that requires jurisdictions to incorporate the
requirements of an updated MWELO in a local ordinance, and the amended
requirements include provisions more stringent than those required in this §
5.08.045, the revised requirements of 23 CCR, Division 2, Chapter 2.7 shall be
enforced.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.050 PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY, DIRECT SERVICE PROVIDERS AND
VENDORS.
   A.   In order to comply with the City's organic waste product procurement
target, as required by 14 CCR § 18993.1, any mulch procured by the City or by a
direct service provider who is required to procure mulch through a written
contract or agreement with the City shall:
      1.   Meet and exceed the physical contamination, maximum metal
concentration, and pathogen density standards for land application specified in
14 CCR §§ 17852(a)(24.5)(A)1 through 3; and
      2.   Be produced at one of the following facilities:
         a.   A compostable material handling operation or facility, as defined
in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(12), that is permitted or authorized under 14 CCR Division
7, other than a chipping and grinding operation or facility as defined in 14
CCR § 17852(a)(10);
         b.   A transfer/processing facility or transfer/processing operation,
as defined in 14 CCR §§ 17402(a)(30) and (31), respectively, that is permitted
or authorized under 14 CCR Division 7; or
         c.   A solid waste landfill, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code
§ 40195.1, that is permitted under 27 CCR Division 2.
   B.   All vendors providing paper products and printing and writing paper
shall:
      1.   Certify in writing, under penalty of perjury, the minimum percentage
of post-consumer material in the paper products and printing and writing paper
offered or sold to the City. This certification requirement may be waived if
the percentage of post-consumer material in the paper products, printing and
writing paper, or both, can be verified by a product label, catalog, invoice,
or a manufacturer or vendor internet website;
      2.   Certify in writing, on invoices or receipts provided, that the paper
products and printing and writing paper offered or sold to the City are
eligible to be labeled with an unqualified recyclable label as defined in 16
Code of Federal Regulations § 260.12 (as published on January 1, 2013);
   C.   All City departments and direct service providers to the City must
comply with any City Environmental Preferable Purchasing Policy, including any
recovered organic waste product and recycled content paper procurement
requirements.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.055 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS BY CITY.
   A.   City representatives and/or the City’s designated entity, including
designees, are authorized to conduct inspections and investigations, at random
or otherwise, of any collection container, collection vehicle loads, or
transfer, processing, or disposal facility for materials collected from
generators, or source separated materials to confirm compliance with this
Chapter by organic waste generators, commercial businesses, property owners,
commercial edible food generators, haulers, self-haulers, food recovery
services, and food recovery organizations, subject to applicable laws. This §
5.08.055 does not allow the City to enter the interior of a private residential
property for inspection.
   B.   Regulated entities shall provide or arrange for access during all
inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall
cooperate with the City's employee or its designated entity/designee during
such inspections and investigations. Such inspections and investigations may
include confirmation of proper placement of materials in containers, edible
food recovery activities, records, or any other requirement of this Chapter
described herein. Failure to provide or arrange for: (i) access to an entity's
premises; or (ii) access to records for any Inspection or investigation is a
violation of this Chapter and may result in penalties described.
   C.   The City shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an
entity that may be potentially noncompliant with SB 1383 regulations, including
receipt of anonymous complaints.
   D.   Any records obtained by the City during its inspection or other reviews
shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure exemptions of
the Public Records Act, as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 6250 et seq.
   E.   Subject to applicable laws, City representatives, its designated
entity, and/or designee are authorized to conduct any inspections or other
investigations as reasonably necessary to further the goals of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
§ 5.08.060 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute grounds for
issuance of a Notice of Violation and assessment of a fine by a Jurisdiction
Enforcement Official or representative. Enforcement actions under this Chapter
include, but are not limited to, issuance of an administrative citation and
assessment of a fine. The City's procedures on imposition of administrative
fines, as set forth in
Chapter 1.02 of this Code, are hereby incorporated in their entirety, as
modified from time to time, and shall govern the imposition, enforcement,
collection, and review of administrative citations issued to enforce this
Chapter and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this Chapter, except as
otherwise indicated in this Chapter.
   B.   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. The City may pursue civil actions in
the California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations.
   C.   Responsible entity for enforcement.
      1.   Enforcement pursuant to this Chapter may be undertaken by the
Jurisdiction Enforcement Official, the City Manager or their designated entity,
legal counsel or combination thereof.
      2.   The Jurisdiction Enforcement Officials will interpret this Chapter;
implement enforcement actions; and, determine if compliance standards are met.
      3.   The Jurisdiction Enforcement Officials may issue Notices of
Violation(s).
   D.   Process for enforcement.
      1.   Jurisdiction Enforcement Officials and/or their designee will
monitor compliance with this Chapter randomly and through compliance reviews,
route reviews, investigation of complaints, and an inspection program (that may
include remote monitoring). Section
5.08.055 establishes the City's right to conduct inspections and
investigations.
      2.   The City may issue an official notification to notify regulated
entities of their obligations under this Chapter.
      3.   The City will issue a Notice of Violation to any responsible person
found to have prohibited container contaminants in a container upon the first
occurrence of any such violation. Such notice will be provided via a cart tag
or other communication immediately upon identification of the prohibited
container contaminants. Such notice shall, at a minimum, include information
regarding the requirement to properly separate material into the appropriate
containers and may include photographic evidence of the violation. If the City
observes prohibited container contaminants a second time, a second Notice of
Violation, containing a warning that a third occurrence may result in a fine
and/or the assessment of costs, will be provided in the same manner as required
of a first Notice of Violation. If the City observes prohibited container
contaminants a third time, the City may assess the responsible person the costs
of enforcing this §
5.08.060.D.3. and for cleaning the contamination and/or impose any applicable
administrative fines.
      4.   Effective January 1, 2024, with the exception of violations of
generator contamination of container contents addressed under §
5.08.060.D.3., the City shall issue a Notice of Violation, for any other
violation of this Chapter, requiring compliance within sixty (60) days of
issuance of the Notice of Violation.
      5.   Absent compliance by the responsible person within the deadline set
forth in the Notice of Violation, the City shall commence an action to impose
penalties, via administrative citation and fine, pursuant to the provisions of
this §
5.08.060 and Chapter 1.02 of this Code.
   E.   Penalty amounts for violations. The penalties for any violations of
this Chapter 5.08 shall be imposed in accordance with §
1.02.025 of this Code.
   F.   Compliance deadline extension considerations. The City may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a Notice of Violation issued in accordance
with this §
5.08.060 if it finds that there are extenuating circumstances beyond the
control of the responsible person that make compliance within the deadlines
impracticable, including the following:
      1.   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      2.   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government agency
approvals; or
      3.   Deficiencies in organic waste recycling infrastructure or edible
food recovery capacity and the City is under a corrective action plan with
CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR § 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
   G.   Education period for noncompliance. Beginning January 1, 2022 and
through December 31, 2023, the City will conduct inspections, route reviews or
waste evaluations, and compliance reviews, depending upon the type of regulated
entity, to determine compliance, and if the City determines that organic waste
generator, tier one commercial edible food generator, food recovery
organization, food recovery service, or other entity is not in compliance, it
shall provide educational materials to the entity describing its obligations
under this Chapter and a notice that compliance is required by January 1, 2022,
and that violations may be subject to administrative civil penalties starting
on January 1, 2024.
   H.   Civil penalties for noncompliance. Beginning January 1, 2024, if the
City determines that an organic waste generator, tier one or tier two
commercial edible food generator, food recovery organization, food recovery
service, or other entity is not in compliance with this Chapter, it shall
document the noncompliance or violation, issue a Notice of Violation, and take
enforcement action pursuant to this Chapter, as needed.
(Ord. No. 2021-014, § 2(part))
TITLE 7: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
7.01.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
7.02.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
         
7.03.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
         
7.04.   BICYCLES
         
7.05.   MOTOR VEHICLE AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 7.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions   
   
7.01.005   Violation and penalty
   
7.01.010   Applicability of Vehicle Code definitions
   
7.01.015   Definitions
Traffic Administration
   
7.01.100   Duty of Chief of Police
   
7.01.105   Duty of City Engineer
   
7.01.110   Duty of Public Works Director
   
7.01.115   Traffic accident studies
   
7.01.120   Traffic accident reports
   
7.01.125   Annual Traffic Safety Report
   
7.01.130   Authority to erect emergency parking signs
   
7.01.135   Traffic Committee; duties
Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
   
7.01.200   Authority of police and fire departments to direct traffic
   
7.01.205   Unauthorized person shall not direct traffic
   
7.01.210   Obedience to barriers and signs
   
7.01.215   Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers
   
7.01.220   Removal of marks
   
7.01.225   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
7.01.230   Exemptions to certain vehicles; effect of exemption
   
7.01.235   Removal of vehicles
   
7.01.240   Curb markings to indicate parking regulations
Traffic Control Devices
   
7.01.300   Authority to install traffic control devices
   
7.01.305   Traffic control signs required for enforcement purposes
   
7.01.310   Installation of traffic signals and street name signs
   
7.01.315   Lane marking
   
7.01.320   Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control
devices
   
7.01.325   Hours of operation
   
7.01.330   Distinctive roadway markings
   
7.01.335   Unauthorized painting of curbs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7.01.005 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise specified, a violation of a provision of this Chapter shall
be deemed a civil offense, punishable by a fine as established by resolution of
Council.
('65 Code, § 21-1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 93-011 § 1; Ord. No. 96-033 §
1)
§ 7.01.010 APPLICABILITY OF VEHICLE CODE DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever any words or phrases used in this Chapter are not defined herein,
but are defined in the California Vehicle Code and amendments thereto, such
definitions shall apply.
('65 Code, § 21-1.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.015 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever in this Chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meaning ascribed to them, unless it is apparent from the context thereof that
some other meaning is intended:
   CURB. The physical lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be
marked by curbing construction or not so marked; the word CURB as herein used
shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips
in the center of a street, nor from the tracks or from rights-of-way of public
utility companies.
   DIVISIONAL ISLAND. A raised island located in the roadway and separating
opposing conflicting directions of traffic.
   HOLIDAYS. Those days set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 6700(a) through (l) and
6701 and Thanksgiving Day.
   LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this
City.
   PARKING METER. A mechanical device installed within or upon a parkway or
sidewalk, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of
controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any
vehicle.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street other than a roadway or sidewalk.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Police Department of this City.
   VEHICLE CODE. The Vehicle Code of the State of California.
('65 Code, § 21-1.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
§ 7.01.100 DUTY OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, with such aid as may be
rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the street
regulations of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in the City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
traffic accidents and to cooperate with the City Engineer and other officers of
the City in the administration of traffic laws and in developing ways and means
to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed
by this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 21-2.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.105 DUTY OF CITY ENGINEER.
   It shall be the general duty of the City Engineer to determine the
installation and proper timing of traffic control devices and signals, to
conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial
measures, to conduct engineering and traffic survey of traffic conditions and
to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to
improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties
imposed by the City.
('65 Code, § 21-2.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.110 DUTY OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   A.   Whenever the Public Works Director is required or authorized to
install, place or maintain official traffic control devices, signals or
markings, he may cause such devices, signals or markings to be placed or
maintained.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to install and
maintain all official traffic control devices, markings, signs and signals
required by the Vehicle Code, this Chapter, resolution of the City Council or
the City Engineer pursuant to his authority as granted herein.
('65 Code, § 21-2.3) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Am. Ord. No. 97-009 § 1 (part))
§ 7.01.115 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
   Whenever the accidents at any particular location becomes excessive, the
Chief of Police shall cooperate with the City Engineer in conducting studies of
such accidents and in determining remedial measures.
('65 Code, § 21-2.4) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.120 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   The Chief of Police shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Such reports shall be available for use and information of
the Chief of Police or his designee(s) and the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 21-2.5) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.125 ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.
   The Chief of Police shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be
filed with the City Council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic
matters in this City as follows:
   A.   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;
   B.   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data
on the safety activities of the police;
   C.   The plans and recommendations of the Chief of Police and the City
Engineer for future traffic safety activities.
('65 Code, § 21-2.6) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.130 AUTHORITY TO ERECT EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS.
   Whenever the Chief of Police shall determine that an emergency traffic
congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the Chief of
Police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or
posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is
prohibited on such streets and alleys as the Chief of Police shall direct
during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in
place only during the existence of such emergency and the Chief of Police shall
cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
('65 Code, § 21-2.7) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.135 TRAFFIC COMMITTEE; DUTIES.
   A.   There is hereby established an advisory traffic committee to serve
without compensation, consisting of the Chief of Police, City Engineer, City
Planner, Fire Chief and the Public Works Director or each of their designees.
('65 Code, § 21-2.8)
   B.   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Committee to suggest the most
practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies
of this City having authority with respect to the administration and
enforcement of traffic regulations; to stimulate and assist in the preparation
and publication of traffic reports; to receive complaints regarding traffic
matters; and to recommend to the City Council, to the Chief of Police, to the
City Engineer, and to other City officials ways and means for improving traffic
conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations.
('65 Code, § 21-2.9)
(Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 7.01.200 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the
event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions to the contrary contained in this Code or the Vehicle Code.
('65 Code, § 21-3.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.205 UNAUTHORIZED PERSON SHALL NOT DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the
Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person
authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or
other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any
mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 21-3.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.210 OBEDIENCE TO BARRIERS AND SIGNS.
   No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any
barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Engineer,
or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign
lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any
department of this City.
('65 Code, § 21-3.3) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.215 OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OR AUTHORIZED OFFICERS.
   No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or
other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the municipal
code provisions, or any other city, county or state law. A violation of this
section shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000), six (6) months in jail, or both.
('65 Code, § 21-3.4A) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 96-033 § 2 (part))
§ 7.01.220 REMOVAL OF MARKS.
   No person shall remove, obliterate or conceal any chalk mark, crayon mark or
other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or
officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of municipal, county or
state parking regulations.
('65 Code, § 21-3.4B) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 96-033 § 2 (part))
§ 7.01.225 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State,
any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any
of the provisions of this Chapter except as otherwise permitted in this Chapter
or by state statute.
('65 Code, § 21-3.5) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.230 EXEMPTIONS TO CERTAIN VEHICLES; EFFECT OF EXEMPTION.
   A.   Exemptions to certain vehicles. The provisions of this Chapter
regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to
any vehicle of the Police or Fire Department, any public ambulance or any
public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle
or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any
vehicle mentioned in this Section is operated in the manner specified in the
Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.
   B.   The provisions of this Chapter regulating the parking or standing or
vehicles shall not apply to:
      1.   Any vehicle of a City department or public utility while necessarily
in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned by the United
States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United
States mail.
      2.    Any vehicle displaying a valid permit issued by the City Manager
under the authority of City Council Policy 3003, as that policy may be amended
from time to time, provided that said permit is displayed and used consistent
with such City Council Policy. ('65 Code, § 21-3.6)
   C.   Effect of exemption. Subsection A. does not relieve the driver of a
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway, nor protect him from the consequences of an arbitrary
exercise of the privileges granted in that Section. ('65 Code, § 21-3.7)
(Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 84-022 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part); Ord.
No. 2011-007 § 1)
§ 7.01.235 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   Pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 22651(n), and amendments thereto, any vehicle
which is parked or left standing or remains standing contrary to the provisions
of this Chapter or a resolution of this Council may be removed in the manner
and subject to the procedures set forth in the Vehicle Code and amendments
thereto, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make such removal or
cause such removal to be made, provided the signs required by Cal. Veh. Code §
22651(n), and amendments thereto, have been erected or placed at least twenty-
four (24) hours prior to such removal and providing that the signs indicate
that the area posted is “TOW-AWAY ZONE,” or that vehicles in violation will be
towed away or impounded.
('65 Code, § 21-3.8) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.240 CURB MARKINGS TO INDICATE PARKING REGULATIONS.
   The Public Works Director is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions
and limitations of this Chapter, to place, and when required herein shall
place, the following curb markings to indicate vehicle stopping, parking or
standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as herein
set forth.
   A.   “Red” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time, except
as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone
marked or signed as a bus zone.
   B.   “Yellow” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
between 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays (and holidays) for
any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers and personal
baggage, or commercial loading or unloading of materials, providing that the
loading or unloading of passengers and baggage shall not consume more than
three (3) minutes, nor the commercial loading or unloading of materials more
than twenty (20) minutes. Delivery or pickup of express and parcel post
packages and United States mail is included herein.
   C.   “White” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose
other than loading or unloading of passengers and personal baggage, which shall
not exceed three (3) minutes, and such restrictions shall apply at all times
except when the business abutting said zone is closed.
   D.   “Green” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking between 7:30 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except holidays, for a period of time longer than is
indicated by an appropriate sign or marking.
   E.   “Blue” shall mean parking limited exclusively to vehicles of disabled
persons.
('65 Code, § 21-3.9) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 7.01.300 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   A.   The Public Works Director shall have the power and duty to place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices
when and as required to make effective the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any
provisions thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to
the public of the application of such law, the Public Works Director is hereby
authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to
any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
   C.   The Public Works Director shall also place and maintain or cause to be
placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as the City
Engineer may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn
traffic, provided that the City Engineer shall make such determination only
upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and
in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth
in this Chapter or as may be determined by resolution of the Council.
('65 Code, § 21-4.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.305 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.
   No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this Chapter for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs
are in place, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic law.
('65 Code, § 21-4.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.310 INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND STREET NAME SIGNS.
   A.   The Public Works Director shall install and maintain official traffic
signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are
such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and
released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life
or property from exceptional hazard.
   B.   Subject to City Council approval, the City Engineer shall ascertain and
determine the locations where such signals are required by field observation,
traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his
determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic
engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the Department
of Transportation Traffic Manual.
   C.   Whenever the Public Works Director installs and maintains an official
traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at
such intersection street name signs visible to traffic approaching from all
directions.
('65 Code, § 21-4.3) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.315 LANE MARKING.
   The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane
lines upon the surface of the roadway, as determined by the City Engineer, to
indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily
designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction,
regardless of the center line of the highway.
('65 Code, § 21-4.4) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.320 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE, RELOCATE AND DISCONTINUE TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES.
   Subject to the City Council approval, the Public Works Director shall
remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not
specifically required by State law or this Chapter whenever the City Engineer
shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or
required this installation no longer exist.
('65 Code, § 21-4.5) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.325 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The City Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any
traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this Chapter or by resolution
of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 21-4.6) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.330 DISTINCTIVE ROADWAY MARKINGS.
   The Public Works Director is authorized to place and maintain distinctive
roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of
streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the
roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs
and markings.
('65 Code, § 21-4.7) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.01.335 UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS.
   A.   No person or agency shall paint any street or curb surface unless
authorized by the City Engineer; provided, however, that this Section shall not
apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any association,
corporation or person who has complied with the provisions of this chapter or
resolution of this City pertaining thereto.
   B.   Violation of this Section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punished by a
fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), six (6) months in jail, or
both.
('65 Code, § 21-4.8) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Am. Ord. No. 97-009 § 2)
CHAPTER 7.02: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions 
   
7.02.005   Speed limits on certain streets
   
7.02.010   Regulation of speed by traffic signals
   
7.02.015   Authority to approve and place turning markers and multiple turning
lanes
   
7.02.020   Authority to place restricted turn signs
   
7.02.025   Right turns at signal controlled intersections
   
7.02.030   Public Works Director to sign one-way streets and alleys
   
7.02.035   Stop signs
   
7.02.040   New pavement and markings
   
7.02.045   Closed street
   
7.02.050   No vehicles on walkway
   
7.02.055   Crosswalks; when pedestrians must use crosswalks
   
7.02.060   Crossing at right angles
   
7.02.065   Trains not to block crossings
Commercial Vehicles; Truck Routes
   
7.02.200   Definitions
   
7.02.205   Commercial vehicles restricted to certain streets
   
7.02.210   Truck routes designated
   
7.02.215   Erection of signs
   
7.02.220   Violation and penalty for subchapter
Interstate Trucks
   
7.02.300   Definitions
   
7.02.305   Purpose
   
7.02.310   Length and width restrictions
   
7.02.315   Application for approval of routes
   
7.02.320   Fees and costs
   
7.02.325   Retrofitting
   
7.02.330   Revocation of route designation
   
7.02.335   Service facilities
   
7.02.340   Appeal process
   
7.02.345   Exceptions
Cross-reference:
   Parking and street closures for filming activity, see §
11.14.025
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7.02.005 SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   Based upon an engineering and traffic survey, the prima facie speed limits
herein designated for the following street segments are determined to be
reasonable and safe to facilitate the orderly and efficient movement of
traffic:
Street From To Prima Facie Speed Limit (miles per hour)
                                                              Prima Facie Speed
Street              From                 To                   Limit (miles per
                                                              hour)
Adams Boulevard     City limit at        Washington Boulevard 30
                    Fairfax Boulevard
Braddock Drive      Duquesne Avenue      Overland Avenue      25
Bristol Parkway     Centinela Avenue     Green Valley Circle  35
Bristol Parkway     Green Valley Circle  Slauson Avenue       35
Buckingham Parkway  Green Valley Circle  Hannum Avenue        30
Buckingham Parkway  Hannum Avenue        Slauson Avenue       35
Centinela Avenue    City limit near      City limit near      35
                    Washington Boulevard Washington Place
Centinela Avenue    City limit at Mesmer City limit at Green  45
                    Avenue               Valley Circle
Culver Boulevard    City limit near      Elenda Street        40
                    Sawtelle Boulevard
Culver Boulevard    Elenda Street        Overland Avenue      40
Culver Boulevard    Overland Avenue      Duquesne Avenue      35
                                         City limit at
Culver Boulevard    Duquesne Avenue      Washington Boulevard 35
                                         / Canfield Avenue
Duquesne Avenue     Washington Boulevard City limit near      30
                                         Jefferson Boulevard
Eastham Drive       National Boulevard   Higuera Street       25
Elenda Street       Washington Boulevard Culver Boulevard     35
Fairfax Avenue      City limit near      City limit at La     35
                    Washington Boulevard Cienega Boulevard
Fox Hills Drive     Green Valley Circle  Hannum Avenue        25
Grand View          City limit at        City limit near      25
Boulevard           Mitchell Avenue      Washington Boulevard
Green Valley Circle Sepulveda Boulevard  Centinela Avenue     35
Hannum Avenue       Playa Street         Fox Hills Drive      35
Hannum Avenue       Fox Hills Drive      Buckingham Parkway   35
Hayden Avenue       National Boulevard   Higuera Street       25
Helms Avenue        National Boulevard   Higuera Street       25
Higuera Street      Washington Boulevard Lucerne Avenue       25
Higuera Street      Lucerne Avenue       Hayden Avenue        25
Higuera Street      Hayden Avenue        City limit near      35
                                         Jefferson Boulevard
Ince Boulevard      Washington Boulevard Lucerne Avenue       25
Jefferson Boulevard City limit at Mesmer Sepulveda Boulevard  35
                    Avenue
Jefferson Boulevard Sepulveda Boulevard  Overland Avenue      35
Jefferson Boulevard Overland Avenue      Duquesne Avenue      40
Jefferson Boulevard Duquesne Avenue      City limit at        40
                                         Holdrege Avenue
La Cienega          City limit near      City limit near      35
Boulevard           Fairfax Avenue       Washington Boulevard
Lucerne Avenue      Duquesne Avenue      Higuera Street       25
Mclaughlin Avenue   City limit at        City limit near      30
                    Washington Place     Washington Boulevard
National Boulevard  City limit near      City limit at        40
                    Washington Boulevard Jefferson Boulevard
Overland Avenue     Playa Street         Jefferson Boulevard  35
Overland Avenue     Jefferson Boulevard  Culver Boulevard     35
Overland Avenue     Culver Boulevard     City limit at Venice 35
                                         Boulevard
Playa Street        Sepulveda Boulevard  Overland Avenue      35
Sawtelle Boulevard  Overland Avenue      Sepulveda Boulevard  30
Sawtelle Boulevard  Sepulveda Boulevard  City limit at        35
                                         Ballona Creek Bridge
Sawtelle Boulevard  City limit near 405  Washington Boulevard 30
                    Freeway Bridge
Sawtelle Boulevard  Washington Boulevard City limit at Venice 35
                                         Boulevard
Sepulveda Boulevard City limit near      Sawtelle Boulevard   35
                    Centinela Avenue
Sepulveda Boulevard Sawtelle Boulevard   City limit at        40
                                         Ballona Creek Bridge
Sepulveda Boulevard City limit near      Culver Boulevard     35
                    Greenlawn Avenue
Sepulveda Boulevard Culver Boulevard     City limit at Venice 35
                                         Boulevard
Slauson Avenue      Jefferson Boulevard  Marina Freeway Ramps 40
Slauson Avenue      Marina Freeway Ramps City limit near      45
                                         Shenandoah Avenue
Washington          City limit at Walnut Wade Street          35
Boulevard           Avenue
Washington          Wade Street          Centinela Avenue     35
Boulevard
Washington          Centinela Avenue     Sawtelle Boulevard   35
Boulevard
Washington          Sawtelle Boulevard   Harter Avenue        35
Boulevard
Washington          Harter Avenue        Overland Avenue      35
Boulevard
Washington          Overland Avenue      Culver Boulevard     35
Boulevard
Washington          Culver Boulevard /   National Boulevard   35
Boulevard           Canfield Avenue
Washington          National Boulevard   La Cienega Boulevard 35
Boulevard
Washington          La Cienega Boulevard City limit at        35
Boulevard                                Fairfax Avenue
Washington Place    Washington Boulevard City limit at Grand  35
                    / Zanja Street       View Boulevard
Washington Place    City limit at        Sawtelle Boulevard   35
                    Mclaughlin Avenue
Washington Place    Sawtelle Boulevard   Tilden Avenue        35
Wesley Street       National Boulevard   Higuera Street       25
 
('65 Code, § 21-5.1) (Ord. No. 86-024 § 1; Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 90-015
§ 1; Ord. No. 90-031 § 1; Ord. No. 91-022 § 1; Ord. No. 96-026 § 1; Ord. No.
96-028 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-006 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-011 § 1; Ord. No. 2023-004 §
1)
§ 7.02.010 REGULATION OF SPEED BY TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   The City Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so
as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds
slightly at variance from the speed otherwise applicable within the district or
at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
('65 Code, § 21-5.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.02.015 AUTHORITY TO APPROVE AND PLACE TURNING MARKERS AND MULTIPLE TURNING
LANES.
   Upon the request of the City Engineer, the Public Works Director is
authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such
intersections, and is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of
traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and
the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law.
('65 Code, § 21-6.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.02.020 AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at
which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and the
Public Works Director shall place proper signs so indicating at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted.
('65 Code, § 21-6.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.02.025 RIGHT TURNS AT SIGNAL CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS.
   The Public Works Director shall post appropriate signs prohibiting right
turns where the City Engineer determines that the making of right turns against
the traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe
and orderly flow of traffic.
('65 Code, § 21-6.3) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.02.030 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO SIGN ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever this Chapter or a resolution of the City Council designates any
one-way street or alley, the Public Works Director shall place and maintain
signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless
such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
('65 Code, § 21-7.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.02.035 STOP SIGNS.
   The City Engineer shall have authority to designate those entrances to an
intersection at which a stop is required. The Public Works Director shall
install and maintain a stop sign at each such designated entrance. Such sign
shall conform with and shall be installed as provided in the Vehicle Code.
('65 Code, § 21-8.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.02.040 NEW PAVEMENT AND MARKINGS.
   A.   No person shall deface, mark, alter, damage, mar, draw on or in any
other way destroy, ruin, disfigure or impair any newly placed pavement or
freshly painted marking on any street or sidewalk when a barrier, sign,
delineation or any other traffic control device is in place clearly marking off
the area to pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic.
   B.   Violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to
a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), six (6) months in jail,
or both.
('65 Code, § 21-9.4) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Am. Ord. No. 97-009 § 4 (part))
§ 7.02.045 CLOSED STREET.
   A.   No person shall enter a street or portion of a street when a sign or
barrier is in place that the street or any portion thereof is closed to
vehicular traffic.
   B.   Violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to
a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), six (6) months in jail,
or both.
(Ord. No. 97-009 § 4 (part))
§ 7.02.050 NO VEHICLES ON WALKWAY.
   A.   No person shall place, cause to be placed, leave, push or propel in any
manner any bicycle, motorcycle or any other vehicle upon any pedestrian walkway
which the Council, by resolution, has specifically designated as reserved for
pedestrian use only.
   B.   Violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to
a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), six (6) months in jail,
or both.
('65 Code, § 21-9.5) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Am. Ord. No. 97-009 § 5)
§ 7.02.055 CROSSWALKS; WHEN PEDESTRIANS MUST USE CROSSWALKS.
   A.   Crosswalks.
      1.   The City Engineer may designate those intersections where pedestrian
crossing shall be prohibited. The Public Works Director shall install and
maintain signs at or adjacent to such intersections indicating such
prohibition.
      2.   Subject to Subsection 1., crosswalks shall be established and
maintained at all intersections controlled by a traffic signal or boulevard
stop and other places where the City Engineer determines that there is a
particular need to designate crosswalks for safe and orderly pedestrian
crossing. The Public Works Director shall place and maintain appropriate
devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway to designate such
crosswalks.
('65 Code, § 21-10.1)
   B.   When pedestrians must use crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross a
roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district.
('65 Code, § 21-10.2)
(Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.02.060 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic
control device, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles to the curb
or by the shortest route to the opposite curb.
('65 Code, § 21-10.3) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.02.065 TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK CROSSINGS.
   No person or government agency shall operate any train in such a manner as
to prevent vehicular use of any roadway for a period of time in excess of five
(5) consecutive minutes except:
   A.   When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the
movement of trains;
   B.   When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track;
   C.   When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching
operations;
   D.   When the train is disabled;
   E.   When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing; or
   F.   When necessary to comply with a governmental safety regulation.
('65 Code, § 21-11.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES; TRUCK ROUTES
§ 7.02.200 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. As stated in the California Vehicle Code, A commercial
vehicle “is a vehicle of a type required to be registered under [the California
Vehicle Code] used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire,
compensation, or profit or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.”
(Cal. Veh. Code § 260(a)).
   OVERWEIGHT. The overweight amount is deemed to equal the weight of the
vehicle, either laden or unladen, less 6,000 pounds.
('65 Code, § 21-16.1(a)) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 96-004 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 96-013 § 1)
§ 7.02.205 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES RESTRICTED TO CERTAIN STREETS.
   No person shall drive, or permit to be driven, any commercial vehicle the
total weight of which, either laden or unladen, exceeds six thousand (6,000)
pounds upon any street not designated as a truck route in §
7.02.210 and referred to herein as a restricted street, except for the
following purposes; provided that the most direct route is used to the
restricted street from the truck route and from the truck route to the
restricted street:
   A.   Pickups and deliveries of materials, goods, wares and merchandise from
or to any building or structure;
   B.   Movie or television production under permit from the City of Culver
City;
   C.   Bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any
building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit
has previously been obtained;
   D.   Construction, installation or repair of any public utility, provided
that the vehicle is owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor;
   E.   Transportation of persons by a common carrier;
   F.   Construction, repair or maintenance of City streets, storm drains, and
sanitary sewers; or
   G.   Emergency or government-owned vehicles.
('65 Code, § 21-16.1(b)) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 96-004 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 96-013 § 1)
§ 7.02.210 TRUCK ROUTES DESIGNATED.
   Any commercial vehicle, the laden or unladen weight of which exceeds six
thousand (6,000) pounds, shall use the following streets designated as truck
routes:
   A.   Centinela Avenue.
   B.   Culver Boulevard, between west City boundary and Sepulveda Boulevard.
   C.   Higuera Street, between Hayden Avenue/Place and Jefferson Boulevard.
   D.   Jefferson Boulevard.
   E.   La Cienega Boulevard.
   F.   National Boulevard.
   G.   Sawtelle Boulevard, between Culver/ Washington off-ramp of the San
Diego Freeway and Braddock Drive.
   H.   Sawtelle Boulevard, between Matteson Avenue and Venice Boulevard.
   I.   Adams Boulevard.
   J.   Sepulveda Boulevard.
   K.   Slauson Avenue, east of Jefferson Boulevard.
   L.   Venice Boulevard.
   M.   Washington Boulevard, east of La Cienega Boulevard.
   N.   Fairfax Avenue.
('65 Code, § 21-16.1(c)) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 96-004 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 96-013 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-007 § 1)
§ 7.02.215 ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   This Subchapter shall not be effective until appropriate signs are erected
indicating either the streets affected by this Subchapter or the streets not
affected, as the City Council determines will best serve to give notice of this
Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 21-16.1(d)) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 96-004 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 96-013 § 1)
§ 7.02.220 VIOLATION AND PENALTY FOR SUBCHAPTER.
   A.   A violation of this Subchapter shall constitute an infraction, with
bail forfeiture in the amount of $250.
   B.   A repeat violation of this Subchapter within a twelve (12) month period
constitutes a misdemeanor, subject to a fine of not more than $500 six (6)
months in jail, or both, provided that the City Attorney may prosecute a repeat
violation as an infraction.
('65 Code, § 21-16.1(e)) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 96-004 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 96-013 § 1)
INTERSTATE TRUCKS
§ 7.02.300 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth, and if
any word or phrase used in this Subchapter is not defined in this Section, it
shall have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided that
if any such word or phrase is not defined in the Vehicle Code, it shall have
the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.
   APPROVED INGRESS OR EGRESS POINT. An entrance or exit to or from a National
System of Interstate and Defense Highway or a Federal-aid primary highway which
has been designated and signed by the State of California Department of
Transportation for use by vehicles or combinations of vehicles exceeding the
limitations of Cal. Veh. Code §§ 35400, 35401 or 35411, or subdivisions (b) to
(e), inclusive, of § 35402.
   CALTRANS. The State of California Department of Transportation or its
successor agency.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Culver City or his
authorized representative.
   DESIGNATED ROUTE. A route approved and signed by the City of Culver City
pursuant to this Subchapter between an approved ingress or egress point and a
terminal or service facility.
   INTERSTATE TRUCK. A truck tractor and semi-trailer or truck tractor, semi-
trailer and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the Vehicle Code.
   SERVICE FACILITY. A fuel, food, lodging or repair facility located within
one-half (½) mile of an approved ingress or egress point.
   TERMINAL FACILITY. A facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped
and where full load consignments may be off-loaded, or at which vehicle
combinations not meeting the limitations of Cal. Veh. Code §§ 35400, 35401 or
35411, or subdivisions (b) to (e), inclusive, of § 35402, are regularly
maintained, stored, or manufactured.
   TRAILBLAZER SIGNS. Those signs erected to identify the designated route
which shall be used by interstate trucks to or from the approved ingress or
egress points to or from terminal facilities or service facilities.
('65 Code, § 21-18.1) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
§ 7.02.305 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subchapter is to establish procedures for terminal
designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks
operating on a Federally designated highway system and to promote the general
health, safety and welfare of the public.
('65 Code, § 21-18.2) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
§ 7.02.310 LENGTH AND WIDTH RESTRICTIONS.
   A.   Length. No person may operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in
excess of sixty (60) feet in total length on any street within the City of
Culver City except when traveling along a designated route, except as provided
in §
7.02.345.
('65 Code, § 21-18.3)
   B.   Width. No person may operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in
excess of ninety-six (96) inches in width on any street within the City of
Culver City, without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer. ('65
Code, § 21-18.4)
(Ord. No. 85-004 § 1; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 7.02.315 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF ROUTES.
   A.   Any person owning and operating a terminal facility desiring to have a
designated route to or from the Federally designated highway system established
by the City shall submit an application, on a form provided by the City, to the
City Engineer. The applicant shall also pay the requisite application fee and
provide such other information as may be required by the City Engineer.
   B.   The City Engineer will determine if the facility constitutes a terminal
and, if so, whether there exists a route over which vehicles exceeding sixty
(60) feet in length may safely travel between the facility and approved ingress
or egress points. In determining whether a safe route exists, the City Engineer
shall consider turning radii and lane widths of ramps, intersections, highways
and driveways, pavement structure, and general traffic conditions such as sight
distance, speed and traffic volumes. If a route to and from a terminal is found
to be safe, the applicant shall apply to the California Department of
Transportation for concurrence in the route tentatively designated by the City
and approval of ingress and egress points. If the California Department of
Transportation approves ingress and egress points and concurs in the route
tentatively designated by the City a permit shall be issued by the City.
   C.   The City may approve a permit conditioned upon the applicant taking
certain corrective actions necessary for the route to be made safe. The
applicant may apply for approval of the California Department of Transportation
prior to undertaking said corrective action. No designated route shall be
signed with trailblazer signs until all corrective work has been completed to
the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The cost of all corrective work,
including time for review and inspection by the City and the cost of all
trailblazer signs shall be borne by the applicant.
   D.   Should the safest route between an approved ingress or egress point
involve streets or highways outside the City, no permit shall be issued unless
the route outside the City has been approved by the appropriate jurisdiction.
('65 Code, § 21-18.5) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
§ 7.02.320 FEES AND COSTS.
   A.   The applicant shall pay a non-refundable application fee, as
established by the City Council by resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of
the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and
alternate route.
   B.   Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the City and
by Caltrans, the applicant shall deposit with the City of Culver City,
sufficient funds as estimated by the City Engineer to pay for the purchase and
installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required
at every decision point in the City on route to the terminal. Upon completion
of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any
difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or
refunded to the applicant. No terminal or route may be used until required
signs are installed and all costs paid. Costs for trailblazer signs may be
proportioned in accordance with the procedures in §
7.02.325.
('65 Code, § 21-18.6) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
§ 7.02.325 RETROFITTING.
   A.   If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory
by the City Engineer, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies.
Deficiencies may include, but are not limited to, street resurfacing,
restriping, traffic signalization and traffic channelization. All costs of
engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the
applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the
jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual construction will be done by the City or
by a contractor acceptable to it.
   B.   When the work is to be done by the City, the applicant shall deposit
with the City of Culver City, the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments
between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the
work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be
billed or refunded to the applicant.
   C.   If at any time within five (5) years from the date of completion of the
retrofitting any new applicant seeks terminal approval which would use the
route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such new applicant's
fee may include that applicant's proportionate share of the cost of
retrofitting, as determined by the City Engineer. Such fee shall be paid to the
City by the new applicant and disbursed by the City of Culver City to the
applicant who paid for the retrofitting, as well as to any applicant who
contributed to the cost of retrofitting under this Subsection.
('65 Code, § 21-18.7) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
§ 7.02.330 REVOCATION OF ROUTE DESIGNATION.
   The City Engineer may revoke the designation of any route if he or she finds
that the route is unsafe for use by vehicles exceeding sixty (60) feet or
otherwise becomes a traffic hazard to other vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
If the designated route serves a terminal facility, the owner or operator of
the terminal facility shall be notified in writing of the grounds of the
revocation ten (10) days prior to the effective date of the revocation. The
effective date of the revocation shall be stayed if an appeal of the revocation
is filed within ten (10) days. Service of the notice of revocation shall be
effective if the notice is mailed by certified mail or hand delivered to the
terminal address.
('65 Code, § 21-18.8) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
§ 7.02.335 SERVICE FACILITIES.
   Whenever the California Department of Transportation establishes designated
ingress and egress points for a service facility, the City Engineer shall
establish a designated route between the approved ingress or egress points and
the service facility. The route shall be consistent with the safe operation of
the combination of vehicles permitted to utilize the approved ingress or egress
points. The City Engineer shall petition the Department of Transportation of
the State of California to rescind the approved ingress or egress points to
provide access to a service facility if the City Engineer determines that no
safe route exists between the approved ingress or egress point and the service
facility.
('65 Code, § 21-18.9) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
§ 7.02.340 APPEAL PROCESS.
   If the City Engineer denies terminal designation, route permit or revokes a
previously approved terminal or route, the terminal owner or other interested
person, within ten (10) days following notice of such denial or revocation, may
appeal said decision to the City Council in writing.
   A.   An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the City Engineer and
shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically the
grounds for the appeal and wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by
the City Engineer, or wherein his decision is not supported by the evidence in
the record. Within ten (10) days of the filing of an appeal, the City Engineer
shall transmit to the City Clerk the terminal or route application, the
sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed therewith, the report of
the City Engineer, the findings of the City Engineer, and his decision on the
application.
   B.   The City Clerk shall make copies of the data provided by the City
Engineer available to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is
not the appellant) upon request and may give notice to any other interested
party who requested notice of the time when the appeal will be considered by
the City Council.
   C.   The City Council shall consider the appeal and its determination shall
be final. If a permit is denied or a designated route revoked, no person may
apply for a permit to serve the same terminal for a period of one year from the
date of said denial or revocation.
('65 Code, § 21-18.10) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
§ 7.02.345 EXCEPTIONS.
   This Subchapter shall not apply to:
   A.   The limited access to reach facilities for fuel, food, lodging and
repair and to reach terminals, shall not apply to licensed carriers of
household goods who have obtained prior written approval from the City Engineer
of the proposed route to be used when directly enroute to or from a point of
loading or unloading of household goods if travel on highways other than those
specified for the limited access referred to above is necessary and incidental
to the shipment of household goods directly enroute to or from the point of
loading or unloading of household goods. The City Engineers approval shall be
limited to a determination as to whether the route is consistent with safe
operation of the combination of vehicles.
   B.   Persons operating vehicles traveling to or from a service facility not
more than one-half (½) mile from an approved ingress or egress point designated
to provide access to or from a service facility when the City has not
designated a route between the approved egress point and the service facility,
if such access is not detrimental to the public safety and is consistent with
the safe operation of vehicles or combination of vehicles exceeding sixty (60)
feet in total length.
('65 Code, § 21-18.11) (Ord. No. 85-004 § 1)
CHAPTER 7.03: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
7.03.005   Obedience to diagonal parking signs and markings
   
7.03.010   Establishing time limits for stopping, standing or parking
   
7.03.015   Establishing parking spaces for disabled persons
   
7.03.020   Parking on left-hand side of divided highway
   
7.03.025   Parking space markings
   
7.03.030   All night parking prohibited; exceptions
   
7.03.035   Night parking permits
   
7.03.040   Overtime parking
   
7.03.045   No parking on Sepulveda Boulevard between Slauson and Centinela
Avenue
Prohibited and Limited Parking
   
7.03.200   Application of subchapter
   
7.03.205   Parking in parkways and on private property prohibited
   
7.03.210   Public Works Director to maintain areas
   
7.03.215   No parking areas
   
7.03.220   Use of streets for parking, standing or storing of vehicles
prohibited
   
7.03.225   Parking for washing, repairing, advertising prohibited
   
7.03.230   Parking on grades
   
7.03.235   Parking on city parking lots and property prohibited
   
7.03.240   Parking in an alley
   
7.03.242   Regulating vehicle habitation on public streets and other public
property
   
7.03.245   Driving, parking or storing vehicles on unpaved surfaces prohibited
   
7.03.250   Culver City Redevelopment Agency included within the term “city”
Preferential Parking Program
   
7.03.300   Establishment of preferential parking zones
   
7.03.305   Prohibitions
   
7.03.310   Penalties
   
7.03.315   Appeal rights
Loading and Unloading Zones; Public Carrier Zones
   
7.03.400   Authority to establish loading zones
   
7.03.405   Effect of permission to load or unload
   
7.03.410   Authority to establish public carrier zones
   
7.03.415   Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated
   
7.03.420   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands
Parking Meters
   
7.03.500   Purpose
   
7.03.505   Parking meter zones
   
7.03.510   Manner if installation
   
7.03.515   Operational procedure to be followed
   
7.03.520   Parking meter fees and time of operation
   
7.03.525   Unlawful to park after meter time has expired
   
7.03.530   Improper use of meter
   
7.03.535   Meters and standards not to be used for certain purposes
   
7.03.540   Rule of evidence
   
7.03.545   Application of other provisions
   
7.03.550   Use of money deposited in parking meter
   
7.03.555   Unintentional violation
Prohibited and Limited Parking of Oversized, Non-motorized and Commercial
Vehicles
   
7.03.600   Definitions
   
7.03.605   Measurements
   
7.03.610   Prohibitions
   
7.03.615   Exemptions
   
7.03.620   Removal and penalties
   
7.03.625   Conflict of provisions
Specified Veterans’ Parking Exemptions
   
7.03.700   Definitions
   
7.03.705   Privileges of specified veterans’ parking exemptions
   
7.03.710   Compliance with other parking restrictions
Cross-reference:
   Use of streets for bus benches, see §§
9.08.500 et seq.
   Parking and street closures for filming activity, see §
11.14.025
   Off-street parking and loading zoning regulations, see Chapter 17.320
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7.03.005 OBEDIENCE TO DIAGONAL PARKING SIGNS AND MARKINGS.
   On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of
the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in
place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator
of any vehicle to park said vehicle except:
   A.   At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings
allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said
allotted space;
   B.   With the front wheel nearest the curb within six (6) inches of said
curb.
('65 Code, § 21-12.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.010 ESTABLISHING TIME LIMITS FOR STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.
   A.   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to establish time limits for the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at certain locations whenever he
determines that access to property would be improved or a more equitable
distribution of available curb parking would be obtained.
   B.   When such limits are so established, the Public Works Director shall
erect and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating such limits.
('65 Code, § 21-14.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.015 ESTABLISHING PARKING SPACES FOR DISABLED PERSONS.
   A.   The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to establish
requirements for off-street and on-street parking spaces for the exclusive use
of disabled persons.
   B.   The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to establish single on-
street parking spaces for the exclusive use of disabled persons upon
recommendation thereof from the City Traffic Committee.
   C.   The City Council may, by resolution, establish a zone containing
multiple on-street parking spaces for the exclusive use of disabled. Such
action shall follow the receipt of a recommendation from the Public Works
Director and the City Traffic Committee.
   D.   When such spaces are established, the Public Works Director shall cause
signs and/or markings to be erected and maintained indicating such
restrictions.
('65 Code, § 21-14.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-004, §1)
§ 7.03.020 PARKING ON LEFT-HAND SIDE OF DIVIDED HIGHWAY.
   A.   In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs, markings or meters are in place permitting such standing or parking.
   B.   The City Engineer may determine where such standing or parking shall be
permitted.
   C.   Where such parking is permitted, the Public Works Director shall
install and maintain appropriate signs, markings or meters.
('65 Code, § 21-14.3) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.025 PARKING SPACE MARKINGS.
   A.   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine where marked
parking spaces shall be established.
   B.   The Public Works Director shall place and maintain parking space
markings to indicate such parking spaces.
   C.   When such markings are placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle other than within a single marked space, unless the size or shape of
the vehicle makes compliance impossible.
('65 Code, § 21-14.4) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.030 ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall
stop, stand or park any vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than
thirty (30) minutes, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of any day,
except physicians, persons on emergency calls or persons who have been issued a
permit pursuant to §
7.03.035.
('65 Code, § 21-14.5) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.035 NIGHT PARKING PERMITS.
   Applications for Night Parking Permits shall be submitted to the City
Engineer on a form supplied by him, which form shall contain the address and
telephone number of the applicant, a brief description of the vehicle to which
it is to be attached, including the make, model and type of vehicle the license
and motor number thereof, a statement as to the necessity for such Night
Parking Permit and such other pertinent information as the City Engineer may
require. If it is determined, upon investigation, that there is not adequate
parking space available to applicant at his place of residence or business, or
within a radius of five hundred (500) feet therefrom, a Night Parking Permit
shall be issued. No permit, or renewal thereof, shall be effective for more
than one year from date of issuance, and may be revoked at any time by the City
Engineer on three (3) days' written notice to the permittee, after
determination by the City Engineer, and approval of the City Manager, that on-
street parking is no longer required for the vehicle for which said permit was
issued. A Night Parking Permit sticker shall carry a permit number, expiration
date, a brief description of the vehicle to which it applies, and the limits of
the parking area. Such sticker shall at all times be displayed on the lower
left-hand portion of the rear window of the vehicle, plainly visible from the
exterior thereof. Permits are non-transferable, as shown on the face thereof,
and shall be returned to the City Engineer for cancellation upon expiration or
revocation thereof. There shall be a fee for investigation of an application
for a Night Parking Permit, a further fee for each renewal permit, and a fee to
replace a vehicle sticker which is lost or destroyed or substituted for a
different vehicle. Such fees are established by resolution of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 21-14.6) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part); Ord.
No. 2007-002 § 5)
§ 7.03.040 OVERTIME PARKING.
   OVERTIME PARKING is herein defined as the parking of any vehicle for a
period of time longer than is permitted under any of the provisions of this
Chapter. Every hour of overtime parking in any designated parking space or curb
parking area shall constitute a separate and additional violation and shall be
punishable as such. Such additional and separate violation shall not apply
where the vehicle has been entirely moved from the original parking space or
curb parking area in which it was located when the overtime parking occurred.
('65 Code, § 21-14.7) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.045 NO PARKING ON SEPULVEDA BOULEVARD BETWEEN SLAUSON AND CENTINELA
AVENUE.
   No parking, standing or stopping shall be permitted at any time on both
sides of Sepulveda Boulevard between Slauson Avenue and Centinela Avenue.
('65 Code, § 21-14.8) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
PROHIBITED AND LIMITED PARKING
§ 7.03.200 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   A.   The provisions of this Subchapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic control device.
   B.   The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions hereof or of State law prohibiting or limiting the
standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
('65 Code, § 21-13.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 2004-017 § 1)
§ 7.03.205 PARKING IN PARKWAYS AND ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, or any portion thereof,
within any parkway.
   B.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on private property without the
direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such
property.
('65 Code, § 21-13.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.210 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO MAINTAIN AREAS.
   The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate
signs or paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas,
and restricted parking areas, as defined and described by this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 21-13.3) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.215 NO PARKING AREAS.
   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such
vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:
   A.   Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated
with appropriate signs or markings.
   B.   On either side of any street between the projected right-of-way lines
of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such
street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or markings.
   C.   In any area where the City Engineer determines that the parking or
stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life
or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or markings.
   D.   In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking
area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or markings.
   E.   On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a
portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the
street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use
of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose
other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway
or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or
structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or
interfere with such use or movement; provided that appropriate signs or
markings are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
effective time of such no parking.
   F.   At any place within twenty-five (25) feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection in any business district when such place is indicated by
appropriate signs or markings, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus
stop.
   G.   Within twenty-five (25) feet of the near side of an intersection
controlled by any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric
flashing device.
   H.   Upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty
(20) feet, and provided that appropriate signs or markings are erected and
maintained.
   I.   Upon one side of a street when the width of the roadway does not exceed
thirty (30) feet provided appropriate signs or markings are erected and
maintained.
   J.   Upon one side of a street adjacent to any school property, when such
parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation provided
that appropriate signs or markings are erected and maintained.
('65 Code, § 21-13.4) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.220 USE OF STREETS FOR PARKING, STANDING OR STORING OF VEHICLES
PROHIBITED.
   A.   1.   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any
vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley, for more than a
consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours.
      2.   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street in excess
of a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours may be removed by any member
of the Police Department authorized by the Chief of Police, in the manner and
subject to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code.
   B.   Any vehicle parked or left standing on any City-owned or controlled
property or any City-owned, controlled or operated parking lot, or on any
privately owned or operated parking lot in violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter or of State law, may be removed by any member of the Police
Department authorized by the Chief of Police, in the manner and subject to the
provisions of the California Vehicle Code.
   C.   Exemptions. The provisions of Subsections (A) and (B) above shall not
apply to the following:
      1.   Any government, public utility or emergency vehicle; or
      2.   Any motor vehicle, large motor vehicle, non-motorized vehicle or
commercial vehicle that is parked on any public street highway parkway,
roadway, alley or thoroughfare pursuant to a permit lease, license or other
entitlement issued by the City
('65 Code, § 21-13.5) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 87-031 § 1; Ord. No. 97-
009 § 6; Ord. No. 2005-009 §§ 2-4)
Cross-reference:
   Commercial vehicles restricted to certain streets, see §
7.02.205
§ 7.03.225 PARKING FOR WASHING, REPAIRING, ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
   A.   Displaying such vehicle for sale;
   B.   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
   C.   Advertising or promoting any business or other commercial event or
endeavor.
('65 Code, § 21-13.6) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.230 PARKING ON GRADES.
   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway
when upon any grade exceeding three percent (3%) within any business or
residential district without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning
them against the curb or by other means.
('65 Code, § 21-13.7) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.235 PARKING ON CITY PARKING LOTS AND PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   A.   Parking on city parking lots and property prohibited.
      1.   No person shall park or leave standing, or permit to be parked or
left standing, any vehicle at any time on or in any parking lot or other
property owned or controlled by the City, provided that signs or markings
giving notice of such prohibition are erected and maintained on said lot or
property.
      2.   The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to erect and
maintain, on any City-owned or City-controlled parking lot, signs or markings
reserving individual stalls to be used only by designated persons, and
specifying a time limit for parking and standing in certain stalls and areas
and no person shall park or leave standing or permit to be parked or left
standing any vehicle contrary to the directions of said signs or markings.
      3.   A vehicle in violation of this Section may be removed by the Police
Department provided that the lot, stall, area or property has a sign or marking
containing the words “VEHICLES MAY BE TOWED,” or something similar, and the
phone number of the Police Department.
('65 Code, § 21-13.8)
   B.   Use of city parking lot restricted. No person shall use or be upon any
portion of any City-owned or City-controlled parking lot unless said person is
lawfully parking a vehicle or going to or from a lawfully parked vehicle.
('65 Code, § 21-13.9)
   C.   After hours use of a city parking lot. The City Council may designate
the hours that a City-owned or City-controlled parking lot is open and no
person shall use or be upon such lot when such lot is not open, provided that
signs or markings are erected and maintained by the Public Works Director
indicating when the lot is open.
('65 Code, § 21-13.10)
(Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.240 PARKING IN AN ALLEY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in an alley for any purpose
other than the loading and unloading of persons or materials; provided that
upon such stopping, standing or parking, for such loading or unloading, the
vehicle shall not impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic.
('65 Code, § 21-13.11) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.242 REGULATING VEHICLE HABITATION ON PUBLIC STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
   A.   Except in a verifiable emergency, no person shall use any vehicle
parked or standing upon any public street, alley, right-of-way, public park or
other public property as a temporary or permanent substitute for a residence or
dwelling unit.
   B.   For purposes of this section:
      1.   Evidence that a vehicle is being used as a temporary or permanent
substitute for a residence or dwelling unit shall include, but not be limited
to, use of the vehicle for living sleeping, cooking and/or bathing purposes;
      2.   The term VEHICLE shall include any boat and any device, operable or
inoperable with or without wheels, by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved or drawn upon any street or highway, including but not limited
to, a motor vehicle, mobile home and trailer.
(Ord. No. 2005-009 § 5)
§ 7.03.245 DRIVING, PARKING OR STORING VEHICLES ON UNPAVED SURFACES PROHIBITED.
   A.   No person shall drive, park or store any vehicle, as defined in the
California Vehicle Code, on any private property unless the surface thereof has
been improved to meet the minimum standards for parking areas, as prescribed in
the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code.
   B.   No owner or occupant of private property shall drive, park or store or
cause or permit to be driven, parked or stored on any surface of said property
any vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code unless the surface has
been improved to meet the minimum standards for parking areas, as prescribed by
resolution of the City Council.
   C.   No owner of a vehicle parked or stored in violation of this Section
shall fail or refuse to remove the unlawfully parked or stored vehicle within
twelve (12) hours after personal notice, provided that said vehicle may be
removed within said twelve (12) hour period in accordance with applicable
provisions of the Vehicle Code.
   D.   Exceptions. This Section shall not apply:
      1.   During the performance of construction operations pursuant to any
public works project or pursuant to a valid grading or building permit issued
by the Building Department so long as all surfaces used for vehicular access or
parking are in compliance with applicable dust control regulations, as
prescribed by the City Engineer.
      2.   To the rear yard of a one-family dwelling.
('65 Code, § 21-13.12) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.250 CULVER CITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY INCLUDED WITHIN THE TERM “CITY”.
   Whenever the term CITY is used within this Subchapter, it shall be deemed to
include within its meaning the Culver City Redevelopment Agency.
('65 Code, § 21-13.13) (Ord. No. 85-001 § 1)
PREFERENTIAL PARKING PROGRAM
§ 7.03.300 ESTABLISHMENT OF PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES.
   A.   Pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 22507, the City Council may, by
resolution, designate certain streets as preferential parking zones, and
establish rules and procedures regulating the evaluation and recommendation of
such zones, and the issuance of permits allowing preferential parking within
these zones.
   B.   Prior to the City Council considering any resolution designating any
preferential parking zone, the City Engineer shall first have evaluated and
recommended to the City Council the establishment of any preferential parking
zone. The City Engineer's evaluation and recommendation regarding any
preferential parking zone shall be conducted pursuant to the rules and
procedures adopted, by resolution of the City Council, pursuant to §
7.03.300 A.
   C.   The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees relating to the
administration of the preferential parking zones.
(Ord. No. 2004-017 § 2 (part))
§ 7.03.305 PROHIBITIONS.
   When preferential parking zones have been authorized by the City Council,
and signs have been posted giving notice of preferential parking zone
restrictions, it shall be unlawful:
   A.   1.   For any person to park a vehicle on any public street or alley
subject to a “Time-Limited Parking Except By Permit” limitation for a period
longer than the subject time limitation, unless a
preferential parking zone permit therefor has been issued by the City of Culver
City and is displayed on the vehicle. For purposes of this Section, successive
acts of parking upon any public street subject to a “Time-Limited Parking
Except By Permit” limitation, or portion of such street within the same
preferential parking zone, shall be deemed a single act of parking, subject to
the time-limit parking restriction applicable to that preferential parking
zone.
      2.   This restriction shall not apply to government vehicles, public
utility vehicles, emergency vehicles or any vehicle parked while it is being
loaded or unloaded.
   B.   1.   For any person to park a vehicle on any public street subject to a
“No Parking Anytime Except By Permit” limitation, unless a preferential parking
zone permit therefor has been issued by the City of Culver City and is
displayed on the vehicle.
      2.   This restriction shall not apply to government vehicles, public
utility vehicles, emergency vehicles or any vehicle parked while it is being
loaded or unloaded.
   C.   For any person to represent himself/herself as eligible for a
preferential parking zone permit or to furnish false information in an
application therefor presented to the City Engineer, the Chief of Police, their
designees or any other City employee or City official having a duty to act upon
such application.
   D.   For any person holding a preferential parking zone permit to allow the
use or display of such permit on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle
for which the permit was issued.
   E.   For any person to copy, produce or otherwise bring into existence a
facsimile or counterfeit preferential parking zone permit.
   F.   For any person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit
preferential parking zone permit.
   G.   For any person to buy, sell or use a preferential parking zone permit
in violation of the rules and procedures adopted, by resolution of the City
Council, pursuant to § 7.03.300 A.
(Ord. No. 2004-017 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2013-011 §§ 1, 2)
§ 7.03.310 PENALTIES.
   A.   Any violation of this Subchapter shall be deemed an infraction and
subject to the penalties set forth in
§ 1.01.045 of this Code.
   B.   Any violation of this Subchapter shall be cause for denial. nonrenewal
or revocation of any preferential parking zone permit.
(Ord. No. 2004-017 § 2 (part))
§ 7.03.315 APPEAL RIGHTS.
   Any denial, nonrenewal or revocation of any preferential parking zone permit
may be appealed to the City Council within twenty (20) days of such denial,
nonrenewal or revocation.
(Ord. No. 2004-017 § 2 (part))
LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES; PUBLIC CARRIER ZONES
§ 7.03.400 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH LOADING ZONES.
   A.   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark loading
zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
      1.   At any place in any business district.
      2.   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in
front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
   B.   In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any
block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
('65 Code, § 21-15.1) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.405 EFFECT OF PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD.
   A.   Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of
loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and
shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more
than twenty (20) minutes.
   B.   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries, and also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post
packages and United States mail.
   C.   Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or
unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal
baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no
event for more than three (3) minutes.
   D.   Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this
Section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading
or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.
('65 Code, § 21-15.2) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.410 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH PUBLIC CARRIER ZONES.
   The City Engineer is authorized to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab
stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such
streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the
greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus
stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs or
markings.
('65 Code, § 21-15.3) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.415 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXICABS REGULATED.
   A.   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
   B.   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone so designated as
provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
   C.   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided
herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers.
('65 Code, § 21-15.4) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.420 RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping
does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter
such zone.
('65 Code, § 21-15.5) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
PARKING METERS
§ 7.03.500 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subchapter is to establish parking meter zones, parking
meter fees and regulations applicable to parking meters.
(Ord. No. 2011-002 § 1 (part))
§ 7.03.505 PARKING METER ZONES.
   All public streets within the City are hereby established as parking meter
zones within which the City may install parking meters for the purpose of
controlling and regulating the parking of vehicles. The specific locations for
the installation of parking meters within the City's parking meter zones shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2011-002 § 1 (part))
§ 7.03.510 MANNER OF INSTALLATION.
   A.   The Public Works Director/City Engineer shall cause parking meters to
be installed and maintained in all parking meter locations established pursuant
to §
7.03.505.
   B.   Except for multi-space meters, parking meters shall be installed in the
sidewalk or parkway area immediately adjacent to each parking space and shall
be placed in such manner as to conspicuously show or display by a sign or
signal that the parking space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use.
   C.   Multi-space parking meters shall be installed at various nearby
locations to provide metering for more than one parking space at a time.
Parking spaces that are controlled by multi-space parking meters shall be
clearly designated by a posted sign, pavement marking, or other clearly visible
means. A “multi-space parking meter” is a pay station for multiple parking
spaces placed at various locations along streets for the payment and control of
parking thereon. The term “parking meter,” as hereinafter used in this
Subchapter, shall include “multi-space parking meter.”
(Ord. No. 2011-002 § 1 (part))
§ 7.03.515 OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter, immediately after occupancy
of a metered parking space, the vehicle operator shall pay the required fee for
use of the metered parking space in accordance with the directions prescribed
by the parking meter adjacent to or assigned to the metered parking space,
unless the parking meter indicates an unexpired portion remains of the period
of time for which payment previously had been deposited.
(Ord. No. 2011-002 § 1 (part))
§ 7.03.520 PARKING METER FEES AND TIME OF OPERATION.
   The City Council shall establish by resolution the parking meter fees for
the various parking meter locations established within the City's parking meter
zones. Said resolution shall specify the parking meter location, the amount of
the parking meter fee for that location, the time period covered by the fee and
the time of operation for the meters therein.
(Ord. No. 2011-002 § 1 (part))
§ 7.03.525 UNLAWFUL TO PARK AFTER METER TIME HAS EXPIRED.
   No operator of any vehicle shall permit said vehicle to remain parked in any
parking space during any time that the meter is showing a signal indicating
that such space is illegally in use other than such time necessary for the
operator to comply with §
7.03.515.
('65 Code, § 21-17.6) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.530 IMPROPER USE OF METER.
   A.   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter
any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device, foreign matter, metallic
substitute for a coin of the United States; or deface, injure, tamper with,
open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
   B.   Violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to
a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), six months in jail, or
both.
('65 Code, § 21-17.7) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Am. Ord. No. 97-009 § 7)
§ 7.03.535 METERS AND STANDARDS NOT TO BE USED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   No person shall attach anything to or allow a bicycle, newsrack or any other
article or thing to lean against a parking meter or a parking meter standard
unless said meter or meter standard has been altered by the City or approved
designee to include a bicycle rack and has been designated as such by the
Public Works Director/City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 21-17.8) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 2011-002 § 2)
§ 7.03.540 RULE OF EVIDENCE.
   The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which
space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking,
shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or
allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by this
Chapter.
('65 Code, § 21-17.9) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.545 APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS.
   No Section of this Subchapter shall be construed as permitting any parking
in violation of any other provision of this Code.
('65 Code, § 21-17.10) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1)
§ 7.03.550 USE OF MONEY DEPOSITED IN PARKING METER.
   All moneys deposited in parking meters in the City shall be collected by
duly authorized agents of the City Treasurer and shall be placed in a Parking
Meter Fund, which fund shall be devoted exclusively to the following purposes:
   A.   Purchasing, leasing, otherwise acquiring, improving and maintaining of
on-street parking meters and off-street parking facilities in the City.
   B.   Security for the payment of and interest on, off-street parking revenue
bonds issued by the City, or any parking district organized within the City.
   C.   Personnel, software, hardware, tools and equipment to be used to
collect current data and make other improvements to further traffic safety,
efficiency, and enforcement.
   D.   Such other purposes related to on-street or off-street parking as shall
be determined from time to time by the City Council.
('65 Code, § 21-17.11) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Ord. No. 2011-002 § 3)
§ 7.03.555 UNINTENTIONAL VIOLATION.
   A.   Any person unintentionally violating any provision of this Subchapter,
by reason of a mechanical failure of a parking meter not caused by such person,
may be acquitted of such violation upon establishing such facts by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   B.   Exception: A violation of §
7.03.530 is a strict liability offense. Even unintentional deposit of a coin
substitute and/or damage to a parking meter under the provisions of §
7.03.530 shall subject the offender to the penalty established.
('65 Code, § 21-17.12) (Ord. No. 83-027 § 1; Am. Ord. No. 97-009 § 8)
PROHIBITED AND LIMITED PARKING OF OVERSIZED, NON-MOTORIZED AND COMMERCIAL
VEHICLES
§ 7.03.600 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
that is not defined herein shall have the meaning as set forth in the
California Vehicle Code.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the City of Culver City or his or
her designee.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle having more than two axles, or any single
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE or combination of said vehicles that exceed twenty (20) feet
in length, or any single COMMERCIAL VEHICLE or combination of said vehicles
eighty-four (84) inches or more in width, or any single COMMERCIAL VEHICLE or
combination of said vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more. A COMMERCIAL VEHICLE includes a
truck tractor, but does not include a large motor vehicle or non-motorized
vehicle, as defined herein, or a pick-up  truck without a camper, or a sports
utility vehicle.
   LARGE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any house car, pick-up truck with camper, recreational
vehicle, or any other vehicle, or combination of vehicles, that measures more
than twenty (20) feet in length, or is both more than eight-four (84) inches in
width and eighty-four (84) inches in height. The term LARGE MOTOR VEHICLE does
not include a commercial vehicle, as defined herein, a pick-up truck without a
camper, or a sports utility vehicle.
   NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Any trailer, boat, or any other device that can be
used for transporting persons or property, and is not self-propelled.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any passenger vehicle, pick-up truck without a camper, sports
utility vehicle motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, but shall not include a house
car.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Culver City Police Department.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any area within the City that is zoned RI, R2, R3,
RLD, RMD, RHD, and those portions of PD Zone districts that are specified for
residential uses.
   VEHICLE OWNER. The registered owner or person who has possession, custody or
control of any motor vehicle, large motor vehicle or non-motorized vehicle.
(Ord. No. 2005-009 §1 (part))
§ 7.03.605 MEASUREMENTS.
   To determine the width or length of the vehicles defined in this Subchapter,
any extension to the vehicle caused by mirrors, air conditioners, or similar
attachments shall not be included.
(Ord. No. 2005-009 §1 (part))
§ 7.03.610 PROHIBITIONS.
   A.   No person shall, at any time, park or leave standing any large motor
vehicle or non-motorized vehicle on any public street, highway, parkway or
alley, except:
      1   In residential districts, large motor vehicles or non-motorized
vehicles attached to a motor vehicle or large motor vehicle, which are parked
adjacent to the vehicle owner’s residence, are allowed for a period of time not
to exceed forty-eight (48) consecutive hours, for the sole purpose of loading,
unloading, cleaning, battery-charging, or other activity preparatory or
incidental to travel.
      2.   In residential districts, large motor vehicles, or non-motorized
vehicles attached to a motor vehicle or large motor vehicle, which are parked
adjacent to the vehicle owner's residence, may be allowed for an additional
penod of time of up to twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, but no more than a
total of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, provided an extension has been
granted by the Chief of Police.
   B.   Any large motor vehicle, or non-motorized vehicle attached to a motor
vehicle or large motor vehicle, which is parked on a public street, highway,
parkway or alley, pursuant to either Subsection (A)(1) or (A)(2) herein above,
shall, at the end of the permitted period of time, whether forty-eight (48) or
seventy-two (72) hours, be removed from its location, and shall not be parked
on any public street, highway, parkway or alley for a period of at least forty-
eight (48) hours.
   C.   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any
commercial vehicle shall park or leave standing any such vehicle on any public
street highway, parkway, roadway, alley or thoroughfare for more than three (3)
hours, except:
      1.   For such reasonable period of time in excess of three (3) hours that
may be necessary for the purpose of making pick-ups or deliveries of goods,
wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure, or for the purpose
of delivering materials to be used for repair, alteration, remodeling or
construction of any building or structure upon a restricted street or highway;
or
      2   For such reasonable period of time in excess of three (3) hours that
may be necessary when such vehicle is parked in connection with the performance
of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked;
or
      3   For such reasonable time in excess of three (3) hours that may be
necessary to make emergency repairs.
   D.   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any motor
vehicle, large motor vehicle, non-motorized vehicle or commercial vehicle,
which is six (6) feet or more in height, including any load thereon, shall park
or leave standing any such vehicle on any street or highway within forty-five
(45) feet of any intersection.
(Ord. No. 2005-009 §1 (part))
§ 7.03.615 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this Subchapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Any government, public utility or emergency vehicle; or
   B.   Any motor vehicle, large motor vehicle, non-motorized vehicle or
commercial vehicle that is parked on any public street, highway, parkway,
roadway, alley or thoroughfare pursuant to a permit, lease, license or other
entitlement issued by the City.
(Ord. No. 2005-009 §1 (part))
§ 7.03.620 REMOVAL AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, a violation of any provision of this
Subchapter shall be deemed a civil offense, and punishable by a fine
established by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   Any vehicle found in violation of this Subchapter may be cited or
removed, or both cited and removed, by any member of the Police Department
authorized by the Chief of Police, in the manner and subject to the
requirements of this section and Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22651 and 22651.05.
   C.   After any vehicle has been removed summarily, as provided in Subsection
(B) above, the registered and legal owners of the vehicle shall be given the
opportunity for a post-removal hearing to determine the validity of the storage
of the vehicle in accordance with Cal. Veh. Code § 22852.
   D.   The procedures for hearings provided for in Subsection (C) above shall
be established by the Chief of Police, and the hearing shall be held by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee. Said designee shall not be the person
who directed the storage of the vehicle.
   E.   The disposition of any stored vehicle shall be in accordance with Cal.
Veh. Code §§22850.5 through 22855.
(Ord. No. 2005-009 §1 (part))
§ 7.03.625 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   In the event of any conflict between this Subchapter and any other
provisions of this Code, this Subchapter shall control.
(Ord. No. 2005-009 §1 (part))
SPECIFIED VETERANS’ PARKING EXEMPTIONS
§ 7.03.700 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   CONTROLLED PARKING SPACE. A parking space in a City-owned lot, where parking
is subject to a fee or a metered space. CONTROLLED PARKING SPACE does not mean
a space assigned to a City employee, or a space dedicated to a disabled person.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. An automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor-driven form
of transportation not in excess of 6,000 pounds gross weight.
   VETERAN’S LICENSE PLATE. A valid license plate issued by the California
Department of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code §§ 5101.3, 5101.4
5101.5, 5101.6 and 5101.8, or such other statutes as later enacted, which
provide for the issuance of license plates to Medal of Honor  recipients,
Legion of Valor recipients, Purple Heart recipients, Pearl Harbor survivors,
and former American prisoners of war, and such other plates issued by another
state that indicate a similar status.
(Ord. No. 2006-001 § 1 (part))
§ 7.03.705 PRIVILEGES OF SPECIFIED VETERANS PARKING EXEMPTION.
   A person may park a motor vehicle, upon which a veteran’s license plate is
displayed, in any controlled parking space without charge.
(Ord. No. 2006-001 § 1 (part))
§ 7.03.710 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   The provisions set forth in this Subchapter do not exempt a vehicle that
displays a veteran’s license plate from compliance with any and all other
parking regulations set forth in this Code, including but not limited to,
vehicle height restriction, parking time limitation, street sweeping, and no
parking restrictions.
(Ord. No. 2006-001 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 7.04: BICYCLES
Section
   
7.04.005—7.04.245 Reserved
Traffic Regulations
   
7.04.250   Riding on sidewalks
   
7.04.255—7.04.395 Reserved
Bicycle Dealers
   
7.04.400   Dealers' reports of purchases
   
7.04.405   Dealers' reports of sales
   
7.04.410   Form of reports
Cross-reference:
   Curb markings to indicate parking regulations, see §
7.01.240
§§ 7.04.005—7.04.245 RESERVED.
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 7.04.250 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   A.   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within any business
district or upon the sidewalk adjacent to any public school building, church,
recreation center or playground or upon a walkway specifically designated by
resolution of the City Council as closed to all vehicular or bicycle traffic.
   B.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and when overtaking and passing
a pedestrian, after giving an audible signal, shall at all times pass to the
left of such pedestrian.
('65 Code, § 8-27) (Ord. No. CS-100 § 51; Ord. No. CS-639 § 1)
§§ 7.04.255—7.04.395 RESERVED.
BICYCLE DEALERS
§ 7.04.400 DEALERS' REPORTS OF PURCHASES.
   All persons engaged in the business of buying or receiving on consignment
secondhand bicycles or secondhand bicycle frames shall make a daily report to
the Chief of Police upon forms provided for that purpose by the Police
Department. All junk dealers who purchase or otherwise acquire any bicycle or
bicycle frame as junk, or otherwise, shall report such acquisition to the Chief
of Police on such forms within 24 hours thereafter, and shall not sell or
otherwise dispose of any bicycle or bicycle frame within 21 days after such
article has been purchased or received.
('65 Code, § 8-32) (Ord. No. CS-100 § 71)
§ 7.04.405 DEALERS' REPORTS OF SALES.
   In addition to any other reports required by the provisions of this Chapter,
all persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand vehicles, or
bicycle frames, shall make a daily report to the Chief of Police. Any junk
dealer who sells or otherwise disposes of any bicycle, bicycle frame, or other
part thereof, as junk, or otherwise, shall report such disposition to the Chief
of Police within 24 hours thereafter.
('65 Code, § 8-33) (Ord. No. CS-100 § 72)
§ 7.04.410 FORM OF REPORTS.
   All reports required by this Chapter shall be in writing and shall show:
   A.   The name and address of the person from whom or to whom such bicycle
frame was purchased, consigned, or otherwise acquired, sold or otherwise
disposed of.
   B.   The description of each such bicycle or bicycle frame.
   C.   The frame number thereof.
   D.   The number of the license plate, if any, which was acquired thereto.
   E.   Such other information as the Chief of Police requires.
('65 Code, § 8-34) (Ord. No. CS-100 § 73)
CHAPTER 7.05: MOTOR VEHICLE AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Section
Transportation and Air Quality Management
   
7.05.005   Definitions
   
7.05.010   Transit provider environmental review requirements
   
7.05.015   Transportation demand and trip reduction measures
   
7.05.020   Maintenance
   
7.05.025   Monitoring
   
7.05.030   Violations; penalties
Mobile Source Air Pollution Reduction Fund
   
7.05.100   Purpose
   
7.05.105   Definition
   
7.05.110   Trust fund
   
7.05.115   Expenditure of trust fund revenues
   
7.05.120   Audits
TRANSPORTATION AND AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT
§ 7.05.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION. The use of modes of transportation other than
the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools,
vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.
   BUSPOOL. A vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a
regular basis to and from work on a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule.
   CARPOOL. A vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together to
and from work on a regular basis.
   THE CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA). The statute, being Cal.
Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq., and its amendments that require all
jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of
environmental degradation posed by proposed development.
   EMPLOYEE PARKING AREA. The portion of total required parking used by on-site
employees. For the purposes of this subchapter, employee parking shall be
calculated using the following presumptions:
 
Type of Use              Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees
Retail/Commercial        30%
Office/Professional      85%
Industrial/Manufacturing 90%
 
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The floor area measured between the interior of the
exterior walls of every floor and partial floor within a building at, above,
and below grade, based on final detailed plans.
   NET INCREASE IN GROSS FLOOR AREA. The difference between the amount of gross
floor area on a new development site immediately before and after completion of
a new development, as defined herein, including the amount of demolished and
newly constructed gross floor area.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. The new construction of nonresidential building square
footage which results in a net increase in gross floor area, as defined herein,
that equals or exceeds the project size threshold criteria set forth in §
7.05.015 below.
   PREFERENTIAL PARKING. On-site parking spaces designated or assigned through
use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles
carrying commute passengers on a regular basis, that are provided in a location
more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for
single occupant vehicles.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The legal owner of a development who may serve as the lessor
to a tenant.
   SERVICE AREA. The area surrounding a development project within a one (1)
mile radius of local fixed route bus operator(s) and a two (2) mile radius of
express and rail transit operators which may constitute the area serviced by
potentially impacted transit operators.
   SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD). The regional authority
appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and
otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the non-desert
portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties).
   TENANT. The lessee or sublessee of facility space at an applicable
development project.
   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM). The alteration of travel
behavior—usually on the part of commuters—through programs of incentives,
services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles
such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move
trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in
telecommuting or compressed work weeks).
   TRIP REDUCTION. Reduction in the number of work-related strips made by
single occupant vehicles.
   VANPOOL. A vehicle carrying seven (7) to fifteen (15) persons commuting
together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a
seating arrangement designed to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult
passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis.
   VEHICLE. Any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to
automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles.
('65 Code, § 39-1) (Ord. No. 93-004 § 1 (part))
§ 7.05.010 TRANSIT PROVIDER ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to certification of any Environmental Impact Report (EIR) prepared for
a development project pursuant to the requirements of the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as amended, the EIR preparer shall identify
and consult with regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing
service to the project. The EIR preparer shall use the “Transit Impact Review
Worksheet,” contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program
Manual, or a similar worksheet, to assess transit impacts. Pursuant to the
provisions of CEQA, fixed-route transit operators providing service to the
service area of the project shall be sent a Notice of Preparation (NOP) for all
EIR's and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given an opportunity to comment
on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or
capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to
recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP
network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit
operator shall be evaluated in the Draft EIR prepared for the project. Transit
mitigation measures which are adopted shall be monitored pursuant to the
mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA.
('65 Code, § 39-2) (Ord. No. 93-004 § 1 (part))
§ 7.05.015 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND AND TRIP REDUCTION MEASURES.
   A.   Applicability of requirements.
      1.   Prior to occupancy of any new development, the property owner or
applicable heirs, assigns or successors in interest, shall make lasting
provisions for, at a minimum, all of the following transportation demand
management and trip reduction measures, found in Subsection B. below.
      2.   The requirements of this Section shall apply to any new development
that results in a net increase of twenty-five thousand (25,000) or more gross
square feet of floor area.
      3.   This Section shall not apply to projects for which an application
for new development has been deemed “complete” by the City pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code § 65943, or for which an application for a building permit has been
filed, prior to the effective date of this Section.
   B.   Development standards.
      1.   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any new
development that equals or exceeds twenty-five thousand (25,000) gross square
feet, the developer shall provide and continuously maintain the following which
shall be met to the satisfaction of the City Planner and Director of
Transportation:
         a.   A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying
transportation information in a prominent area accessible to the greatest
number of employees shall be installed. Such required information shall
include, but is not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes
serving the site;
            (2)   Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information
including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency, transportation
management associations, and local transit operators;
            (3)   Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-
oriented organizations;
            (4)   Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/
local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and
            (5)   A listing of any other facilities and resources that may be
available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and
pedestrians at the site.
   All information required by this Section shall be regularly stocked on a
periodic basis.
      2.   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any new
development that equals or exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet,
the developer shall comply with Subsection B.1. of this Section and shall
comply with the following requirements to the satisfaction of the City Planner
and Director of Transportation:
         a.   Not less than ten percent (10%) of the employee parking area
shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s) without
displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. These spaces shall be
reserved for use by potential carpool or vanpool vehicles. This preferential
parking shall be identified on the site plan accompanying the application for a
building permit. Spaces shall have signs that designate them for employee
carpool and vanpool vehicles.
         b.   Preferential parking spaces reserved for employee vanpool shall
be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a
minimum interior vertical clearance of eight (8) feet two (2) inches shall be
provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by vanpool vehicles.
Adequate turning radii and a minimum parking space dimension of nine (9) feet
wide by eighteen (18) feet in length shall be provided for vanpool parking
areas.
         c.   Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided
to accommodate four (4) bicycles for the first fifty thousand (50,000) gross
square feet of new development, and one (1) bicycle for each additional fifty
thousand (50,000) gross square feet of new development. Calculations which
result in a fraction of one-half (½) or higher shall be rounded up to the
nearest whole number. Secure bicycle parking may consist of a fully enclosed
space or a locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle which
protects the bicycle from inclement weather. Specific facilities and their
location (e.g., provision of racks, bicycle storage lockers or locked room)
shall be provided to the satisfaction of the City Planner and Director of
Transportation or designee.
      3.   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any new
development that equals or exceeds one hundred thousand (100,000) gross square
feet, the developer shall comply with Subsections B.1. and 2. of this Section,
and shall comply with the following requirements to the satisfaction of the
City Planner and Director of Transportation:
         a.   The new development shall include sidewalks or other designated
pedestrian pathways following direct and safe routes from the external
pedestrian circulation system, vehicle and bicycle parking areas and transit
facilities, to each building in the development.
         b.   If determined necessary by the City to mitigate the impacts of
the new development, bus stop improvements shall be provided to the
satisfaction of the Director of Transportation. The Director, in consultation
with other local bus service providers, will determine appropriate
improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, the
City shall consider that commuters should be afforded entrances that are safe,
efficient and that have direct access to nearby transit stations or stops.
         c.   A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles
may deliver or board their passengers.
('65 Code, § 39-3) (Ord. No. 93-004 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 93-014 § 1)
§ 7.05.020 MAINTENANCE.
   All facilities and improvements required by this subchapter shall be
maintained in a state of good repair.
('65 Code, § 39-4) (Ord. No. 93-004 § 1 (part))
§ 7.05.025 MONITORING.
   All facilities and improvements required to be constructed pursuant to this
subchapter shall be shown on building plans for the development and shall be
monitored by the Planning Division and Transportation Department in the same
manner that other CCMC requirements are currently monitored.
('65 Code, § 39-5) (Ord. No. 93-004 § 1 (part))
§ 7.05.030 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   A.   Criminal violations.
      1.   Any person or business that violates any provision of this
subchapter shall be guilty of an infraction, except as otherwise provided in
this Section, which shall be punishable in accordance with §§
1.01.035 et seq. of this Code.
      2.   Any violation which would otherwise be an infraction shall
constitute a misdemeanor which shall be punishable in according with §§
1.01.040 et seq. of this Code if a defendant has been convicted of three (3) or
more violations of this subchapter within the twelve (12) month period
immediately preceding the violation. For this purpose, a bail forfeiture shall
be deemed a conviction of the offense charged.
   B.   Civil liability. Any person of business found to be in violation of
this subchapter shall be liable for a civil penalty in accordance with §
1.01.050 of the Culver City Municipal Code.
('65 Code, § 39-6) (Ord. No. 93-004 § 1 (part))
MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION FUND
§ 7.05.100 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality
Management District's (SCAQMD) imposition of the vehicle registration fee
authorized by Cal. Health & Safety Code § 44223 and to bring the City into
compliance with the requirements set forth in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 44243
in order to receive revenues generated by such fees for the purpose of
implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles.
('65 Code, § 33K-1) (Ord. No. 91-019 § 1)
§ 7.05.105 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following words and terms shall be
defined as follows:
   MOBILE SOURCE POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAMS. Any program or project
implemented by the City to reduce air pollution from Motor Vehicles which it
determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the
plan proposed pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code§§ 40460 et seq.
('65 Code, § 33K-2) (Ord. No. 91-019 § 1)
§ 7.05.110 TRUST FUND.
   The City Treasurer shall establish a separate interest bearing trust fund
account to receive all monies remitted to City pursuant to this subchapter. All
interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that
account.
('65 Code, § 33K-3) (Ord. No. 91-019 § 1)
§ 7.05.115 EXPENDITURE OF TRUST FUND REVENUES.
   All revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to this subchapter shall be
exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs. Such
revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one
(1) year of completion of such programs.
('65 Code, § 33K-4) (Ord. No. 91-019 § 1)
§ 7.05.120 AUDITS.
   The City consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by the
trust fund account established pursuant to §
7.05.115, as required by Cal. Health & Safety Code § 44244.1.
('65 Code, § 33K-5) (Ord. No. 91-019 § 1)
TITLE 9: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
9.01.   ANIMALS AND FOWL
         
9.02.   FIRE PREVENTION
         
9.03.   HEALTH, SANITATION AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
         
9.04.   NUISANCES
         
9.05.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
         
9.06.   PARTIES AND GATHERINGS; PARADES
         
9.07.   NOISE REGULATIONS
         
9.08.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PARKWAYS
         
9.09.   HELICOPTERS AND HELISTOPS
         
9.10.   PARKS, PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY
         
9.11.   SMOKING REGULATIONS
         
9.12.   VIEW PRESERVATION (OBSTRUCTION FROM TREES)
         
9.13.   MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY OF VACANT AND/OR UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY
CHAPTER 9.01: ANIMALS AND FOWL
General Provisions
   
9.01.005   Penalties for violation of chapter
   
9.01.010   Definitions
   
9.01.015   Animals other than household pets; permit required; business
exclusion
   
9.01.020   Permit for dogs and cats
   
9.01.025   Application for permit; appeal upon denial
   
9.01.030   Animal experimentation prohibited
   
9.01.035   Animals and fowl in or near certain establishments prohibited
   
9.01.040   Bee keeping; permit required
   
9.01.045   Riding or driving of horses or other animals upon public streets;
exceptions
   
9.01.050   Inconsistencies with Los Angeles County Code Title 10
Dogs
   
9.01.300   License required
   
9.01.305   License fee; exemptions
   
9.01.310   Definition of owner under dog licensing regulations
   
9.01.315   Transient dogs exempted
   
9.01.320   License tags
   
9.01.325   Failure to produce animal or documents
   
9.01.330   Dogs confined on private premises
   
9.01.335   Dogs running at large; prohibition
Cats
   
9.01.400   License voluntary
   
9.01.405   License fee; term
   
9.01.410   Definition of owner under cat licensing regulations
Adoption by Reference of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code - “Animals”
   
9.01.500   Adoption of Los Angeles County Code Title 10
   
9.01.505   Amendments to Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code
Declawing of Animals
   
9.01.600   Onychectomy (declawing) and flexor tendonectomy prohibited
Abatement of Animal Public Nuisance
   
9.01.700   Purpose
   
9.01.705   Definitions
   
9.01.710   Unlawful to keep a nuisance animal
   
9.01.715   Investigation by Culver City Animal Services
   
9.01.720   Declarations to be filed
   
9.01.725   Filing period
   
9.01.730   Hearing and notice of hearing
   
9.01.735   Determination and order
   
9.01.740   Issuance of Administrative Order by the Administrative Hearing
Officer
   
9.01.745   Administrative penalties
   
9.01.750   Administrative costs
   
9.01.755   Appeal of Administrative Order
   
9.01.760   Failure to comply with Administrative Order
   
9.01.765   Civil action
   
9.01.770   Not exclusive remedy
Sale and Use of Glue Traps Prohibited
   
9.01.800   Purpose
   
9.01.805   Definitions
   
9.01.810   Glue trap prohibitions
   
9.01.815   Enforcement and penalties
Cross-reference:
   Animals in parks prohibited, see §
9.10.055
   Off-Leash Dog Park, see §§
9.10.400 and
9.10.405
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 9.01.005 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.
   A.   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine,
only, as set forth in § 1.01.045 of this Code, except where otherwise expressly
provided in this Chapter that a violation may be charged as a misdemeanor.
   B.   Any violation which would otherwise be an infraction is a misdemeanor
if a defendant has been convicted of three or more violations of this Chapter
within the 12-month period immediately preceding the violation and such prior
convictions are admitted by the defendant or alleged in the accusatory
pleading. For this purpose, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a
conviction of the offense charged.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.010 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever in this Chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meaning ascribed to them, unless it is apparent from the context thereof that
some other meaning is intended:
   ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER. The field officer(s) responsible for enforcement of
City municipal codes, County ordinances and state Laws, governing the care and
keeping of domestic and non-domesticated animals in the City of Culver City.
   CAT. A feline of any age or gender.
   DOG. A canine of any age or gender.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any horse, pony, mule, jack, jenny, cow, bull, calf,
heifer, sheep, goat, swine, rabbit, as well as any livestock and any other
domesticated animal other than a household pet.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. Any cat, dog, canary, parrot and any other animal and bird
usually and ordinarily kept as a household pet, excluding any animal, fowl or
reptile prohibited by California Fish and Wildlife per California Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 671.
   PERSON. Any natural person, individual or corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, association or other group or combination of individuals
and/or groups acting as an entity.
   POLICE CHIEF. The Culver City Chief of Police or designee.
   POULTRY and DOMESTIC FOWL. Any pigeon, chicken, duck, goose, turkey and all
other domesticated fowl other than a household pet.
   UNLICENSED DOG. Any dog over four months of age for which the license for
the current year has not been paid, or to which the tag for the current year
provided for in this Chapter is not attached.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.015 ANIMALS OTHER THAN HOUSEHOLD PETS; PERMIT REQUIRED; BUSINESS
EXCLUSION.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or have in
possession or under control, any animals, fowl or reptiles, other than
household pets, in the City, without having applied for and received a permit
as hereinafter provided, which permit shall be revocable at any time it is made
to appear to the Culver City Animal Services Officer that the keeping of such
animals, fowl or reptiles is, or may become, detrimental to the public health,
safety, and/or general welfare.
   B.   Each duly licensed pet or animal shop, establishment or business shall
be excluded from Subsection A of this Section except to the extent that any
such business shall be required annually to obtain and maintain in force a
single permit for the keeping of animals, fowls, or reptiles, other than
household pets. Such permit shall be issued by the County of Los Angeles under
Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code. This provision shall not be construed
to apply to any person, corporation or business entity other than those legally
engaged in the purchase and sale of animals, fowl or reptiles to the general
public.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.020 PERMIT FOR DOGS AND CATS.
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no person shall
keep or permit to be kept on any or in any lot, building, structure or premises
more than three dogs over the age of four months or more than three cats over
the age of four months, without first having applied for and received a permit
as provided herein.
   B.   For purposes of this section, a service dog as defined in Titles II and
III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and serving a person who is
disabled within the meaning of the ADA or Government Code § 12926 is not
counted toward the number of dogs kept or maintained.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.025 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; APPEAL UPON DENIAL.
   A.   Application for permit.
      1.   All applications for permits to keep animals, fowl or reptiles shall
be filed with the City Clerk, shall be accompanied by a fee of Fifty Dollars
($50.00) and shall state the number and kind of animals, fowl or reptiles as
well as such other information required by the Animal Services Division.
Signatures of at least one adult resident of each dwelling or apartment unit
within a radius of 200 feet, indicating approval or disapproval, shall be
appended to such applications. Upon receipt of a complete application, the
Animal Services Officer shall conduct an investigation and complete a report.
      2.   Upon completion of any investigation, the Animal Services Division
shall cause notices to be posted within a radius of 200 feet from the address
wherein said animals, fowl or reptiles are proposed to be kept, and not more
than 50 feet apart. Permit will be granted providing no written objections are
filed within 10 days of posting, unless the City's Animal Services Division
finds that denial of the permit is in the interest of the public's health,
safety and welfare. Written notice of denial of a permit shall be provided to
the applicant.
   B.   Appeal to Police Chief. In the event of the denial of an application,
the applicant may appeal to the Police Chief by filing with the City Clerk a
written request for review within 10 days from receipt of a notice of denial.
Upon receipt of a timely request for review, the Chief of Police shall review
the written grounds for appeal and the City's own records of the circumstances
of the denial of the permit. The Chief of Police may uphold the denial of the
permit, or grant such permit, if he or she determines that the denial is not
warranted under a totality of the circumstances and that the keeping of the
animal is not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
Such determination shall be made within 30 days from the date of the filing of
the appeal. A written notice of the decision shall be sent by first class mail
to the appellant within 10 days of the date of the decision. The action of the
Chief of Police under this section shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.030 ANIMAL EXPERIMENTATION PROHIBITED.
   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to permit the transfer, disposal
or otherwise surrendering of any live animal obtained from within the City to
any research institution, person or other agency for experimentation, whether
medical in nature or otherwise. It shall be unlawful for any person having the
care, custody or possession of such animal to willfully permit the violation of
this Section.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.035 ANIMALS AND FOWL IN OR NEAR CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any rabbits, fowl,
or birds (other than canaries, parrots or similar species), within 35 feet of
any food establishment, school, church, hospital or any residence or dwelling
house, apartment or hotel, or other building or structure occupied for any
purpose by human beings. Nor shall any animal or fowl be kept in any sandwich
packing or box lunch establishment, bakery, restaurant or lunch stand or within
35 feet of any door, window, ventilator or air shaft of such places, except as
otherwise provided by state or local law.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.040 BEE KEEPING; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep bees, or an apiary, unless a
permit has been obtained from the Animal Services Division as set forth in §
9.01.025 herein. Nothing shall be construed herein to prohibit the keeping of
bees in a hive or box located within a school house for the purpose of study or
observation.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.045 RIDING OR DRIVING OF HORSES OR OTHER ANIMALS UPON PUBLIC STREETS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   A.   No person shall use the public streets, alleys, or other public places
of the City, or any portion thereof, as a bridle or equestrian path, or shall
ride or cause to be driven any horse thereon, or shall drive any loose cattle,
horses, mules, sheep, goats or swine, in, upon, or along any such streets,
alleys or public places, except for the Police Department, on duty law
enforcement or other public safety personnel.
   B.   The Chief of Police may designate, by legible signs, street crossings
and other locations over which horses may be ridden to allow ingress or egress
to and from bridle paths. He may also issue temporary permits for the purpose
of transporting horses, cattle, or other animals, from one location to another
inside or outside the boundaries of the City, such permit to designate streets
to be utilized with least danger or inconvenience to the public.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or manage any riding
academy business, unless a permit has been obtained in the manner required for
the obtaining of permits from the City generally.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.050 INCONSISTENCIES WITH LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE TITLE 10.
   In the event of inconsistencies between this Chapter 9.01 and the adopted
provisions of Los Angeles County Code Title 10 (Animals), the provisions in
this Chapter 9.01 shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
DOGS
§ 9.01.300 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have, harbor, keep, to permit to be
harbored or kept, any unlicensed dog in the City, over the age of four months.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.305 LICENSE FEE; EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   License fee. There shall be an annual dog license fee. The amount, time
of payment, prorating schedule, if any, and penalty for late payment, if any,
of said fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   Exemptions. The license fees established by Subsection A. of this
Section shall not apply to any individual who qualifies for an exemption as
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.310 DEFINITION OF OWNER UNDER DOG LICENSING REGULATIONS.
   Any person keeping or harboring any dog for 15 consecutive days shall be
deemed to be the owner thereof within the meaning of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.315 TRANSIENT DOGS EXEMPTED.
   The license provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Any dog found within the City when the owner thereof resides in any
other municipality within the County or within the unincorporated area of the
County and such dog is wearing or has attached to it a license tag for the
current year issued by such municipality or County.
   B.   Any dog owned by or in charge of any person who is a non-resident of
the City and is traveling through the City or temporarily sojourning therein
for a period of not exceeding 30 days.
   C.   Any dog brought into the City and kept therein for not to exceed 30
days for the exclusive purpose of entering the same in any bench show or dog
exhibition or field trials or competition.
   D.   Any dog brought or sent into the City from any point outside thereof
for the exclusive purpose of receiving veterinary care in any dog hospital, in
the event that such dog is kept at all times strictly confined within such
hospital.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.320 LICENSE TAGS.
   A.   Manner of affixing. The numbered license tag marked with "Culver City
Animal License" required hereunder shall be securely affixed to a collar,
harness, or other device which shall at all times be worn by each dog except
while such dog remains indoors or in any enclosed yard or pen.
   B.   Duplicate tags. In the event any license tag for a dog is lost or
destroyed, a duplicate thereof may be procured from the agency designated by
the City upon the submission to such agency of such proof as he may require and
upon the payment therefor of the fee as set forth by resolution of the City
Council.
   C.   Counterfeit tags prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
attach to any dog a counterfeit or fraudulent tag in lieu of the tag required
and issued under the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.325 FAILURE TO PRODUCE ANIMAL OR DOCUMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful or any person to fail or refuse to exhibit any dog,
certificate, license or tag when requested so to do by the person authorized to
enforce the provisions of this Chapter, in the event that the same are
possessed by such person.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.330 DOGS CONFINED ON PRIVATE PREMISES.
   No person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall
cause, permit or allow the same to be loose on private premises, except if such
premises are enclosed in such a manner as to adequately confine said dog.
Electric invisible fences and/or verbal command control are not sufficient to
meet the provisions of this Section.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.335 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE; PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge, care, custody
or control of a dog in the City to cause, permit or allow the same to be or to
run at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, sidewalk, median, parkway,
court or other public place, or upon any private property or premises other
than those of the person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of
such dog, unless that dog be restrained by a substantial chain or leash not
exceeding six feet in length, and is in the control of a competent person.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
CATS
§ 9.01.400 LICENSE VOLUNTARY.
   Every person owning or having custody or control of any cat over the age of
four months in the City may obtain, on a voluntary basis, a City license for
each of such cats. If such license is obtained, all required license fees shall
be paid as set forth in §
9.01.405 of this Subchapter. The numbered license tag will be marked with
"Culver City Animal License."
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.405 LICENSE FEE; TERM.
   A.   License fee. There shall be a voluntary annual cat license fee. The
amount, time of payment, prorating schedule, if any, and penalty for late
payment, if any, of said fee shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
   B.   Term. Every license and tag issued pursuant to this Subchapter shall be
for the period of 12 months, beginning on the first day of the month in which
the animal is licensed, and continuing until the last day of the month 12
months thereafter.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.410 DEFINITION OF OWNER UNDER CAT LICENSING REGULATIONS.
   Any person keeping or harboring any cat for 15 consecutive days shall be
deemed to be the owner thereof within the meaning of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF TITLE 10 OF THE LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE - "ANIMALS"
§ 9.01.500 ADOPTION OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE TITLE 10.
   A.   The City of Culver City hereby adopts by reference Divisions 1, 2 and 3
of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, "Animals," encompassing §§
10.04.010 through 10.90.010, inclusive, dated October 6, 2016, with certain
amendments, additions, deletions and exceptions. The provisions of the Los
Angeles County Code Title 10, as indicated above, shall be applicable in the
City and referred to, together with this Chapter 9.01, as the "Animal Ordinance
of the City of Culver City."
   B.   A copy of the Los Angeles County Code, Title 10 shall be available for
public inspection in the City Clerk's office and in the Animal Services
Division of the Culver City Police Department.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.505 AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 10 OF THE LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE.
   The Los Angeles County Code Title 10 is hereby amended as follows:
   A.   Section 10.08.100 "Department" is hereby amended to mean the County of
Los Angeles Department of Animal Care and Control, or where applicable, the
Culver City Police Department, Division of Animal Services.
   B.   Section 10.08.110 "Director" is hereby amended to mean the Director of
the Department of Animal Care and Control, or, where applicable, the Culver
City Animal Services Officer.
   C.   Section 10.20.010 is hereby deleted.
   D.   Section 10.20.030 is hereby deleted.
   E.   Section 10.20.038 is hereby deleted.
   F.   Section 10.20.045 is hereby deleted.
   G.   Section 10.20.050 is hereby deleted.
   H.   Section 10.20.185 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Microchipping of dogs required. A dog four months or older must be
implanted with an identifying microchip. The owner or custodian is required to
provide the microchip number to the City and to the applicable national
microchip registry of a change of ownership of the dog, or the owner's change
of address or telephone number.
   I.   Section 10.20.190 is hereby deleted.
   J.   Section 10.20.220 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Vaccination Requirements. A person keeping or harboring a dog over four
months of age in the City must have the dog vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian on or before 15 days after the dog turns four months old.
   K.   Section 10.20.350 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Mandatory Spaying or Neutering of Dogs.
      1.   A person may not own, keep, or harbor a dog four months or older in
violation of this section. An owner or custodian of an unaltered dog must meet
one of the criteria set forth in Section 10.20.355 (Unaltered Dog License
Requirements) and pay the fee established by City Council resolution.
      2.   The owner or custodian of a dog that cannot be spayed or neutered
without a likelihood of serious bodily harm or death due to age or illness must
obtain written confirmation from a licensed veterinarian. The confirmation must
also state when the dog may be safely spayed or neutered. If the dog cannot be
spayed or neutered within 30 days of the issuance of the written confirmation
of a likelihood of serious bodily harm or death, the owner or custodian must
apply for an unaltered dog or cat license.
   L.   Section 10.20.357 is hereby deleted.
   M.   Section 10.32.010 is hereby deleted.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
DECLAWING OF ANIMALS
§ 9.01.600 ONYCHECTOMY (DECLAWING) AND FLEXOR TENDONECTOMY PROHIBITED.
   A.   No person, licensed medical professional or otherwise, shall perform or
cause to be performed an onychectomy (declawing) or flexor tendonectomy
procedure by any means on any animal within the City, except when necessary for
a therapeutic purpose. THERAPEUTIC PURPOSE means the necessity to address the
medical condition of the animal, such as an existing or recurring illness,
infection, disease, injury or abnormal condition in the claw that compromises
the animal's health. THERAPEUTIC PURPOSE does not include cosmetic or aesthetic
reasons or reasons of convenience in keeping or handling the animal. In the
event that an onychectomy or flexor tendonectomy procedure is performed on any
animal within the City in violation of this Section, each of the following
persons shall be guilty of a violation of this Section:
      1.   The person or persons performing the procedure;
      2.   All persons assisting in the physical performance of the procedure;
and
      3.   The animal guardian that ordered or requested the procedure.
   B.   Any violation of this Section shall constitute a misdemeanor. However,
at the discretion of the City Attorney, any violation may be prosecuted as an
infraction.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
ABATEMENT OF ANIMAL PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 9.01.700 PURPOSE.
   The disturbance caused by excessive, unrelenting or habitual noise of any
animal is disruptive of the public's peace and tranquility and represents an
unwanted invasion of privacy of the residents of the City and a public
nuisance. It is declared to be in the public interest to promote the health and
welfare of the residents of the City by providing an administrative proceeding
for the abatement of such nuisances.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.705 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings given herein:
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER. That person or designee who is authorized by
the City Manager to hear testimony from witnesses including complainants, peace
officers, Animal Services Officers or other parties including the owner or
person having charge, custody or control of the animal allegedly causing the
nuisance, to determine whether the maintenance of the animal is a public
nuisance and to order the abatement of such nuisance by taking such actions as
set forth in this Chapter.
   COMPLAINING PARTY. That person or those persons who contact the Culver City
Animal Services Division to report a noisy animal or noisy animals.
   DECLARANT. That person or those persons who contact the Culver City Animal
Services Division to report a noisy animal or noisy animals and complete the
Declaration of Animal Public Nuisance Form.
   NOISY ANIMAL. Any animal or animals maintained on the same premises or
location whose excessive, unrelenting or habitual barking, howling, crying,
whining or making other sounds common to their species annoy or become
offensive to a resident or residents in the vicinity thereby, disturbing the
peace of the neighborhood or causing excessive discomfort to any reasonable
person of normal sensitivity hearing such sounds.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. That person or those persons in charge of the premises or
location where any noisy animal is located and may include any of the
following:
      1.   The person or persons who own the property where the noisy animal is
located;
      2.   The person or persons in charge of the premises where the noisy
animal is located;
      3.   The person or persons occupying the premises where the noisy animal
is located;
      4.   The owner of the noisy animal.
   If any of those persons are minors, the parent or parents or a guardian of
such minor shall be the responsible party.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.710 UNLAWFUL TO KEEP A NUISANCE ANIMAL.
   A.   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, keeping,
harboring or having in his or her care, custody or control any animal, to cause
or suffer, or permit to be made or caused by such animal, barking, howling,
crying or making of any noises or other sounds common to their species, so as
to annoy and become offensive to a resident or residents in the vicinity in
which the animal is kept, thereby disturbing the peace of the neighborhood or
causing excessive discomfort to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity
residing in the area, unless such noise or sound is made by an official police
dog while on duty.
   B.   If, in violation of the provisions of this Subchapter, any person who
owns, maintains, harbors, keeps or has any animal which persistently emits any
noises or sounds in such manner as to annoy and become offensive to a resident
or residents in the vicinity in which the animal is kept, the maintenance of
such animal may be declared a public nuisance by the Animal Services Division
by written notice to the owner or person in charge, custody or control of the
animal. If after the issuance of such notice, the person owning, keeping,
harboring or having in such person's care or custody any animal has not abated
the noise, such person shall be subject to enforcement of the provisions of
this Code.
   C.   It is unlawful for the responsible party, after being informed in
writing that such person's animal has been declared a noisy animal and that the
maintenance of a noisy animal is a public nuisance, to fail, refuse or neglect
to take whatever steps or use whatever means are necessary to assure that such
animal does not again disturb residents in the vicinity in which the animal is
kept.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.715 INVESTIGATION BY CULVER CITY ANIMAL SERVICES.
   A.   When an Animal Services Officer is notified or alerted of a possible
animal which may constitute a nuisance and has personally confirmed the
existence of a potential nuisance, or has received a written complaint under
penalty of perjury of such noisy animal signed by the complaining party, the
Animal Services Officer shall issue an Initial Warning - Animal Nuisance
Complaint Notice to the responsible party. Such notice shall specify that the
continued barking, howling or other noise or sounds of such animal is in
violation of this Code and that the animal noise must be abated forthwith to
avoid further enforcement action. Such notice shall be served upon the
responsible party or, if such service cannot be safely made, posted at the
premises upon which the animal is located. A copy of the Initial Warning Animal
Nuisance Complaint Notice shall be filed with the Culver City Animal Services
Division. The Culver City Animal Services Officer shall, within 10 days of the
issuance of said warning notice, make a reasonable attempt to speak personally
or by telephone with the responsible party concerning the matter, including
what efforts have been made to abate the nuisance. If no one is available at
the time of the visit, a warning notice and educational materials will be
issued. The responsible party will be granted a 10-day period to resolve the
issue.
   B.   If within 10 days of the issuance of the Initial Warning Animal
Nuisance Complaint Notice, the Culver City Animal Services Division determines
that the barking, howling or other sound or cry was provoked or that such
barking, howling or other sound or cry was not excessive, unrelenting or
habitual, the Culver City Animal Services Division shall cause the Initial
Warning Animal Nuisance Complaint Notice to be voided.
   C.   The original nuisance animal complaint will remain on file and active
for 30 days after the initial 10 day correction period. If a second complaint
is not received from the original complainant in 30 days, the complaint shall
expire and the complainant must begin the process again if another allegation
of nuisance is made regarding the same animal.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.720 DECLARATIONS TO BE FILED.
   A.   When the Culver City Animal Services Division receives a subsequent
verbal or written complaint concerning a noisy animal at the same location
within 30 days after the issuance of an Initial Warning Animal Nuisance
Complaint Notice, the Culver City Animal Services Division shall determine
whether the Initial Warning Animal Nuisance Complaint Notice went unheeded. If
the determination is made the noise was not abated, the Culver City Animal
Services Division will give or send a Declaration of Animal Public Nuisance and
Petition for an Administrative Hearing to the complaining party for completion.
   B.   The Declaration of Animal Public Nuisance and Petition for an
Administrative Hearing shall be completed under penalty of perjury by the
complaining party and returned to the Culver City Animal Services Division. If
not returned within a 30-day period and no further complaints are received, no
action will be taken by the Culver City Animal Services Division.
   C.   Declarations under penalty of perjury must be filed with the Culver
City Animal Services stating in detail all of the following:
      1.   That Declarant is a resident of a residential home located within
two hundred yards of the premises where the noisy animal is located;
      2.   Within the past month Declarant has heard the noisy animal bark,
howl, whine or makes other sounds common to their species in a continuous or
untimely fashion and for a substantially long period to the extreme annoyance
of the Declarant;
      3.   That Declarant has had deterioration of emotional health from the
barking, howling, whining or making other sounds common to their species;
      4.   That Declarant requests that the noisy animal either be removed from
the premises or be confined indoors during specified hours;
      5.   That Declarant has mailed a copy of the declaration, certified mail,
to the owner of the noisy animal.
   D.   The Culver City Animal Services Division, upon timely receipt of an
executed Declaration of Animal Public Nuisance and Petition for an
Administrative Hearing, shall set the case for hearing before the
Administrative Hearing Officer. The hearing shall be set at least 10 and not
more than 60 days from the date the Declaration is received. The Culver City
Animal Services Division shall serve a notice, either personally or by first-
class mail, to the complaining party and responsible party, of the date, time,
and place for the hearing. The notice of hearing shall advise the complaining
party and responsible party that they may present evidence at the hearing
through witnesses, audio or video recordings or any other documentary evidence.
The notice of hearing shall be accompanied by a copy of the Declaration of
Animal Public Nuisance and Petition for an Administrative Hearing. If the
notice cannot be safely served by personal service, then it may be posted upon
the premises where the animal is kept and sent by first-class mail.
   E.   The complaining party may be informed that further action may not be
warranted if the animal is controlled, but in any case, no further action can
be taken until the completed Declaration of Complaint and Petition for an
Administrative Hearing form is received by the Culver City Animal Services
Division.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.725 FILING PERIOD.
   At least one Initial Warning - Animal Nuisance Complaint notice and one
Declaration of Animal Public Nuisance must be issued for each premise or
location for the noisy animal(s) before procedures provided for hereinafter are
implemented.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.730 HEARING AND NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be open to the
public. Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply. Each party shall have the opportunity to present
evidence in support of his or her case, and to cross-examine witnesses. The
complainant bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish
a violation of this animal nuisance abatement code. The evidence submitted in
the hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer may be either in the form
of written declarations or by way of oral testimony. All written declarations
shall be made under penalty of perjury in compliance with § 2015.5 of the
California Code of Civil Procedure. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall
use preponderance of the evidence as the standard of evidence in deciding the
issues. The Administrative Hearing Officer may admit all relevant evidence,
including incident reports, audio or video recordings, and affidavits of
witnesses. The Administrative Hearing Officer may decide all issues even if the
responsible party for the animal fails to appear at the hearing. The
Administrative Hearing Officer may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence,
that the animal is a nuisance animal and the maintenance of such animal is a
public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.735 DETERMINATION AND ORDER.
   Within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing conducted pursuant to
Section
9.01.730, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall notify the responsible party
by first class mail of the Administrative Hearing Officer's determination and
any orders issued. If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the
animal is a nuisance animal and the maintenance thereof, a public nuisance, the
responsible party shall comply with the Administrative Hearing Officer's order
within 10 days after the date of mailing of the determination and order.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.740 ISSUANCE OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
OFFICER.
   A.   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall make findings within the
"Administrative Order" regarding the existence of the violation(s) specified in
this chapter. If the Administrative Hearing Officer concludes that the animal
in question constitutes a nuisance, the Administrative Order shall set forth a
schedule for correction (i.e., whether the nuisance animal should be removed
from the residence or whether the nuisance animal should be confined indoors
for a specified schedule, and any other steps that may be taken to abate the
nuisance).
   B.   The Administrative Hearing Officer may, as part of his/her
determination that the animal is a nuisance animal and a public nuisance,
direct the responsible party to perform one or more of the following actions
(this list is illustrative rather than comprehensive):
      1.   Containment of the animal within an enclosed building on the
premises of responsible party;
      2.   Require that the animal wear a noise suppression device obtained at
the expense of the responsible party to reduce or eliminate the noise creating
the nuisance;
      3.   Require that the animal undertake obedience training designed to
abate the nuisance problem when appropriate and under the conditions imposed by
the Administrative Hearing Officer and at the expense of the responsible party;
      4.   Restrict the time of day, days of the week and duration when the
animal may be placed out-of-doors on the premises of the responsible party;
      5.   Require the animal to be debarked at the expense of the responsible
party;
      6.   Require the responsible party to permanently remove the animal from
said property and outside the City limits;
      7.   Any other reasonable means to accomplish the abatement.
   C.   If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the animal in
question does not constitute a nuisance, all proceedings regarding the
violation(s) shall immediately cease. However, this does not preclude other
persons or Declarants from reinstituting proceedings against the owner of the
same nuisance animal.
   D.   The Administrative Order has the discretion to impose administrative
penalties as provided in §
9.01.745, and administrative costs as provided in §
9.01.750.
   E.   The Administrative Order shall become final on the date of service, and
shall notify the responsible person of his right to appeal as provided in §
9.01.755. The Administrative Order shall set a deadline for compliance with its
terms in the event that the responsible person fails to file an appeal.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.745 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   A.   The Administrative Hearing Officer may assess against the responsible
person an administrative penalty for any violation found to exist, or for any
violation which was not timely corrected. The penalty shall be in the amount
established by resolution of the City Council. Because a new and separate
offense occurs each day during which a violation of any provision or
requirement of this code is committed, the Administrative Hearing Officer may
further assess a penalty for each day from the date the compliance order was
issued until the date the violation is corrected as determined by the
Administrative Hearing Officer. The Administrative Order shall specify the date
by which the penalty must be paid.
   B.   Administrative penalties assessed by the Administrative Hearing Officer
are a debt owed to the City.
   C.   Any person who fails to comply with the requirements and/or
restrictions provided in any such hearing shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. Such violation or violations shall be subject to the remedies
procedure delineated in Culver City Municipal Codes Chapters 1.01 and 1.02.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.750 ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   The Administrative Hearing Officer may assess against the responsible person
administrative costs for any violation found to exist, or for any violation
which was not timely corrected. The administrative costs include any and all
costs incurred by the City in connection with prosecuting the violation,
including but not limited to costs of investigation, staffing costs in
preparation for the administrative hearing and for the hearing itself, and
costs for all inspections necessary to enforce the compliance order and the
Administrative Order. The Administrative Order shall specify the date by which
the costs must be paid to the city.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.755 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.
   Within 20 days after service of the Administrative Hearing Officer's
Administrative Order upon the responsible person, he or she may seek review of
the Administrative Order by filing an appeal with the Los Angeles County
Superior Court. The responsible person shall serve upon the city clerk either
in person or by first class mail a copy of the notice of appeal. If the
responsible person fails to timely file a notice of appeal, the Administrative
Order shall be deemed confirmed.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.760 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.
   Failure to comply with an Administrative Order after it becomes final is a
misdemeanor. Filing a criminal misdemeanor action does not preclude the city
from using any other legal remedy available to gain compliance with the
Administrative Order.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.765 CIVIL ACTION.
   In the event any person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with an
Administrative Order of the Administrative Hearing Officer within the time
specified in said order and the public nuisance continues to exist, nothing
herein precludes civil action to obtain the abatement of such public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
§ 9.01.770 NOT EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   The provisions of this chapter are to be construed as an added remedy of
abatement of the nuisance hereby declared and not in conflict with or
derogation of any other actions or proceedings or remedies otherwise provided
by this title or other state or local law.
(Ord. No. 2017-011 § 2)
SALE AND USE OF GLUE TRAPS PROHIBITED
§ 9.01.800 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to prohibit the sale and use of glue traps
which are designed to capture animals and subject them to a slow, cruel,
inhumane death.
(Ord. No. 2025-014, § 1)
§ 9.01.805 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, such as birds, rodents,
reptiles, and insects.
   GLUE TRAP. A device that is designed to, or is capable of, being used to
capture any animal by means of an adhesive substance or similar viscid
substance.
   PERSON. A natural person.
   REGULATED ENTITY. Any business (regardless of whether it consists of a sole
proprietor, corporation, partnership or any other manner of organization) or
association, group or organization (regardless of the manner of organization
and regardless of whether conducted on a profit or not-for profit basis).
   SELL or SALE. Any transfer, exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale or
distribution for a commercial purpose in any manner or by any means whatsoever.
(Ord. No. 2025-014, § 1)
§ 9.01.810 GLUE TRAP PROHIBITIONS.
   A.   It is unlawful for any regulated entity or person to sell, offer for
sale, or display for sale, glue traps within the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any regulated entity or person to set, place, or
otherwise use a glue trap or permit another person or regulated entity to set,
place, or use a glue trap to capture or kill any animal within the city.
(Ord. No. 2025-014, § 1)
§ 9.01.815 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   A.   A violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed
a misdemeanor, subject to the penalties as set forth in §
1.01.040 of this code.
   B.   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
prosecuting a violation of this subchapter as an infraction, at their
discretion, as set forth in §
1.01.035.B. of this code subject to the penalties as set forth in §
1.01.040 of this code.
   C.   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
bringing civil action, at their discretion, for violations of the provisions of
this subchapter, as set forth in §
1.01.050 of this code.
   D.   A violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter may be enforced
through the administrative citation process set forth in chapter 1.02 of this
code.
(Ord. No. 2025-014, § 1)
CHAPTER 9.02: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
California Fire Code Adoption and Amendments
   
9.02.005   The 2024 International Fire Code with the 2025 California Fire code
adopted by reference
   
9.02.010   Violations and penalties
   
9.02.015   Amendments, additions, deletions, and substitutions
   
9.02.020   Amendments; Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.025   Amendments; Chapter 2 of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.030   Amendments; Chapter 4 of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.035   Amendments; Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.040   Amendments; Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.045   Amendment; Chapter 10 of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.050   Amendment; Chapter 20 of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.055   Amendment; Chapter 28 of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.060   Amendment; Appendix C of the California Fire Code
   
9.02.065   Amendment; Appendix D of the California Fire Code
Administrative Assessment Cost Recovery Program
   
9.02.300   Definitions
   
9.02.305   Hazardous materials cleanup
   
9.02.310   False alarms; violations
   
9.02.315   Re-inspections
   
9.02.320   Penalties
   
9.02.325   Appeals
Very High, High, and Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zones
   
9.02.400    Designation of very high, high, and moderate fire hazard severity
zones
CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS
§ 9.02.005 THE 2024 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE WITH THE 2025 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   A.   The City Council hereby adopts all chapters, certain amendments,
additions, deletions and exceptions to the 2024 International Fire Code, with
errata, incorporating Part 9 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations
known as the 2025 California Fire Code, with errata, including the 2025 Fire
Code Chapter 1 as amended, Chapter 2 as amended, Chapter 3 as amended, Chapter
9 as amended, Chapter 10 as amended, Chapter 31 as amended, Chapter 49 as
amended, Chapter 80 as amended, Appendix Chapter 4, Appendix B, Appendix BB,
Appendix C, Appendix CC, Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F, Appendix G,
Appendix H, Appendix I, and Appendix N as adopted by the California Building
Standards Commission, Chapter 9.02 of this Code, the Zoning Code, as set forth
in Title 17 of this Code, and any other City regulations relating to existing
zoning, fireworks, and building trades, is hereby adopted. The provisions of
the International Fire Code, with errata, California Fire Code, and Fire Code
Appendices, as indicated above, shall be applicable in the City and referred to
as the "Fire Code of the City of Culver City."
   B.   One copy of the Fire Code of the City of Culver City shall be available
in the Fire Prevention office for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.010 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with the
requirements of the Fire Code of the City of Culver City, hereinafter referred
to as the "Fire Code." Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to
comply with any of the requirements of the Fire Code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be punished in accordance with §
1.01.035 and §
1.01.040 of this Code.
   B.   In addition to the penalties herein provided above, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of the Fire Code,
shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such, and each
day such condition continues, shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.015 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND SUBSTITUTIONS.
   The Fire Code is amended as provided in this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.020 AMENDMENTS; CHAPTER 1 OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Section 104.1.1 Fire Prevention Standard Operating Policy Manual. A Fire
Code Departmental Policy Manual, known as the Culver City Fire Prevention
Standard Operating Guidelines has been created and adopted to serve as
instructions and interpretations of the adopted Fire Code. The Policy Manual
shall be a published document, maintained in the Fire Prevention office, and
amended from time to time to provide current instruction and interpretation.
   Section 105.1.1.1 Permit Fees. Permit Fees shall be adopted by resolution of
the City Council.
   Section 105.5.4.1 Aviation. An operational permit is required for all types
of aircraft that are flying, hovering, landing, lifting, filming, parking, or
conducting similar activities.
   Section 105.5.16.1 Permits to Conduct Displays of Fireworks Granted by City
Council. The City Council, by resolution, upon written application as provided
in this Subchapter and subject to the provisions of this Subchapter, may grant
two (2) permits to conduct a public display of fireworks in a calendar year,
each display to occur on a separate date. The City Council may by resolution,
grant an additional special permit for a public fireworks display sponsored by
the City.
   Section 105.5.16.2 Application for Permit; Conditions for Filing. An
application for a permit to conduct a public display of fireworks shall be
filed in compliance with all of the following:
   A.   Application for a permit to conduct a public display of fireworks shall
be filed in the Office of the City Manager, on forms provided by the City, at
least 180 days prior to the date requested for conducting the public display of
fireworks.
   B.   The following information shall be included on the application:
      1.   The location of the public display of fireworks as approved by the
Culver City Fire Department;
      2.   The location for storage of the fireworks to be displayed as
approved by the Culver City Fire Department, if within the City;
      3.   Who, if anyone, will provide management services to the applicant
for the public display of fireworks and evidence that such manager has complied
with all business tax certificate requirements; and
      4.   Transportation routes and any other information deemed necessary by
the City Council for the consideration of the application.
   C.   Evidence of the following types of insurance in a form with
endorsements as approved by the City Attorney and in an amount as established
by the City Attorney and the Fire Chief, but not less than Five Million Dollars
($5,000,000.00) shall be filed with the application:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance; combined single limit,
bodily injury and property damage, each occurrence;
      2.   Premises/operation liability;
      3.   Contractual liability, specifically referencing indemnification
agreements with the City; and
      4.   Products liability, including completed operations liability.
   D.   All fees required pursuant to this Code and City Council resolution
shall be paid at the time of filing the application; and
   E.   Evidence of compliance with any special conditions required by the
Culver City Fire Department because of the location of the public display of
fireworks.
   Section 105.5.16.3 Conditions Governing Permit. Any permit granted to
conduct a public display of fireworks shall be governed by all of the
following:
   A.   The public display of fireworks shall be conducted by a duly licensed
pyrotechnician who shall have obtained Culver City Fire Department approval no
later than the last day of June of the year in which the permit is granted;
   B.   One public display of fireworks may be conducted on July 4th, and one
may be conducted on another day. Any fireworks display shall be conducted
strictly in accordance with all regulations and conditions specified in this
Subchapter and in the City Council resolution granting the permit;
   C.   Any attempt to transfer a permit to any person shall void the permit;
   D.   The permittee shall agree, in writing, to indemnify and hold harmless
the City, its officers, representatives, and employees from any loss or
liability or damages, including expenses and costs, for bodily injury or
property damage sustained by any person as a result of any operation related to
the permit; and
   E.   Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Subchapter shall
preclude consideration of any application filed if permits have not been
granted thereunder; and shall be sufficient cause of the revocation of any
permit previously issued.
   Section 105.5.16.4 Time Limits. The City Council, by resolution, may extend
or shorten the time requirements established by this Subchapter.
   Section 105.5.16.5 Rescission of Prohibition. The prohibition set forth in
Chapter 56 of the California Fire Code shall not be rescinded by the City
Council without the approval of a majority of the voters voting at a regular or
special election.
   Section 105.5.41.1 Special Events and Assemblage. A permit is required for
special events and assemblages.
   Section 105.5.41.2 Non-Defined Operations. An operational permit may be
required after a Fire Department Review for hazards to people or property from
the proposed operation, system or event.
   Section 105.5.41.3 Permits. A permit shall be required as set forth in the
Culver City, City Council approved fee schedule for all special event and
assemblages.
   Section 105.5.41.4 Special Event Application and Submittals. All special
events and assemblages shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review.
All applications shall have a contact name, phone number, business name,
address, a plot plan, floor plan and sufficient detail and information to allow
for a comprehensive evaluation. Permits, Fire Safety Officers, security, and
other issues determined by the review shall be provided by the event organizer
prior to allowing the event or assemblage to operate. Tents in excess of 400
square feet needed for a special event or assemblage shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 31 and require a separate fire permit.
   Section 112.1.1 Appeals. Protests and appeals from the enforcement of this
Code shall be made to the Municipal Code Appeals Committee in accordance with
Section 1.01.065 of the Culver City Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.025 AMENDMENT; CHAPTER 2 OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Chapter 2 Definitions is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 202, Existing Building/Structure Square Footage. The existing square
footage of a building/structure is defined as the remaining square footage
after all demolition of the building has been completed.
   Section 202, Existing Roof Structure Square Footage. The existing square
footage of a roof structure is defined as the remaining square footage of the
roof structure after all demolition of the roof structure has been completed.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-14 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009 §
2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.030 AMENDMENT; CHAPTER 4 OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Chapter 4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 403.10.1.5.1 Identification. Identification numbers shall be
provided for all individual units in covered mall buildings, multi-unit
buildings and other commercial complexes, and shall be placed in such a
position as to be plainly visible and legible. The position and size of such
identification numbers shall be determined by the Fire Code Official. Numbers
and names shall be provided for all enclosed rooms and spaces, including
service rooms, mechanical rooms, closets, and similar spaces to identify use.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.035 AMENDMENT; CHAPTER 5 OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Chapter 5 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 503.1.2.1 Difficult Apparatus Access. If the Fire Code Official or
his/her designee determines that access for fire apparatus and equipment to any
building or structure is unduly difficult, installation of an automatic fire-
extinguishing system shall be required.
   504.1.1 Keysets, Handles, Locks and Keys. As determined by a Fire Department
review, all noted exterior doors shall be provided with locksets and handles
for Fire Department Access. Keys for required access shall be provided by the
owner and made readily available in the KNOX Box.
   Section 504.5 Catwalks and Ladders. Upon review, buildings with parapets and
other construction that exceeds five (5) feet from the roof may be required to
provide noncombustible catwalks and ladders.
   Section 504.6 Exterior Structure Requirements. All buildings with wall tops
and/or parapets with soft materials, rails or other construction that creates a
hazard to safe access for firefighting purposes shall have solid surfaces to
support the use of ladders, firefighters with gear and other suppression
equipment. Review and approval of surfaces shall be by the Fire Code Official.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.040 AMENDMENT; CHAPTER 9 OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Chapter 9 of the Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 901.4.1.1 Automatic Fire-Extinguishing System. An automatic fire-
extinguishing (sprinkler) system shall be installed in every new building in
the City, including any new residential building, hereinafter constructed or
moved into the City, regardless of area separation or type of construction.
   Exception: New buildings/additions less than 500 square feet may be exempted
upon approval of the Fire Code Official.
   Section 901.4.1.2 Commercial, Industrial and Multi-Family. In existing
commercial, industrial and multi-family residential occupancies, fire
sprinklers shall be required in existing and new portions of the building for
height increases, area increases of 50% or more, and for any occupancy change
that increases fire risk or hazard.
   Section 901.4.1.3 Residential. Existing one and two family dwellings shall
be required to install a fully automatic fire sprinkler system in existing and
new portions of the building when a story is added, more than 75% of the
existing roof structure is replaced, or when the enclosed floor area is
increased by more than 75%. Note: See Culver City Amended Chapter 2 for the
definition of "EXISTING BUILDING/STRUCTURE AND ROOF STRUCTURE."
   Section 903.3.5.1 Domestic Service. Where the domestic service provides the
water supply for the automatic sprinkler system, the supply shall be a minimum
1-inch water meter.
   Section 903.3.8.1.1 Partial Fire Sprinkler Systems. Where in the Fire Code
or the Building Code a partial fire sprinkler system is allowed or required,
the fire sprinkler system shall be installed, modified or extended to protect
the entire building or structure.
   Section 903.3.8.5.1 Hydraulically Calculated Systems. The design of
hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the
water supply capacity.
   Section 903.4.2.1 Interior Audible Device. An interior audible device shall
be required in an approved location and shall be connected to the automatic
sprinkler system.
   Section. 907.1.6 Projection Room Controls. All projection equipment and
audio equipment shall be interconnected to the fire alarm system for shut down,
upon an interrupt signal from the fire alarm panel, to prevent interference of
all visual and audible evacuation devices and directions from the theatre staff
for evacuation directions.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-013, § 2; Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.045 AMENDMENT; CHAPTER 10 OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Chapter 10 is hereby amended to add Section 1006.3.5 to read as follows:
   1006.3.5 Single-exit buildings with Group R-2 dwelling units with an
occupied floor or roof above the third story. Single-exit, Group R-2 occupancy
buildings with an occupied floor or roof above the third story are hereby
permitted within the City of Culver City so long as they strictly comply with
all of the following in addition to the requirements of this Code, and the
California Building Code where specified, other than CBC Section 1006.3.4:
   1.   All dwelling units or accessory dwelling units shall meet the
definitions of dwelling units or accessory dwelling units as defined in Chapter
2, and no other type of unit shall be permitted within the building.2. Group R-
2 occupancies, as defined in CBC Section 310.3, within the building shall be
limited to apartment houses. Group R-2.1 and Group R-2.2 occupancies shall not
be permitted.
   2.   The building is not classified as a high-rise building as defined in
Chapter 2.
   3.   The floor area of each floor (story or basement) shall not exceed 4,000
net habitable square feet (371.6 m2).
   4.   There shall be no more than two single exit stairway conditions on the
same property.
   5.   Single-exit buildings over three stories are not permitted in any area
designated as a Fire Hazard Severity Zone pursuant to Section 9.02.400 of this
Code.
   6.   The building shall be of VA (four stories maximum), IVA, IVB, IVC,
IIIA, IIA, IB, or IA type of construction.
   7.   Recycling, waste, and linen chute access shall be located within a
separate room and shall not be accessible from the interior stairway. The
separate chute access room shall have no horizontal dimension less than five
feet (1.53 m) nor be less than 25 square feet (2.32 m2) in area.
   8.   Each dwelling unit and each accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to
a maximum of six habitable spaces as defined in Chapter 2.
   9.   An elevator is required for buildings that are five or six stories in
height. All stories must be served by the elevator. When an elevator is
provided, it shall comply with CBC Section 3002.4A, general stretcher
requirements.
   10.   When an elevator is provided, it shall have a pressurized shaft or
pressurized hoistway that at all times must remain pressurized in accordance
with CBC Section 909.21 at a minimum positive pressure of 0.10 inch of water
(25Pa) and a maximum positive pressure of 0.25 inch of water (67Pa) with
respect to all adjacent areas on all floors, or shall open into elevator
lobbies constructed to comply with CBC Section 3006.
   11.   No more than 20 feet (6.10 m) of travel distance to the exit stairway
as measured from the entry/exit door of any dwelling unit to the exit stairway
door or related passageway door shall be permissible.
   12.   Other occupancies are permitted in the same building provided they
separately comply with all the requirements of this Code. Other occupancies
shall not communicate with the Group R occupancy portion of the building and
shall be provided with a separate means of egress, distinct from the single-
exit serving the Group R-2 occupancy.
   Exception: Parking garages accessory to the Group R-2 occupancy are
permitted to use the single-exit stairway.
   13.   Private roof decks up to 150 square feet (13.9 m2) per unit are
permitted at or below the sixth story. The private roof deck must be accessible
only through that individual unit. Individual roof decks shall be separated
from other private roof decks and any other areas by a minimum 42-inch (1067
mm) tall guardrail or walls.
   14.   No more than a total of four dwelling units (including accessory
dwelling units) shall be permitted on each story or basement level.
   15.   The building shall not exceed six stories, not more than 5 stories of
Group R-2 occupancy are permitted to be served by a single exit stairway.
Basement levels shall be counted as stories for the purpose of this limit.
   16.   Exit access doors shall swing in the direction of egress travel at the
exterior or interior exit stairway, associated passageway, or vestibule,
regardless of the occupant load served. Door swing shall not reduce or encroach
into the required stair landing. Landings shall not be reduced by any amount
when the door is in any position. Reductions in the minimum required landing
dimensions, as allowed per CBC Section 1010.1.5 and CBC Section 1011.6, shall
not be permitted.
   17.   The maximum exit access travel distance, measured in accordance with
CBC Section 1017, shall not exceed 125 feet (38.1 m).
   18.   A corridor complying with CBC Section 1020 or an egress balcony
complying with CBC Section 1021 shall separate each dwelling unit entry/exit
door from the exit stairway, including any related passageway, on each floor.
Corridor and egress balcony walls shall be of not less than 1-hour fire-
resistance-rated construction. The egress balcony shall be separated from the
interior of the building by walls and opening protectives as required for 1-
hour fire- resistance-rated corridors.
   19.   Dwelling units, elevators, equipment rooms, storage rooms, trash
rooms, and other similar rooms or spaces shall not open into the interior exit
stairway enclosure.
   20.   An exterior exit stairway or interior exit stairway shall be provided.
The interior exit stairway, including any related passageways, shall be a
smokeproof enclosure in compliance with CBC Section 909.20.
   21.   Electrical receptacles shall be prohibited in an interior exit
stairway.
   22.   Dwelling unit doors are permitted to open onto an exterior exit
stairway as long as the dwelling unit doors do not encroach into the stairs and
required stairway landings. Reductions in the minimum required landing
dimensions, as allowed per CBC Section 1010.1.5 and CBC Section 1011.6, shall
not be permitted.
   23.   Exits shall terminate directly onto a public way that is 15 feet wide
minimum or onto an egress court where the width of the egress court is equal to
or exceeds the court length and terminates at a public way that is no less than
15 feet wide.
   24.   The total horizontal travel distance from the edge of the roadway to
the farthest unit door (at any level), excluding the vertical rise within a
stairway (and associated landings), shall be less than 250 feet.
   25.   Notwithstanding CBC Section 1031.2, all basement levels and sleeping
rooms within any story or basement shall have not fewer than one emergency
escape and rescue opening in accordance with CBC Section 1031.
   26.   The building shall be provided with a sprinkler system in accordance
with NFPA-13 as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission and
amended by the City of Culver City.
   27.   A manual fire alarm system and automatic smoke detection system that
activates the occupant notification system in accordance with CBC Section 907.5
shall be provided. Smoke detectors shall be located in common spaces outside of
dwelling units, including but not limited to gathering areas, laundry rooms,
mechanical equipment rooms, storage rooms, interior corridors, interior exit
stairway, and passageways.
   28.   Compliance with these requirements does not exempt Single-exit, Group
R-2 occupancy buildings with an occupied floor or roof above the third story
from any other applicable requirements of the City of Culver City Fire Code or
the State Fire Code.
   29.   There shall be 20 feet of width in both the front and rear of the
building for fire department access and operations, specifically with regard to
aerial ladder usage. For the purposes of the rear requirement, a public alley,
designated egress court, or other approved form of public access may be used to
satisfy all or part of the required 20 feet.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.050 AMENDMENT; CHAPTER 20 OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Chapter 20 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 2001.3.1 Permits. All flight operations within the City of Culver
City are required to have an approved Culver City Fire Department permit.
Permits shall cover but not be limited to: flight to perform lifts, hovering,
fly over, landings, filming and other operations while flying, hovering or
landing.
   Section 2001.3.2 Operation and Review Standards. Compliance with CA Fire
Code Chapter 20 and CCMC 9.09 shall be used to obtain a flight permit and the
requirements for flight operations and approvals. All operations shall be
reviewed and approved by the Fire Department. Landing, fueling, repairs, and
storage are limited. The need for providing standby personnel, Fire Safety
Officers and permits for any or all activities shall be determined by the Fire
Department.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.055 AMENDMENT; CHAPTER 48 OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Chapter 48 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 4804.6.1 Illumination. The approved perimeter aisles shall be
illuminated at floor level with light fixtures spaced at intervals of not more
than fifty (50) feet apart and providing a minimum light intensity of not less
than (1) foot-candle. Power for the emergency light fixtures shall be supplied
as required by Culver City Fire Department Regulations. All Exit and Emergency
lights shall comply with the Building Code requirements for two sources of
power with one of the two sources of power provided by approved batteries.
   Section. 4804.10 Flammable Liquids and Compressed Gases on Sound Stages.
Unless approved, in writing, by the Fire Code Official, flammable liquids and
compressed flammable gases shall be prohibited on television and motion picture
sound stages.
   Section 4804.11 Fire Department Filming and Performance Regulations. All
Motion Picture and Television Production Studio Sound Stages, Approved
Production Facilities and Productions Locations shall comply with Culver City
Fire Department Filming and Performance Regulations. Fire Department Filming
Regulations are available for review at the Fire Prevention counter.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.060 AMENDMENT; APPENDIX C, OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Appendix C is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section C101.1.2. Use Table as Indicated. Whenever the reference is made to
Table C102.1, use Culver City Fire Department requirements of 300-foot fire
hydrant spacing in commercial/ industrial/residential areas for Hydrant
Placement, Spacing and Specifications. Maximum distance of a fire hydrant to an
FDC shall not exceed 100 feet.
(Ord. No. 2017-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-014 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-009
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.065 AMENDMENT; APPENDIX D OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Appendix D is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section D101.1.2. Use Table as Indicated. Upon review of a project and based
on Fire Department access and water supplies, the Fire Department may change
the tables to mitigate special hazards.
(Ord. No. 2025-016 § 2 (part))
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSESSMENT COST RECOVERY PROGRAM
§ 9.02.300 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CULVER CITY MUNICIPAL CODE.  The ordinances embraced in the Chapters and
Sections found in "The Code of the City of Culver City, California,"
hereinafter referred to as "CCMC."
   FAILURE TO NOTIFY.
      1.   Pre-Test Notification Failure - failure to notify the Fire
Department before proceeding with any testing of a fire alarm or fire
suppression system which results in an unnecessary response.
      2.   Post-Test Notification Failure - failure to notify the Fire
Department after completion of testing and/or maintenance of a fire alarm or
fire suppression system, which results in an unnecessary response.
   FALSE ALARM.  The deliberate reporting of an alarm for which no fire or
emergency actually exists or an alarm that is set off "needlessly" includes,
but is not limited to, the triggering of an alarm by conditions that are not
typical of a current or impending fire emergency.
   FIRE CODE.  The "Fire Code of the City of Culver City" as defined in §
9.02.005 of the CCMC.
   FIRE CODE STANDARDS.  Volume 2 of the "International Fire Code" published by
the International Code Council.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material that, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant or
potential hazard to human health and safety, to the environment, or to property
if released. For the purposes of this chapter HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  include, but
are not limited to, hazardous materials as defined in §
9.03.105 N., O., or P. of the CCMC, and other substances known to cause harm to
the environment if released such as used oil, paint, paint residues, and
solvents.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Hazardous waste generated from a Culver City
household in conducting non-commercial activities.
   MUNICIPAL CODE APPEALS COMMITTEE.  The committee is authorized to hear
appeals of alleged violations of the CCMC. [CCMC §
1.01.065].
   RE-INSPECTION.  A repeat inspection for compliance after the issuance of an
"Order to Comply" served by a member of the Culver City Fire Department to any
person, firm or corporation to correct a Fire Code violation.
   SEWER SYSTEM.  All pipes, drains, channels, and other means used to
transport sewage to the Hyperion Water Treatment Plant, or other City-
authorized treatment facility for treatment (e.g. household or commercial
drains, and the like).
   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.  All pipes, drains, channels, and other means used to
transport surface waters to the ocean without treatment (e.g., curbside drains,
La Ballona Creek, and the like).
   UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE.  A release or emission of materials in a manner
which does not conform to the provisions of this code [CCMC §
9.02.005] or applicable public health and safety regulations.
(Ord. No. 2014-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.305 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP.
   A.   Violation. It shall be a violation of this Section to release hazardous
materials in an unauthorized manner. At no time shall a hazardous material be
released into a street or surface where the drainage is to the storm drain
system.
   B.   Responsibility for cleanup. The person, firm or corporation responsible
for an unauthorized discharge, shall institute and complete all actions
necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden
or gradual, at no cost to the jurisdiction. When deemed necessary by the Fire
Code Official or his designee, cleanup may be initiated by the Fire Department
or by an authorized individual or firm. Costs associated with such a cleanup
shall be borne by the owner, operator or other operator or other person
responsible for the unauthorized discharge.
   C.   Assessment of administrative charges. Costs are determined based on
actual personnel costs plus benefits, and estimated costs of equipment per unit
response, plus any other applicable expenditure.
(Ord. No. 2014-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.310 FALSE ALARMS; VIOLATIONS.
   A.   Violation. It shall be a violation of this Section for:
      1.   Any person, firm, entity or corporation to cause or allow more than
four (4) false alarms within the prior three hundred sixty-five (365) days from
a facility in a residential, commercial, or manufacturing zone; or any other
zone recognized by the Culver City Municipal Code.
      2.   An alarm company to cause or allow more than one (1) "Failure to
Notify" the Culver City Police/Fire Dispatcher to testing, inspecting, or
maintaining a fire suppression and/or alarm system of a specified facility
within the prior three hundred sixty five (365) days. For notification
requirements for maintenance, service and testing see California Fire Code
Chapter 9, section 901.
      3.   An alarm company to cause or allow more than one (1) "Failure to
Notify" the Culver City Police/Fire Dispatcher within one (1) hour after
completion of testing, inspecting, or maintaining a fire suppression and/or
alarm system of a specified facility, within the prior three hundred sixty-five
(365) days. For notification requirements for maintenance, service and testing
see California Fire Code Chapter 9, section 901.
   B.   Assessment of administrative charges.  An administrative charge of One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) will be assessed for each additional false alarm
above the limits as set forth in Subsection A.
(Ord. No. 2014-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.315 RE-INSPECTIONS.
   A.   Violation. It shall be a violation for any person, firm, entity or
corporation to fail to comply within the prescribed time with orders to comply
issued by the Culver City Fire Department.
   B.   Violation corrected. Where the violation has been corrected within the
time period prescribed as confirmed by inspection or other proof acceptable to
the Fire Marshal, the case shall not be assessed.
   C.   Violation not corrected. Where the violation has not been corrected
within the time period prescribed by the Fire Department, any additional
compliance inspection(s) shall be assessed to the violator at an administrative
charge of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first additional inspection. If
compliance is still not achieved, a further administrative charge of Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per each additional inspection required shall be
assessed.
(Ord. No. 2014-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.320 PENALTIES.
   In addition to any administrative costs as described above, violations of
this Section shall be punished as:
   A.   For the first violation in a twelve (12) month period as an infraction;
   B.   For the second and each subsequent violation in a twelve (12) month
period as an infraction or misdemeanor as determined by the City Attorney.
(Ord. No. 2014-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.02.325 APPEALS.
   A.   The "initial warning" cannot be appealed. Subsequent notices and orders
can be appealed to the Municipal Code Appeals Committee. To contest first and
subsequent notices and orders to comply, and/or the administrative fee
assessment, a written objection must be filed with the City Clerk's office
within ten (10) days of receipt of the appealable notice or order. The City
will notify each appellant of the date and time of the scheduled informal
hearing.
   B.   Those who wish to appeal an Order to Comply an Administrative
Assessment shall follow the process set forth on the order to comply form and
appropriate City procedures.
(Ord. No. 2014-004 § 2 (part))
VERY HIGH, HIGH, AND MODERATE FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONES
§ 9.02.400 DESIGNATION OF VERY HIGH, HIGH, AND MODERATE FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY
ZONES.
   A.   The City Council designates very high, high, and moderate fire hazard
severity zones (FHSZs) as recommended by the Culver City Fire Department on a
map entitled, Very High, High and Moderate FHSZs - Culver City, and dated May
2025, increasing the levels of certain FHSZs and adopting other FHZS as
identified by the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.
   B.   The Culver City Fire Department's very high, high, and moderate FHSZs
designation map shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's office and in the
Fire Prevention Division offices.
(Ord. No. 2012-005A, § 1; Ord. No. 2025-009, § 2)
CHAPTER 9.03: HEALTH, SANITATION AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
Health Code
   
9.03.005   Health Code adopted by reference; violations
Public Health Licensing
   
9.03.007   Adoption of public health licensing
Hazardous Materials Disclosure Requirements, Business Plans, and Inspections
   
9.03.100   Findings and declarations
   
9.03.105   Definitions
   
9.03.110   Business plans
   
9.03.115   Inventory reports
   
9.03.120   Risk management and prevention program
   
9.03.125   Trade secrets
   
9.03.130   Public inspection of records
   
9.03.135   Reporting release or threatened release of hazardous materials
   
9.03.140   Authority to inspect
   
9.03.145   Fees
   
9.03.150   Civil and criminal penalties and fines; rewards
   
9.03.155   Investigations of violations
   
9.03.160   Liberal construction; severability
   
9.03.165   Incident command authority
Culver City Hazardous Waste Management Plan
   
9.03.300   Purpose and adoption; contents
   
9.03.305   Hazardous waste management facility siting permit
   
9.03.310   Land use approvals
HEALTH CODE
§ 9.03.005 HEALTH CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; VIOLATIONS.
   There is hereby adopted by reference the Los Angeles County Public Health
Code, as amended, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
City Clerk. Any violations of said County Code, hereby adopted as the Health
Code of the City of Culver City, shall be punishable as a misdemeanor under the
provisions of
§§ 1.01.035 et seq. of the Culver City Municipal Code.
('65 Code, § 16-1) (Ord. No. CS-826 § 3; Ord. No. 88-014 § 1)
PUBLIC HEALTH LICENSING
§ 9.03.007 ADOPTION OF PUBLIC HEALTH LICENSING.
   A.   Division 1 of Title 8, Consumer Protection, and Division 1 of Title 11,
Health and Safety, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended as of February 1,
2002, are hereby adopted by reference thereto; and a copy of Division 1 of
Title 8 and Division 1 of Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended
as of February 1, 2002, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk
and shall be maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the
public.
   B.   In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between the provisions of
this Code and those contained in Division 1 of Title 8, Consumer Protection,
and Division 1 of Title 11, Health and Safety, of the Los Angeles County Code,
as amended as of February 1, 2002, thereto, this Code shall prevail.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of Division 1 of Title 8,
Consumer Protection, or Division 1 of Title 11, Health and Safety, of the Los
Angeles County Code, as amended as of February 1, 2002, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable in such manner and to such extent as
provided by
Chapter 1.01 of this Code and any and all remedies, civil and criminal,
provided therein.
(Ord. 2002-004 § 1)
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS, BUSINESS PLANS, AND INSPECTIONS
§ 9.03.100 FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS.
   The City Council finds and declares in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare and the environment, and in order to supplement the City's
existing emergency response program and to comply with Federal and State laws
and regulations, it is necessary to establish a system for collecting and
verifying information for business plans relating to the handling, use,
storage, release or threatened release of hazardous materials. The authority
for this Subchapter includes the provisions of Title III of the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA), 42 USC 11001 et seq., as
amended; Cal. Health & Safety Code§§ 25500 et seq., as amended, and the City's
police power to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
Furthermore, pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25502, the Culver City
Fire Department has been designated as the administering agency for Cal. Health
& Safety Code§§ 25500 et seq. and shall carry out its intent and requirements.
('65 Code, § 16-8) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.105 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions govern the
construction of this Subchapter:
   ACUTELY HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. This term shall have the same meaning as
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS MATERIAL.
   BUSINESS PLAN. An emergency pre-plan prepared for each facility, site, or
branch of a business which meets the requirements of §
9.03.115 A. Each business plan shall provide the information required in §
9.03.115.
   BUSINESS. Any employer, self-employed individual, trust, firm, joint stock
company, corporation, partnership, or association. For the purpose of this
Subchapter, BUSINESS includes both for-profit and non-profit enterprises.
   CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE. The California Health and Safety Code, as
amended.
   CHEMICAL. Any chemical element, chemical compound or chemical mixture.
   CHEMICAL NAME. The scientific designation of a substance in accordance with
the nomenclature system developed by the International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Service.
   COMMON NAME. Any designation or identification, such as a code name, code
number, trade name, or brand name used to identify a substance other than by
its chemical name.
   DEPARTMENT. The Culver City Fire Department.
   DUN & BRADSTREET NUMBER. The number assigned to a business as listed in
various directories published by Dun & Bradstreet.
   EPA NUMBER. The number assigned by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
to a specific business site where hazardous wastes are generated.
   EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any chemical on the list prepared by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and classified as an extremely
hazardous substance pursuant to 40 CFR 300 and 355, and any amendments thereto.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the Culver City Fire Department or his/her
designee(s). A designee of the Fire Chief may vary for any different aspect of
the hazardous material disclosure and business plan program.
   HANDLE. To use, generate, process, produce, package, treat, store or
possess, emit, discharge or dispose of any hazardous material in any fashion.
STORE, as used in this Subsection, does not include the storage of hazardous
materials which are in transit or which are temporarily maintained in a fixed
facility for a period of less than thirty (30) days during the course of
transportation.
   HANDLER. Any business which handles any hazardous material.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material that because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS include,
but are not limited to, hazardous substances, acutely hazardous materials,
hazardous waste, infectious waste, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum
or petroleum products or gases, poisons, biological agents, flammable,
corrosive, oxidized or reactive materials and any material for which a handler
or the Department has a reasonable basis for believing it would be injurious to
the health, safety and welfare of persons or harmful to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE.
      1.   Any substance or chemical product listed in 49 CFR 172 and 173 and
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25501.1.
      2.   In general, if the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare a
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for the substance or product, or if the
substance is radioactive, the handler should refer to the above described
lists.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Includes the definitions found in Cal. Health & Safety Code
§§ 25115, 25117, and 25316, as amended. In general, if the chemical meets the
definition of HAZARDOUS MATERIAL and is being disposed of or will no longer be
used, the handler should refer to the above described Sections.
   MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET or MSDS. A form on which data about a specific
chemical substance is provided, as required in Cal. Admin. Code Title 8, § 5194
and in the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 29 USC 651 et seq. This
data includes, but is not limited to, information about the chemical in the
following categories: hazardous ingredients, physical data, fire and explosion
data, health hazard data, reactivity data, spill or leak procedures, special
protection information and special precautions.
   MODIFIED FACILITY.
      1.   An addition or change to a facility or business which results either
in a substantial increase in the amount of extremely hazardous materials
handled by the facility or business, or a significantly increased risk in
handling an extremely hazardous material, as determined by the Department.
      2.    MODIFIED FACILITY does not include an increase in production up to
the facility's existing operating capacity. MODIFIED FACILITY also does not
include an increase in the production levels up to the production levels
authorized in a permit granted pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 42300,
as long as the increased levels would not result in a significant increase in
danger or harm to persons in the workplace or to the environment.
   QUALIFIED PERSON. A person who is qualified to attest, at a minimum, to the
validity of the hazard and show the relationship between the plan and the
hazards the plan is designed to mitigate.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, dumping, or disposing (including the
abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers, and other closed receptacles)
into the environment of any hazardous material, extremely hazardous substance,
or toxic chemical, unless permitted or authorized by a regulatory agency.
   RISK MANAGEMENT AND PREVENTION PROGRAM or (RMPP). The administrative and
operational programs which are designed to prevent acutely hazardous materials
accident risks, including, but not limited to, design safety of new and
existing equipment, standard operating procedures, preventative maintenance
programs, operator training and accident investigation procedures, risk
assessment for unit operations, or operating alternatives, emergency response
planning and internal or external audit procedures to ensure these programs are
being executed as planned.
   SITE. A location with a single address used by a business. Locations with
different addresses, but used by the same business, even if contiguous, shall
be considered separate sites. Furthermore, if a location with a single address
used by a business has two (2) or more buildings or structures at that
location, each building or structure may be considered a separate site, if in
the discretion of the Fire Chief or his designee, there exists a significant
potential danger to the public health and safety and/or environment.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE or SIC CODE. The identification
number assigned to specific types of businesses in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual issued by the Federal Office of Management and Budget.
   THREATENED RELEASE. A condition creating a substantial probability of harm,
when the probability and potential extent of harm make it reasonably necessary
to take immediate action to prevent, reduce, or mitigate damages to persons,
property, or the environment.
   TITLE III. Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of
1986 (SARA), 42 USC 11001 et seq., as amended, which Act amended the
Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, 42
USC 9601 et seq. Title III is also known as the “Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986.”
   TRADE SECRET. Information about a chemical or chemicals, the release of
which would unreasonably harm the competitive position of a business. Specific
factors for determining trade secret status are described in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 25511, as amended, 42 USC 11042, as amended, Cal. Gov't Code §
6254.7(d), as amended, Cal. Evid. Code § 1060, as amended, and §
9.03.125 of this Subchapter and any Resolution adopted thereunder.
('65 Code, § 16-9) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.110 BUSINESS PLANS.
   A.   Applicability and contents. Every business within the City must
complete the Departments reporting form(s), declaring whether that business
handles any hazardous or extremely hazardous materials at any time within the
calendar year. All businesses handling hazardous or extremely hazardous
materials shall be required to prepare and submit a business plan to the
Department. Business plans shall include, but not be limited to, the inventory
of hazardous materials, as described in §
9.03.115, procedures for emergency notification to the Department and the State
Office of Emergency Services, procedures for mitigation of a release or
threatened release of hazardous materials, evacuation plans and employee
training, as required by Resolution by the City Council.
   B.   Reporting dates; facilities, sites, and branches. Business plans shall
be submitted under the same schedule established for the hazardous material
inventories under §
9.03.115 as set by Resolution by the City Council. A separate business plan
shall be required for each facility, site, or branch of a business which meets
the requirements of Subsection A.
('65 Code, § 16-10) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.115 INVENTORY REPORTS.
   A.   Applicability; reporting dates. Every business within the City which
handles hazardous or extremely hazardous materials shall prepare an inventory
of all hazardous materials it handles within a single calendar year. The
inventory shall be considered part of the business plan, required pursuant to §
9.03.110 of this Subchapter, and shall be submitted to the Department annually,
according to the dates established in the Inventory Reporting Schedule. The
Inventory Reporting Schedule and specific information required thereunder shall
be established by Resolution by the City Council.
   B.   Required inventory data. The inventory data shall be submitted in a
manner and format authorized by the Department. This data shall include all
information required by Resolution by the City Council and the following:
      1.   Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25509;
      2.   Title III, §§ 311 and 312, being 42 USC 11021 and 11022;
      3.   Any regulations adopted by the State or Federal governments for the
implementation of these laws;
      4.   Any amendments to these laws or their respective implementing
regulations;
      5.   Any information the Fire Chief deems necessary to promote the
health, safety and welfare of the general public.
('65 Code, § 16-11) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.120 RISK MANAGEMENT AND PREVENTION PROGRAM.
   A.   General requirements; timetable.  
      1.   Any business which handles any acutely hazardous material at any
time within the calendar year, shall be required to file an acutely hazardous
material registration form, pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25533.
Within ninety (90) days after the Department receives the form, said business
may be required, at the discretion of the Fire Chief, to prepare a Risk
Management and Prevention Program (RMPP) for that business. The RMPP shall be
prepared within twelve (12) months following the Fire Chief's request for
preparation.
      2.   The RMPP shall be required for any new or modified facility which
will be used for the handling of acutely hazardous materials and which will
commence or have commenced new or modified operations on or after January 1,
1988. The new or modified operations dealing with acutely hazardous materials
shall not commence until the RMPP has been prepared and certified, pursuant to
Subsection D. The RMPP shall be prepared in addition to the business plan
required in §
9.03.115 of this Subchapter. A separate plan shall be prepared for each site,
branch, or facility of the business located within Culver City, unless the Fire
Chief agrees to a consolidated plan.
   B.   Plan contents. The RMPP shall include all the information required by
Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25534.
   C.   Review and update of RMPP. The handler shall review the RMPP, and shall
make necessary revisions to the RMPP at least every three (3) years, but, in
any event, within sixty (60) days following a modification which would
materially affect the handling of an acutely hazardous material.
   D.   Certification; copy of RMPP. The RMPP, including any revisions required
by the Department, shall be certified as complete by a qualified professional
and the facility operator. If requested, a copy shall be provided to the
Department.
   E.   Notification of completion; implementation of the RMPP. The handler
shall notify the Department in writing when the RMPP has been completed and
certified. The handler shall implement the programs and activities specified in
the RMPP. The handler shall again notify the Department in writing when the
RMPP has been implemented, and shall summarize the steps taken in the
preparation and implementation of the RMPP. The handler shall continue to carry
out the programs and activities specified in the RMPP after notification of
implementation is sent to the Department.
('65 Code, § 16-12) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.125 TRADE SECRETS.
   A.   Trade secret factors; disclosure to Department. If a business believes
the inventory required by this Subchapter involves the release of a trade
secret, the business shall still make the full disclosure to the Department,
but shall notify the Department in writing of that belief on the inventory
form.
   B.   Protection from disclosure. Subject to the requirements of Cal. Health
& Safety Code § 25511, this Section and the Resolution adopted pursuant to this
Subchapter, any person who receives trade secret information as authorized
hereunder, shall protect from disclosure any trade secret designated as such by
the handler.
   C.   Violations; enforcement. Any person, as described in the Resolution
adopted pursuant to this Subchapter, who discloses trade secret information in
violation of this Section and/or the Resolution, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
('65 Code, § 16-13) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.130 PUBLIC INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   A.   The business plan and revisions thereto shall be available for public
inspection during the regular working hours of the Administration Division of
the Department, except that those portions of the business plan specifying the
location where hazardous materials are stored and handled on-site, shall not be
available for public inspection. Such location information includes, but is not
limited to, any maps of the site, as required by Cal. Health & Safety Code §
25509(a)(5).
   B.   Trade secret information shall not be revealed, except if it is
required by Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25511 or § 11042 of Title III (42 USC
11042). However, business plan information shall be made available to Federal,
State and other local agencies upon request.
('65 Code, § 16-14) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.135 REPORTING RELEASE OR THREATENED RELEASE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   A.   Immediate verbal notice required.
      1.   A person shall provide an immediate, verbal report of any release or
threatened release of a hazardous material to the Department and the State
Office of Emergency Services, as soon as:
         a.   He or she has knowledge of the release or threatened release;
         b.   Notification can be provided without impeding immediate control
of the release or threatened release; and
         c.   Notification can be provided without impeding immediate emergency
medical measures.
      2.   The immediate reporting required hereunder shall include all the
information described in the Resolution adopted pursuant to this Subchapter. An
immediate report shall not be required if there is a reasonable belief that the
release or threatened release poses no significant present or potential hazard
to human health and safety, property, or the environment. Each handler shall
allow fire, public health and safety personnel to have access to the facility.
   B.   Written report required. In addition to the immediate verbal
notification required in Subsection A., any business with ten (10) or more
employees and which handles more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds of hazardous
materials in a single calendar year shall submit a copy to the Department of
any report on any release or threatened release of a hazardous material
prepared in writing, pursuant to Title III, being 42 USC 11001 et seq., as
submitted to the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
within ten (10) days of the date of the release.
('65 Code, § 16-15) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.140 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   In order to carry out the purposes of this Subchapter, any employee or
authorized representative of the Department shall be granted access to inspect
the premises of a handler, and any real property within two thousand (2,000)
feet of the premises of a handler, pursuant to the authority specified in Cal.
Health & Safety Code §§ 25185, 25185.5 and 25508. The Department shall also
have the right to inspect the premises of a handler to determine if the
business plan and/or RMPP has been implemented.
('65 Code, § 16-16) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.145 FEES.
   A.   In general. To pay for the costs incurred by the City in carrying out
the provisions of this Subchapter, the City Council shall by Resolution, set a
schedule of fees to be collected from each business.
   B.   Late fees. Businesses submitting inventories and business plans after
the filing deadlines established by Resolution by the City Council, shall be
assessed a penalty as provided by Resolution. Any business which pays its fees
after the required payment date shall also be assessed a penalty.
   C.   Enforcement. Any business which fails to pay the fees established
pursuant to this Subchapter or fails to pay the late fees when applicable under
Subsection B. shall not be issued a City Business Tax Certificate nor be
allowed to renew a current Certificate, until such time as the fees are paid in
full.
('65 Code, § 16-17) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.150 CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND FINES; REWARDS.
   A.   Civil liability. Any business found in violation of §§
9.03.110 (Business Plans),
9.03.115 (Inventories),
9.03.120 (RMPP),
9.03.140 (Inspections) and/or
9.03.145 (Fees) of this Subchapter, or of the implementing regulations, rules
and procedures thereto shall be civilly liable to the City in the following
amounts:
      1.   For any violation, an amount not to exceed Two Thousand Dollars
($2,000.00) for each day of violation, except as otherwise provided in this
Section.
      2.   Any business that knowingly violates the above-stated sections,
after reasonable notice of the violation, shall be civilly liable to the City
in an amount not to exceed Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for each day of
violation.
      3.   If the violation results in, or significantly contributes to, an
emergency, including but not limited to a fire, the business shall also be
assessed the full cost of the City and/or county emergency response, as well as
the cost of cleaning up and disposing of the hazardous materials.
      4.   If a civil penalty has been levied under this Section, against a
business which fails to submit full payment of the penalty, that business shall
not be issued a new City Business Tax Certificate nor be allowed to renew a
current Certificate, until such time as the penalty is paid in full.
Furthermore, a late fee may be assessed.
   B.   Criminal fines and imprisonment; failure to report releases; risk
management and prevention.
      1.   a.   Any business that violates §§
9.03.110 (Business Plans),
9.03.115 (Inventories), and
9.03.145 (Fees) of this Subchapter shall be guilty of an infraction, except as
otherwise provided in this Subchapter, which shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), in accordance with the provisions of
§
1.01.035 of the Culver City Municipal Code. Each and every day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
         b.   Any violation which would otherwise be an infraction shall be a
misdemeanor if a defendant has been convicted of three (3) or more violations
of this Subchapter within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding
the violation and if such prior convictions are admitted by the defendant and/
or alleged in the accusatory pleading. For this purpose, a bail forfeiture
shall be deemed a conviction of the offense charged.
      2.   Any person or business who violates §
9.03.135 of this Subchapter (reporting of releases), or who knowingly makes any
false statement or representation in any record, report, or other document
filed, maintained, or used for the purpose of compliance with §
9.03.120 of this Subchapter (RMPP) or with Cal. Health & Safety Code§§ 25500 et
seq., shall, upon conviction, be subject to the following penalties:
         a.   First conviction - A fine not to exceed Twenty-Five Thousand
Dollars ($25,000.00) for each day of violation, or by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than one (1) year, or by both the fine and
imprisonment.
         b.   Repeat convictions - If the conviction is for a violation
committed after a first conviction under this Section, the person shall be
punished by a fine of not less than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) nor more
than Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) for each day of violation, or by
imprisonment in the State prison for sixteen (16), twenty (20), or twenty-four
(24) months or in the county jail for not more than one (1) year, or by both
the fine and imprisonment.
         c.   If the violation results in, or significantly contributes to, any
emergency, including, but not limited to a fire, the person or business shall
also be assessed the full cost of the City and/or county emergency response, as
well as the cost of cleaning up and disposing of the hazardous materials.
   C.   Interference with enforcement; misdemeanor. Any person who willfully
prevents, interferes with, or attempts to impede the enforcement of this
Subchapter by any authorized representative of the City is, upon conviction,
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   D.   Rewards; persons providing information. Any person who provides
information which materially contributes to (1) the imposition of a civil
penalty under §
9.03.150 A.; or (2) the conviction of a person under §
9.03.150 B. as determined by the City Attorney or other person filing the
action, shall receive a reward from the City or the State equal to ten percent
(10%) of the amount of the settlement or the fine collected, not to exceed Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), according to the provisions and limitations of
Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25517. The reward shall be paid from the amount of
the civil penalty or criminal fine collected. This Section shall not apply to
any City employee who provides such information in the scope of his/her
employment.
   E.   Other laws, rules and regulations.  
      1.   The provisions of this Section are in addition to other provisions
of local, State and Federal laws, regulations, and rules, which in and of
themselves, or in combination with the requirements of this Section, may bring
about civil and/or criminal actions against a person or business for violation
of the specific sections of those laws, rules, or regulations.
      2.   Pursuant to §
1.01.055 of the Culver City Municipal Code, unless otherwise expressly
provided, the remedies and penalties provided by this Subchapter are cumulative
to each other and to the remedies and penalties available under other laws.
('65 Code, § 16-18) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.155 INVESTIGATIONS OF VIOLATIONS.
   The Department shall be the lead agency in all investigations of violations
of this Subchapter and/or of violations of Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 25500
et seq., except if the Fire Chief authorizes in writing that another agency may
accept lead status. Such authorizations shall be made on a case-by-case basis.
('65 Code, § 16-19) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.160 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION; SEVERABILITY.
   A.   This Subchapter is to be liberally construed so as to accomplish the
intent of the City Council in protecting the public health, safety and welfare
and the environment.
   B.   For the purpose of this Subchapter, all references to any Federal,
State or local laws, statutes and codes shall be construed to include any
amendments thereto and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   C.   Severability. If any provision of this Subchapter or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, that invalidity shall
be severable from and shall not affect any and all remaining phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 16-20) (Ord. No. 88-014 § 2)
§ 9.03.165 INCIDENT COMMAND AUTHORITY.
   The authority for incident command at the scene of an on-highway hazardous
substance incident on local streets and roads, other than freeways, is assigned
to the Culver City Fire Department.
('65 Code, § 16-21) (Ord. No. 96-008 § 1)
CULVER CITY HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
§ 9.03.300 PURPOSE AND ADOPTION; CONTENTS.
   Pursuant to state requirements, the City has determined it shall provide a
plan for the management of hazardous waste, including the siting of hazardous
waste storage, transfer and/or disposal facilities, which is consistent with
the provisions of the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan (“LA
CoHWMP”). Pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25135.7(c)(1), the City, in
its efforts to assist in the proper management of hazardous waste and to
provide adequate protections for its citizens, adopts that certain document
titled the Culver City Hazardous Waste Management Plan (“CCHWMP”), a copy of
which shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and the City's Planning
Division. The CCHWMP includes the following elements, as described in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 25135.1(d):
   A.   An analysis of the hazardous waste stream generated in Los Angeles
County, including an accounting of the volumes of hazardous waste produced in
the County by type of waste, and estimates of the expected rates of hazardous
waste production until 1994, by type of waste.
   B.   A description of the existing hazardous waste facilities which treat,
handle, recycle, and dispose of the hazardous waste produced in the County,
including a determination of the existing capacity of each facility.
   C.   An analysis of the potential in the County for recycling hazardous
waste and for reducing the volume and hazard of hazardous waste at the source
of generation.
   D.   A consideration of the need to manage the small volumes of hazardous
waste produced by businesses and households.
   E.   A determination of the need for additional hazardous waste facilities
to properly manage the volumes of hazardous waste currently produced or that
are expected to be produced during the planning period.
   F.   Siting criteria to be utilized in selecting sites for new hazardous
waste facilities.
   G.   A statement of goals, objectives and policies for the siting of
hazardous waste facilities and the general management of hazardous wastes
through the year 2000, as well as a statement of the goals of the City.
   H.   A schedule which describes County and City actions necessary to
implement the LA CoHWMP and CCHWMP through the year 2000, including the
assigning of dates for carrying out the actions.
('65 Code, § 16-24) (Ord. No. 91-013 § 1 (part))
§ 9.03.305 HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY SITING PERMIT.
   A.   Permit required. A Culver City Hazardous Waste Facility Siting Permit
(“Facility Siting Permit” or “FSP”) shall be obtained prior to the siting of
any hazardous waste management facility in the City.
('65 Code, § 16-25)
   B.    Procedures for obtaining permit. To obtain a Facility Siting Permit,
the applicant must comply with the following procedures and in addition, with
the applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code, pertaining to
permitting of hazardous waste facilities:
      1.   Information required. Applications shall be accompanied by:
         a.   A plot plan and description of the property involved, plans and
descriptions of the proposed use of the property, with ground plans and
elevations for all proposed buildings; and
         b.   Any other information required in determining the validity of the
request.
      2.   Filing of applications.
         a.   Applications for a Facility Siting Permit shall be made in
writing to the City Planner and in such form and supplying such information as
is required pursuant to this Subchapter. No application shall be accepted,
unless it complies with such requirements.
         b.   Applications filed pursuant to this Subchapter shall be numbered
consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the
permanent official records of the City and there shall be attached thereto
copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto.
      3.   Filing fees. Before accepting any application for filing, the City
shall charge and collect a filing fee, based on the type of application, in an
amount set forth by resolution of the City Council, for the purpose of
defraying the expenditures, incidental to the proceedings required.
      4.   Investigation. The City Planner, or his/her designee shall make such
investigation of facts bearing upon such applications as will serve to provide
all necessary information to assure that the action on each such application is
consistent with the intent and purpose of this Subchapter. The City Planner,
upon completing the investigation, shall immediately prepare for the Planning
Commission a staff report setting forth the pertinent facts and one or more
recommended courses of action.
      5.   Procedures for public hearings and actions; Planning Commission and
City Council. The procedures and requirements as set forth in this Section
shall govern public hearings before the Planning Commission and the City
Council and actions on matters requiring public hearings.
      6.   Setting of public hearings. The Clerk of the Planning Commission,
upon receipt in proper and complete form of any application requiring a public
hearing shall fix a reasonable time and place for a public hearing which shall
commence not less than twelve (12) calendar days nor more than ninety (90)
calendar days after the receipt of the application.
      7.   Notice of public hearings.
         a.   All notices for public hearings regarding a Facility Siting
Permit, before the Planning Commission and the City Council, shall be by
mailing, postage prepaid, to the owners of property within a radius of one
thousand (1000) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property described in
the application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such
owners as shown upon the City's copy of the assessment rolls of the County of
Los Angeles. Such notice shall state the nature of the request, the location of
the property and the time and place of the hearing.
         b.   Notice of a public hearing regarding a Facility Siting Permit
shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, not
less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing.
         c.   In the case of a hearing before the City Council, the City Clerk
shall cause to be posted notices headed “Notices of Hearing for a Culver City
Hazardous Waste Facility Siting Permit,” which heading shall be in words not
less than one (1) inch in height and the notice to be substantially the same as
the postcard, except that explanatory maps or plats posted shall not be
required on the postcard. Posted notices shall be posted not more than one
hundred (100) feet in distance apart within a one thousand (1000) foot radius,
and there shall be at least three (3) of such notices on each side of the
property. Such notices shall be posted at least ten (10) calendar days prior to
the time set for the public hearing.
         d.   Notices of the public hearing shall be sent by certified mail to
the applicant(s), not less than ten (10) calendar days before the date set for
the hearing.
      8.   Public hearing. The Planning Commission and City Council shall each
review the application or proposed action and the staff report and
recommendation followed by any other evidence pertinent to any action proposed
to be taken. All persons so desiring shall be heard relative to the subject
matter for the public hearing. The applicant or appellant may appear in his/her
own behalf or be represented by counsel or other duly authorized
representative. The Planning Commission and City Council may establish their
own rules for the conduct of such hearings.
      9.   Notice of decision. Within ten (10) working days after
recommendation by the Planning Commission, a notice to the applicant shall be
delivered or mailed at the address shown on the application. A copy of such
notice shall also be sent, within the same period of time, to each member of
the City Council, City Manager, City Attorney and to each person who has made a
written request for such notice.
      10.   Decision of the Planning Commission. The decision of the Planning
Commission shall be advisory to the City Council.
      11.   City Council hearing and final decision. Within ten (10) working
days after action by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission's
recommendations and the complete record of the case, shall be delivered to the
City Clerk for transmittal to the City Council. The City Clerk shall set a City
Council public hearing in accordance with the provisions of this Section. The
City Council shall reach a final decision within thirty (30) calendar days
following the close of the City Council public hearing.
('65 Code, § 16-26)
(Ord. No. 91-013 § 1 (part))
§ 9.03.310 LAND USE APPROVALS.
   Pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25135.7(d) the City may attach
appropriate conditions to the issuance of any land use approval of a hazardous
waste facility in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare of its
citizens.
('65 Code, § 16-27) (Ord. No. 91-013 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 9.04: NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances Enumerated
   
9.04.005    Purpose and intent
   
9.04.010    Definitions
   
9.04.015   Prohibited public nuisance conditions on real property
   
9.04.020   Nuisance prohibited; penalty
Administrative Procedures for Abatement of Nuisances
   
9.04.030   Abatement of public nuisances
   
9.04.035   Continuing obligation of responsible persons to abate a public
nuisance
   
9.04.040   Notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel
   
9.04.045   Additional requirements for demolition of buildings or structures
   
9.04.050   Notice and order to vacate buildings or structures
   
9.04.055   Sample notice of abatement
   
9.04.060   Service of notice
   
9.04.065   Right of appeal from a notice of abatement
   
9.04.070   Consequence for an untimely appeal
   
9.04.075   Abatement by responsible person prior to hearing
   
9.04.080   Review by hearing officer
   
9.04.085   Decision of hearing officer; order of abatement
   
9.04.095   Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard
   
9.04.105   Establishment of costs of abatement
   
9.04.100   Combination of notices
   
9.04.110   Collection of abatement costs by special assessment
   
9.04.115   Collection of costs of abatement by nuisance abatement lien
   
9.04.120   Restitution of abatement costs in judicial proceedings
   
9.04.125   Treble the costs of abatement
   
9.04.130   Violations and penalties
Recordation, Enforcement Fees and Attorney’s Fees
   
9.04.135   Recordation of declaration of substandard property
   
9.04.140   Code enforcement fees
   
9.04.145   Recovery of attorney’s fees
   
9.04.150   Applicability of other laws
Graffiti
   
9.04.200   Prevention and removal of graffiti
   
9.04.205   Definitions
   
9.04.210   Graffiti prohibited
   
9.04.215   Possession of graffiti implement
   
9.04.220   Removal policy
   
9.04.225   Authorization to remove; methods
   
9.04.230   Notice to abate; appeal; abatement by city
   
9.04.235   Recovery of costs
   
9.04.240   Failure to remove graffiti upon notice
   
9.04.245   Alternative actions
   
9.04.250   Reward for information
   
9.04.255   Parental responsibility
   
9.04.260   Penalty for violation
   
9.04.265   Community service
   
9.04.270   Suspension or delay of driving privileges
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see
Ch. 9.05
   Unruly parties and gatherings; law enforcement costs, see §§
9.06.005 through
9.06.025
   Newsracks, see §§
9.08.600 through
9.08.675
NUISANCES ENUMERATED
§ 9.04.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   A.   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this Chapter are as
follows:
      1.   To define as public nuisances and violations those conditions and
uses of land that are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to
property values and community appearance, an obstruction or interference with
the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent properties or premises (both public and
private), and/or are hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare
of the general public.
      2.   To develop regulations that will promote the sound maintenance of
property and enhance of conditions of appearance, habitability, occupancy, use
and safety of all structures and premises in all areas of the City.
      3.   To establish administrative procedures for the City’s use, upon its
election, to correct or abate violations of this Chapter on real property
throughout the City.
      4.   This Chapter is not intended to be applied, construed or given
effect in a manner that imposes upon the City, or upon any officer or employee
thereof, any duty towards persons or property within the City or outside of the
City that creates a basis for civil liability for damages, except as otherwise
imposed by law.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.010 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply. For purposes
of this Chapter, these definitions shall supersede any other definitions of the
same terms elsewhere in this Code.
   ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Any item, object, thing, material or substance
that, by its condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair, nonuse,
obsolescence or location on public real property or on private real property,
causes a reasonable person to conclude that the owner has permanently
relinquished all right, title, claim and possession thereto, or that the
object, thing, material or substance cannot be used for its intended or
designed purpose. ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY may include junk and vehicles.
   ABANDONED STRUCTURE.  Real property, or any building or structure thereon,
that is vacant and is maintained in an uninhabitable condition or a condition
of disrepair or deterioration as evidenced by the existence of public nuisances
therein, or that is vacant and under a current notice of default and/or notice
of trustee’s sale, pending tax assessor’s lien sale, or that is vacant and has
been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title was retained by the
beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure. Factors that may
also be considered in a determination of an ABANDONED STRUCTURE include,
without limitation: present operability and functional utility; the presence of
non-functional, broken or missing doors or windows, such that entry therein by
unauthorized persons is not deterred; the existence of real property tax
delinquencies for the land upon which the structure is located; age and degree
of obsolescence of the structure, and the cost of rehabilitation or repair
versus its market value.
   ABATEMENT COSTS.  All costs, fees, and expenses, incidental or otherwise,
incurred by the City in investigating and abating a public nuisance.
   ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE.  Any condition, device, equipment, instrument, item or
machine that is unsafe, unprotected and may prove detrimental to minors whether
in a structure or in outdoor areas of developed or undeveloped real property.
This includes, without limitation, any abandoned or open and accessible wells,
shafts, basements or excavations; any abandoned refrigerators and abandoned or
inoperable motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or,
any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove hazardous or
dangerous to inquisitive minors. An ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE shall also include
pools, standing water or excavations containing water, that are unfenced or
otherwise lack an adequate barrier thereby creating a risk of drowning, or
which are hazardous or unsafe due to the existence of any condition rendering
such water to be clouded, unclear or injurious to health due to, without
limitation, any of the following: bacterial growth, infectious or toxic agents,
algae, insect remains, animal remains, rubbish, refuse, debris, or waste of any
kind.
   BUILDING.  Any structure designed, used, or maintained for the shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, equipment, or property of any kind,
and shall also include structures wherein things may be grown, made, produced,
kept, handled, stored, or disposed of, and all appendages, accessories,
apparatus, appliances, and equipment installed as a part thereof.
   CITY.  The City of Culver City.
   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager or his or her duly authorized representative
(s) or designee(s).
   CITY PERSONNEL.  Any City employee, representative, agent or contractor
designated by the City Manager.
   CODE, CODES, and CULVER CITY MUNICIPAL CODE.  The City of Culver City
Municipal Code and any code, law, or regulation incorporated therein by
reference and any adopted and uncodified ordinances.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT FEES.  Fees imposed by the city to defray its costs of code
enforcement actions, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 54988 and Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 17951 (and any successor statutes thereto), the Culver City
Building Code, and any other applicable local, state, or federal law, as well
as by the City’s police powers as authorized by the California Constitution,
including, but not limited to, the time and other resources of public officials
and city consultants expended by them in identifying, inspecting,
investigating, seeking or causing the abatement of a violation at a real
property. Examples of code enforcement actions include, but are not limited to,
site inspections, drafting reports, taking photographs, procuring other
evidence, engaging in meetings with other officials of the city or other
agencies, engaging in conferences and communications with responsible persons,
their agents or representatives, concerning a violation, as well as with
attorneys for the city at any time, and appearances before judicial officers or
reviewing authorities during the commencement or pendency of a judicial or
administrative hearing. The time and resources that public officials and city
consultants further expend to confirm that a real property remains free of a
violation while a responsible person is on probation to a court or when a
matter concerning a property remains pending before a reviewing authority in an
administrative action, shall also constitute code enforcement actions.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any individual employed by the City with primary
enforcement authority for City Codes, or his or her duly authorized
representative(s).
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  Any vehicle of a type required to be registered under
the State of California Vehicle Code used or maintained for the transportation
of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used, or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property or for other commercial purposes.
Passenger vehicles that are not used for the transportation of persons for
hire, compensation, or profit, house cars (motor homes), and vanpool vehicles
are not commercial vehicles.
   COMPLIANCE PERIOD.  The period of time and/or required schedule for the
abatement of any violation as set forth in any warning, notice, citation, or
other communication from the City, including, but not limited to, a Notice of
Abatement and/or an Order of Abatement.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.  Any substance that is declared by State or Federal
law to be a controlled substance.
   FIRE HAZARD.  Shall include, but shall not be limited to, any device,
equipment, waste, vegetation, condition, thing, or act which is in such a
condition that it increases or could cause an increase of the hazard or menace
of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by
persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing, or
extinguishing fire or that otherwise provides a ready fuel to augment the
spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause; or any
device, equipment, waste, vegetation, condition, thing, or act which could
obstruct, delay, hinder, or interfere with, or may become the cause of
obstruction, delay, or hindrance of, the operations of the Fire Department or
other emergency service personnel or the egress of the occupants in the event
of fire.
   GRAFFITI.  Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that
is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on or otherwise glued,
posted, or affixed to or on any public or private real or personal property
(including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, and vehicles),
regardless of the nature of the material to the extent that the same was not
authorized in advance by the owner thereof. GRAFFITI shall also include any
writing, drawing, or inscription defined as GRAFFITI in §
9.04.205 of this Chapter or as defined in State law.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material or substance of any kind that is declared
by any federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation to be composed of
hazardous material.
   HEARING OFFICER.  Any city employee or other person appointed by the City
Manager to hear all timely appeals as set forth in this Chapter.
   INCIDENTAL EXPENSES.  Shall include, but shall not be limited to, the actual
expenses and costs of the City or incurred by the City, such as preparation of
notices, specifications, contracts, inspection of work, costs of printing and
mailings required hereunder, costs of any filing and/or recordation with the
County Recorder’s Office or other governmental agency, and the costs of
administration and legal services.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE.  Includes, without limitation, any vehicle that is
incapable of being lawfully driven on a highway. Factors that may be used to
determine this condition include, without limitation, vehicles that have a
“planned non-operational” status with the California Department of Motor
Vehicles, vehicles lacking a current registration, a working engine,
transmission, wheels, inflated tires, doors, windshield or any other part or
equipment necessary for its legal and safe operation on a highway or any other
public right-of-way.
   JUNK.  Includes, but is not limited to, any cast-off, damaged, discarded,
junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked appliance,
device, equipment, furniture, fixture, furnishing, object, material, substance,
tire, or thing of any kind or composition. JUNK may include abandoned personal
property, as well as any form of debris, refuse, rubbish, trash or waste.
Factors that may be considered in a determination that personal property is
JUNK include, without limitation, its:
      1.   Condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair or nonuse.
      2.   Approximate age and degree of obsolescence.
      3.   Location.
      4.   Present operability, functional utility and status of registration
or licensing, where applicable.
      5.   Cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value.
   NOTICE OF ABATEMENT.  A Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate
with City Personnel, as described in §
9.04.040 of this Chapter.
   ORDER OF ABATEMENT.  An order issued by a Hearing Officer following an
appeal of a Notice of Abatement.
   OWNER.  Means and includes any person having legal title to, or who leases,
rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in
the City, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized
assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office. OWNERS  include
persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are
court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. An OWNER
of personal property shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control,
or possession of such property.
   PERSON.  Means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind,
corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other
organization, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors,
administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. PERSON also
includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the City.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Property that is not real property, and includes,
without limitation, any appliance, article, device, equipment, item, material,
product, substance or vehicle.
   PLANT MATERIAL.  Trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, turf or any other
ornamental live plants, or as otherwise defined in the Culver City Zoning Code.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Anything which is, or likely to become, injurious or
detrimental to health, safety or welfare, or is offensive to the senses, or an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free
passage or use, in the customary manner, of any sidewalk, public park, square,
plaza, street or highway. All conditions hereafter enumerated in this Chapter,
or that otherwise violate or are contrary to any provision of the Culver City
Municipal Code, are PUBLIC NUISANCES by definition and declaration, and said
enumerated conditions shall not, in any manner, be construed to be exclusive or
exhaustive. A PUBLIC NUISANCE shall also exist when a person fails to comply
with any condition of a City approval, entitlement, license or permit or when
an activity on, or use of, real property violates, or is contrary to, any
provision or requirement of the Culver City Municipal Code.
   REAL PROPERTY or PREMISES.  Any real property owned by any person and/or any
building, structure, or other improvement thereon, or portions thereof. REAL
PROPERTY or PREMISES includes any parkway or unimproved public easement
abutting or adjacent to such real property, whether or not owned by the City of
Culver City.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  Any person, whether as an owner as defined in this
Chapter, or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains, suffers, or
permits a public nuisance, or any violation of the Culver City Municipal Code
or County or State law, or regulation thereof, to exist or continue, by any act
or the omission of any act or duty. A RESPONSIBLE PERSON shall also include
employees, principals, joint venturers, officers, managers, agents, and/or
other persons acting in concert with, or at the direction of, and/or with the
knowledge and/or consent of the owner and/or occupant of the lot, building or
structure on, or in which, a public nuisance or violation exists or existed.
The actions or inactions of a responsible person’s agent, employee,
representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person.
   STRUCTURE.  That which is built or constructed, an edifice, wall, fence, or
building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner. For purposes of this Chapter,
this definition shall supersede any other definition of this term in the Culver
City Municipal Code.
   TARP.  A piece of plastic, canvas or other durable fabric such as denim or
polyvinyl typically designed or used for temporary protection of exposed
objects or areas from the elements.
   VACANT.  Real property or any building or structure thereon that is not
legally occupied, or as to commercial property, where no lawfully licensed
business is conducted on a permanent non-transient basis on the property or in
the building or structure thereon. Factors that may be used to determine
whether real property, or building or structures thereon, is VACANT include,
but shall not be limited to, the lack of a valid Culver City business tax
certificate; or, the presence of overgrown and/or dead vegetation; an
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, and/or mail; past due utility
notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk, and/or
other debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds, and/or
shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with
residential and/or commercial furnishings consistent with the permitted uses
within the zone of the real property; statements by neighbors, passersby,
delivery agents, government employees that the property is VACANT .
   VEHICLE.  Any device, by which any person or property may be propelled,
moved, or drawn upon a highway or other public right-of-way, and includes all
vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code, and all future amendments
thereto. VEHICLE does not include devices (i) that are propelled exclusively by
human power such as bicycles and wheelchairs, or (ii) those that are used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VIOLATION.  Means and includes any prohibited activity, condition, or use on
land or in connection with a building or a structure that is caused, allowed to
exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, inaction, or omission)
by a responsible person in disregard of, or nonconformity with, any other
provision, regulation, prohibition, or requirement of the Culver City Municipal
Code, or any applicable county, state, or federal laws or regulations. Any such
VIOLATION  shall also constitute an unlawful public nuisance for each and every
day or part thereof, during which it is allowed, committed, continued,
maintained or permitted by a responsible person.
   WEEDS.  Shall include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following:
      1.   Any plant, brush, growth, or other vegetation that bear seeds of a
downy or wingy nature;
      2.   Any plant, brush, growth, or other vegetation that attains such
large growth as to become, when dry, a fire hazard;
      3.   Any plant, brush, growth, or other vegetation that is noxious or
dangerous;
      4.   Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as
to constitute a threat to the public health; or
      5.   Dry grass, rubble, brush, or other flammable plant, growth, or other
vegetation that endangers the public safety by creating or tending to create a
fire hazard.
   XERISCAPE LANDSCAPING.  Native or indigenous plant material that requires
little to no water or maintenance, typically the use of mulch, and no or
limited drip/subsurface irrigation.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.015   PROHIBITED PUBLIC NUISANCE CONDITIONS ON REAL PROPERTY.
   The City Council finds and declares that it is a public nuisance and
unlawful for any person to allow, cause, create, maintain, or suffer, or permit
others to maintain the following:
   A.   Any real property or properties in the City in such a manner that any
one or more of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:
      1.   Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which whether in
natural state or as a result of the grading operations, excavation or fill,
causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such
magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health,
safety and welfare, or to adjacent properties.
      2.   Buildings or other structures, or portions thereof, that are
partially constructed or destroyed or allowed to remain in a state of partial
construction or destruction for an unreasonable period of time. As used herein,
an “unreasonable” period shall mean any portion of time exceeding the period
given to a responsible person by the City for the complete abatement of a
nuisance condition with all required City approvals, permits and inspections.
Factors that may be used by the City to establish a reasonable period for the
complete abatement of this nuisance include, but are not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   The degree of partial construction or destruction and the cause
therefor.
         (b)   Whether or not this condition constitutes an attractive nuisance
or if it otherwise poses or promotes a health or safety hazard to occupants of
the premises, or to others.
         (c)   The degree of visibility, if any, of this condition from public
or adjoining private real property.
         (d)   The scope and type of work that is needed to abate this nuisance
in a manner that conforms to the City’s Building Code.
         (e)   The promptness with which a responsible person has applied for
and obtained all required City approvals and permits in order to lawfully
commence the nuisance abatement actions.
         (f)   Whether or not a responsible person has complied with other
required technical code requirements, including requesting and passing required
inspections in a timely manner, while completing nuisance abatement actions.
         (g)   Whether or not a responsible person has applied for extensions
to a technical code permit or renewed an expired permit, as well as the number
of extensions and renewals that a responsible person has previously sought or
obtained from the City.
         (h)   Whether or not a responsible person has made substantial
progress, as determined by the City, in performing nuisance abatement actions
under a technical code permit that has expired, or is about to expire.
         (i)   Whether delays in completing nuisance abatement actions under a
technical code permit have occurred, and the reason(s) for such delays.
      3.   Real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is
abandoned, uninhabited, or vacant (irrespective of whether said structure is
secured against unauthorized entry) for a period of more than six (6) months.
      4.   Exterior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not
limited to, roofs, balconies, decks, fences, stairs, stairways, walls, signs
and fixtures), as well as sidewalks, walkways, pedestrian ways, driveways,
parking areas, and any detached or freestanding structure, that have become
defective, unsightly, or are no longer viable; or are maintained in a condition
of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in,
or tend to result in, a diminution in property values, or where such condition
creates a hazard to persons using said building, structure, or way, or where
such condition interferes with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of
adjacent properties, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary
to, the Culver City Municipal Code, or other applicable law.
      5.   Failure to provide and maintain adequate weather protection to
structures or buildings, in such a manner that results in or tends to result in
the existence of cracked, peeling, warped, rotted, or severely damaged paint,
stucco or other exterior covering.
      6.   Broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing windows, doors,
or vents in a building or structure, and/or broken, defective, damaged,
dilapidated, or missing screens for windows, doors, or crawl spaces in a
building or structure.
      7.   Windows or doors that remain boarded up or sealed after ten (10)
calendar days written City notice to a responsible person requesting the
removal of these coverings and the installation of fully functional or operable
windows or doors. City actions to board up or seal windows or doors in order to
deter unauthorized entry into structures shall not relieve responsible persons
from installing fully functional or operational windows or doors.
      8.   Obstructions of any kind, cause or form that interfere with required
natural or mechanical light, heat, or ventilation for a building or structure,
or that interfere with, hinder, delay, or impede ingress therein and/or egress
therefrom.
      9.   Abandoned personal property that is visible from public or private
property.
      10.   Any form of an attractive nuisance.
      11.   Interior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not
limited to attics, ceilings, walls, floors, basements, mezzanines, and common
areas) that have become defective, unsightly, or are maintained in a condition
of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair, or where such condition interferes
with the peaceful use, possession and/or enjoyment of occupants or properties
in the vicinity, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to,
the Culver City Municipal Code or other applicable law.
      12.   Items of junk, trash, debris, or other personal property that are
kept, placed, or stored inside of a structure or on exterior portions of real
property that constitute a fire or safety hazard or a violation of any
provision of the Culver City Municipal Code; or items of junk, trash, debris,
or other personal property that are visible from public or private real
property; or that are otherwise out of conformity with neighboring community
standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution
in property values.
      13.   The keeping or disposing of, or the scattering or accumulating of
flammable, combustible or other materials including, but not limited to,
composting, firewood, lumber, junk, trash, debris, packing boxes, pallets,
plant cuttings, tree trimmings or wood chips, discarded items, or other
personal property on exterior portions of real property, or within any building
or structure thereon, when such items or accumulations:
         (a)   Render premises unsanitary or substandard as defined by the
California Health & Safety Code, the Culver City Building Code, or other
applicable local, State, or Federal law, rule, or regulation;
         (b)   Violate the Culver City Health Code;
         (c)   Cause, create, or tend to contribute to, a fire or safety
hazard;
         (d)   Harbor, promote, or tend to contribute to, the presence of rats,
vermin and/or insects;
         (e)   Cause, create, or tend to contribute to, an offensive odor;
         (f)   Are visible from the public right-of-way;
         (g)   Cause the premises to be out of conformity with neighboring
community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a
diminution of property values. Provided, however, that this use of land or
condition shall not constitute a nuisance when expressly permitted under the
applicable zone classification and the premises are in full compliance with all
provisions of the Culver City Zoning Code, and all other applicable provisions
of the Culver City Municipal Code and any future amendments and additions
thereto, as well as applicable County, State, and/or Federal laws and
regulations.
      14.   Unsanitary, polluted or unhealthful pools, ponds, standing water or
excavations containing water that constitute an attractive nuisance or that are
otherwise likely to harbor mosquitoes, insects or other vectors. The likelihood
of insect harborage is evidenced by any of the following conditions: water
which is unclear, murky, clouded or green; water containing bacterial growth,
algae, insect larvae, insect remains, or animal remains; or, bodies of water
which are abandoned, neglected, unfiltered or otherwise improperly maintained.
      15.   Holiday lights, decorations, or displays that are erected,
installed, displayed, or maintained on exterior portions of real property more
than thirty (30) calendar days before a Federal, State, or religious holiday
and/or more than fifteen (15) calendar days after a Federal, State, or
religious holiday.
      16.   The hanging, drying, or airing of clothing or household fabrics on
fences, trees, or shrubberies, or the existence of clotheslines, in front yard
areas of any real property, or in any yard area that is visible from a public
right-of-way.
      17.   Canopies, tents, tarps, or other similar membrane structures
located in the front yard of any real property or on any other exterior portion
of real property that is visible from the public right-of-way, unless otherwise
authorized pursuant to a permit or other entitlement from the City.
      18.   Overgrown vegetation including, but not limited to, any one of the
following:
         (a)   Plant material likely to harbor, or promote the presence of,
rats, vermin and/or insects.
         (b)   Plant material causing detriment to neighboring properties, or
that is out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an
extent as to result in, or contribute to, a diminution of property values,
including, but not limited to:
            (1)   Lawns with grass in excess of six inches (6") in height.
               (i)   Xeriscape landscaping and drought tolerant materials are
encouraged as an acceptable landscape feature and are not subject to the six
inch (6") limitation set forth herein, however, xeriscape landscaping must be
maintained as indicated in Subsection
9.04.015(A)(18)(b)(2), hereinbelow.
            (2)   Plant material that is not maintained in a neat, orderly, and
healthy manner for that particular species, as a result of lack of adequate
mowing, grooming, trimming, pruning, weeding, fertilizing, watering, and/or
replacement.
         (c)   Plant material that creates, or tends to create, the existence
of a fire hazard.
         (d)   Plant material that overhangs or grows onto or into any public
property, including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land,
sidewalk, street or other right-of-way, so as to cause an obstruction to any
person or vehicle using such public property.
         (e)   Tree branches within three feet (3') of the rooftop of a
structure so as to facilitate rodent or animal access thereto.
      19.   Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds, ground cover,
and other vegetation, or the absence of healthful vegetation, that causes,
contributes to, or tends to cause or contribute to, any one of the following
conditions or consequences:
         (a)   An attractive nuisance;
         (b)   A fire hazard;
         (c)   The creation or promotion of dust or soil erosion;
         (d)   A diminution in property values; or,
         (e)   A detriment to public health, safety or welfare.
      20.   Lack of landscaping or other approved ground cover in any yard area
as required by the Culver City Zoning Code or other provisions of the City’s
municipal code, or so as to promote or cause dust or soil erosion.
      21.   Garbage containers, yard waste containers, and recycling containers
that are kept, placed or stored in driveways or parking areas when less than
twenty feet from the front or side property line, or, kept, placed, or stored
in front of the building line on the property when the building line is less
than twenty feet from the front property line, except when placed in places of
collection at times permitted and in full compliance with this Code.
      22.    Recreational vehicles that are parked or stored on any real
property for use as temporary or permanent living space, unless authorized
pursuant to any City permit or entitlement or as otherwise authorized by law.
      23.   Vehicles, trailers, campers, boats, recreational vehicles, and/or
other mobile equipment placed, parked or stored in violation of any provision
of the Culver City Zoning Code.
      24.   Vehicles, trailers, campers, boats, recreational vehicles, and/or
other mobile equipment placed, parked, or stored on any unpaved surface, or on
any paved surface that does not have continuously paved access to an adjacent
street, alley, highway, or other public right-of-way for vehicular travel.
      25.   Parking spaces required by the Culver City Municipal Code,
including the Culver City Zoning Code, that are not maintained in such a manner
that said spaces are continuously free, accessible, and available for vehicle
parking without the movement of real or personal property.
      26.   Abandoned, dismantled, inoperable or wrecked boats, campers,
motorcycles, trailers, vehicles, or parts thereof, unless kept, placed, parked,
or stored inside of a completely enclosed, lawfully constructed building or
structure.
      27.   Vehicles, construction equipment, or other machinery exceeding the
permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property upon which
they are located. A nuisance also exists under this provision when a vehicle,
construction equipment, or other machinery is stopped, kept, placed, parked, or
stored on private real property and when such vehicle, equipment, or machinery
exceeds the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property
that were utilized in its placement on said private real property unless
pursuant to a valid permit issued by the City.
      28.   Any equipment, machinery, or vehicle of any type or description
that is designed, used, or maintained for construction-type activities that is
kept, parked, placed, or stored on public or private real property except when
such item is being used during excavation, construction, or demolition
operations at the site and/or where said equipment, machinery, or vehicle is
located pursuant to an active permit or license issued by the City.
      29.   Maintenance of signs, or sign structures, on real property relating
to uses no longer lawfully conducted or products no longer lawfully sold
thereon, or signs and their structures that are in disrepair or which are
otherwise in violation of, or contrary to, the Culver City Zoning Code.
      30.   Specialty structures that have been constructed for a specific
single use only, and which are unfeasible to convert to other uses, and which
are abandoned, partially destroyed or are permitted to remain in a state of
partial destruction or disrepair. Such specialty structures include, but are
not limited to, the following: tanks for gas or liquid(s), lateral support
structures and bulk-heads, utility high-voltage towers and poles, utility high-
rise support structures, electronic transmitting antennas and towers,
structures which support or house mechanical and utility equipment and are
located above the roof lines of existing buildings, high rise freestanding
chimneys and smoke stacks, and recreational structures such as tennis courts
and cabanas.
      31.   Any personal property or structure that obstructs or encroaches on,
across, or over any public property, including, but not limited to, any public
alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way, unless a valid
encroachment permit has been issued authorizing said encroachment or
obstruction.
      32.   Any personal property, vegetation, and/or structure that encroaches
on, across, or over any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other
right-of-way, or that is otherwise situated on private property, in such a
manner that inhibits, prevents, or interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
access or use of said right-of-way, or that otherwise endangers vehicles or
persons in the immediate area of said right-of-way.
      33.   Causing, maintaining or permitting graffiti or other defacement of
real or personal property to be present or to remain on a building, structure
or vehicle, or portion thereof, that is visible from a public right-of-way or
from private real property.
      34.   Storage of hazardous or toxic materials or substances, as so
classified by any local, State or Federal laws or regulations, on real property
in such a manner as to be injurious, or potentially injurious or hazardous, to
the public health, safety or welfare, or to adjacent properties, or that
otherwise violates local, State or Federal laws or regulations.
      35.   Any discharge of any substance or material other than stormwater
which enters, or could possibly enter, the City’s storm sewer system in
violation of the Culver City Municipal Code.
      36.   Maintenance of any tarpaulin (plastic, vinyl, canvas, or other
similar material) or similar covering on or over any graded surface or
hillside, except in the following circumstances:
         (a)   A state of emergency has been declared by local, County, State,
or Federal officials directly impacting the area to be covered;
         (b)   Covering with a tarp performed pursuant to an active building or
grading permit; and/or
         (c)   Tarps installed during the period from December 1 through March
30 of each year, when required due to rain or other weather forecasted within
the subsequent seven (7) calendar days that would be likely to damage or erode
the graded surface or hillside.
      37.   Maintenance of any tarpaulin (plastic, vinyl, canvas, or other
similar material) or similar covering on or over any roof of any structure,
except during periods when rain has been forecasted within the subsequent seven
(7) calendar days, or when specifically permitted under an active roofing or
building permit.
      38.   Maintenance of any tarpaulin (plastic, vinyl, canvas, or other
similar material) or similar covering attached to, affixed to, or located on a
fence for purposes of screening or for providing shade;
      39.   The keeping or suffering of any animal, reptile, or insect in a
manner that poses a threat, disturbance, or menace to persons or property, or
in such a manner or quantity that otherwise violates any provision of the
Culver City Municipal Code.
      40.   Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the
maintenance standards of properties in the vicinity as to cause, or that tends
to cause, substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of
such properties in the vicinity.
   B.   Pollution.
      1.   The production of dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, cinders, or
smoke by any commercial or industrial or other organization, through furnaces
or other facilities, in such quantities as to be detrimental to the public
health or which unnecessarily interferes with the health, comfort, or safety of
any person.
      2.   The pollution of any well, cistern, stream, creek, or other body of
water, by sewage, industrial wastes, or other substances detrimental to the
public health.
   C.   Any “unsafe building” or “unsafe structure” as defined by the Culver
City Building Code.
   D.   Any building or structure, or portion thereof, or the premises on which
the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 17920.3, and any future amendments thereto.
   E.   Any building or structure used by any person to engage in acts which
are prohibited pursuant to the laws of the United States or the State of
California, the provisions of the Culver City Municipal Code, or any other
ordinance of this City, including, but not limited to the following acts:
      1.   Unlawful possession, use, and/or sale of controlled substances; and/
or
      2.   Prostitution; and/or
      3.   Unlawful gambling.
   F.   Any real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is used
by persons to cause, allow, contribute to, permit, or suffer any of the
following acts:
      1.   Disturbances of the peace;
      2.   Excessive and/or loud noise disturbances;
      3.   Consumption of alcohol in public and/or public intoxication;
      4.   Urination in public;
      5.   Harassment of passersby;
      6.   Theft, assault, battery, or vandalism;
      7.   Storage or sale of stolen goods;
      8.   Excessive littering;
      9.   Illegal parking or traffic violations;
      10.   Curfew violations;
      11.   School attendance violations;
      12.   Lewd and/or lascivious conduct; and/or
      13.   Excessive responses by the Police Department or other law
enforcement personnel.
   G.   Storage or use of gunpowder, dynamite, fireworks, explosive chemicals,
or other explosive materials except in compliance with the terms and conditions
of a permit sought from and issued by the City.
   H.   Noise disturbances.
      1.   General. Any noise that is made, generated, produced, or continued,
whether by a person, activity, animal, fowl, automobile, motorcycle, engine,
machine, or other mechanical device, whether on public or private property, in
such a manner that it unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable
person of normal sensitivities, or that otherwise violates any provision of the
Culver City Municipal Code, including the regulations set forth in Chapter 9.07
(“Noise Regulations”) and/or the noise limits set forth in the Culver City
Zoning Code. Factors which shall be considered in determining whether the noise
is a nuisance shall include, but not be limited to the following:
         (a)   The volume of the noise;
         (b)   The intensity of the noise;
         (c)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
         (d)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
         (e)   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
         (f)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
         (g)   The nature of the zoning of the area from which the noise
emanates;
         (h)   The density of inhabitation of the area from which the noise
emanates;
         (i)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;
         (j)   The duration of the noise;
         (k)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant;
         (l)   Whether the noise is produced by commercial or noncommercial
activity; and
         (m)   Whether the noise is a consequence or expected result of an
otherwise lawful use.
      2.   Musical instruments, radios, and the like, in residential districts
or immediately adjacent thereto, between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. The using,
operating or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any musical
instrument, radio or phonograph or amplifying device, in such manner as to
disturb the peace, comfort or repose of the neighboring inhabitants; the
conducting or carrying on of band or orchestral concerts or rehearsals or
practice wherein any occupied adjoining building is nearer than 200 feet.
      3.   Loud speakers and amplifying devices in public places - permit
required. The playing or operating, or permitting the playing or operating, of
any musical instrument, radio or phonograph, or the operation and use of any
loud speaker or sound amplifying device, either mobile or stationary, through
which device the spoken word, or other sounds, are produced or reproduced in
such increased volume as to be clearly audible to a person of normal hearing
under normal and ordinary conditions, for a distance of more than 200 feet from
the source of such sound, upon the public street, or in any public place, or
outside of any doorway of any building facing upon a business street in the
City, except in compliance with the terms and conditions of a permit sought
from and issued by the City.
      4.   Mechanical noise or construction noise near residential zones.
         (a)   The use or operation of any automobile, motorcycle, engine,
machine, or mechanical device, or other contrivance or facility, or the
carrying on of any trade or business, causing between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., any loud or unusual noise or sound, disturbing the peace of
residents of a residentially zoned neighborhood.
         (b)   Any construction or excavation work, except between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Mondays through Fridays, or between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays, or between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. on Sundays.
      5.   Mechanical devices, and the like, interfering with business or
industrial operations. The operation of any automobile, motorcycle, engine,
machine or mechanical device or other contrivance or facility, or the carrying
on of any trade or business, any loud or unusual noise or sound from which
interferes with the transaction or conduct of any business or industrial
operation in the surrounding area, unless the making of such noise is incident
to the construction or repair of buildings or equipment or is otherwise
necessary to the protection or preservation of the property from which such
noise or sound emanates.
      6.   Vulgar or obscene language through loud speaker. The uttering
through any loud speaker, sound making or sound amplifying device, or
otherwise, of any obscene, vulgar, profane or indecent language, or uttering
language intending to, or which would reasonably be expected to, incite riot,
destruction or damage to property or injury to any person, or intended to, or
which would reasonably be expected to, incite others to do any unlawful act or
which utterance would reasonably be expected to create a condition which would
result in a clear and present danger of the commission of such unlawful acts.
   I.   Use of leaf blowers. The commercial use or operation of any leaf blower
or other portable machine powered with an internal combustion engine used to
blow leaves, dirt, and other debris off sidewalks, driveways, lawns and other
surfaces, without first having obtained a leaf blower operator’s permitissued
by the City pursuant to this Section. A leaf blower operator’s permit shall not
be required for an individual operating a leaf blower for private use and not
as part of a commercial business.
      1.   Each applicant for a leaf blower operator’s permit shall be required
to demonstrate conformance with the City’s guidelines for leaf blower usage as
set forth in the permit application and provide evidence of a current business
tax certificate.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a leaf blower or
other machine described in this Section within the City of Culver City, except
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Mondays through Fridays and
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, within the City of
Culver City, a leaf blower with a sound level exceeding 65 decibels.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any business to sell, within the City of
Culver City, a leaf blower with a sound level exceeding 65 decibels.
      5.   Upon request by the City, any person operating a leaf blower must
allow the City’s inspection of the leaf blower to verify compliance with this
Section, and must present to the City, upon request, documentation from the
manufacturer evidencing the leaf blower’s decibel level.
      6.   The City may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this Section as a
result of any violation of Subsection I.2, I.3 or I.5.
      7.   An applicant for a leaf blower operator’s permit who has had a
permit revoked, or been convicted of or pled guilty or no contest to a criminal
charge alleging a violation of this Section, within the prior six (6) months
shall not be issued a permit.
      8.   Subsections I.3, I.4 and I.5 shall become effective on November 23,
2022.
   J.   The keeping or maintaining of decayed or unwholesome food, sold, or
offered for sale to the public.
   K.   Any condition recognized in local or State law or in equity as
constituting a public nuisance, or any condition existing on real property that
constitutes, or tends to constitute, blight, or that is a health or safety
hazard to the community or neighboring properties.
   L.   Any condition, use, or activity that constitutes a public nuisance as
defined by Sections 3479 or 3480 of the California Civil Code, and any future
amendments thereto.
   M.   Any building, structure, or use of real property that violates or fails
to comply with (I) any applicable approval, permit, license, or entitlement or
condition relating thereto, (ii) any ordinance of the City, including, but not
limited to any provision of this Code, or (iii) any applicable County, State,
or Federal law or regulation.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part); Ord. No. 2017-015, § 1)
§ 9.04.020 NUISANCE PROHIBITED; PENALTY.
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Culver City Municipal Code
to the contrary, any person who causes, permits, suffers, or maintains a public
nuisance, or any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or who
fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this Chapter, is guilty
of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.01 of Title 1
of this Code. A criminal prosecution and/or civil litigation may be initiated
without the commencement of the “Administrative Nuisance Abatement” procedures
outlined in Part 2 of this Chapter.
   B.   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
prosecuting a violation of this Chapter as an infraction, at his/her
discretion, as set forth in § 1.01.035.B of this Code.
   C.   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the City Attorney from bringing a
civil action, at his/her discretion, for violations of the provisions of this
Chapter, as set forth in § 1.01.050 of this Code.
   D.   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent any City Enforcement Officer from
issuing Administrative Citations for violation of the provisions of this
Chapter, as set forth in Chapter 1.02 of this Code.
   E.   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this Chapter, or of any law
or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained
or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
§ 9.04.030 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   All conditions or uses that constitute a public nuisance as defined in this
Chapter, or that are contrary to, or in violation of, any other provision or
requirement of the Culver City Municipal Code, or of any applicable County or
State law, or regulation thereof, which shall also constitute a public
nuisance, shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal or
termination. The procedures for abatement in this part shall not be exclusive
and shall not, in any manner, limit or restrict the City from pursuing any
other remedies available at law, including the use of administrative citations
under Chapter 1.02 of this Code, civil actions for penalties and/or equitable
relief, or criminal prosecutions, or from enforcing City codes and adopted
ordinances, or from abating or causing abatement of public nuisances, in any
other manner provided by law.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.035 CONTINUING OBLIGATION OF RESPONSIBLE PERSONS TO ABATE A PUBLIC
NUISANCE.
   A.   Responsible persons shall not allow, cause, create, permit, suffer or
maintain a public nuisance to exist on their premises. If public nuisances do
arise or occur, responsible persons shall promptly abate them by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, removal or termination with all required City
approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable.
   B.   The City may exercise its administrative, civil/injunctive and criminal
remedies, or any one or combination of these remedies, to compel responsible
persons to abate a public nuisance when, in its judgment, such persons have not
completed nuisance abatement actions in a timely or proper manner, or when
responsible persons have failed to prevent an occurrence or recurrence of a
public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.040 NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND INTENTION TO ABATE WITH CITY
PERSONNEL.
   A.   Whenever the City Manager or his/her designee, Community Development
Director, Police Chief, or Fire Chief determines that City employees,
representatives or contract agents (hereafter “City Personnel”) may need to
abate a public nuisance, he or she shall cause to be served a written “Notice
of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel” (hereafter in
this section and in subsequent sections of this Chapter, the “Notice of
Abatement”) on the responsible person(s) that contains the following
provisions:
      1.   The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition(s)
exist(s).
      2.   A description of the nuisance condition(s).
      3.   A reference to the law describing or prohibiting the nuisance
condition(s).
      4.   A brief description of the required corrective action(s) and
      5.   A compliance period in which to complete the nuisance abatement
actions (with all required City approvals, permits and inspections, when
applicable).
      6.   The period and manner in which a responsible person may contest the
Notice of Abatement as set forth in § 
9.04.065 of this Chapter. No such right shall exist when the City is not
seeking to establish the right to abate a public nuisance with City forces or
contract agents.
      7.   A statement that the City may record a Notice of Substandard
Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office against the premises if
the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required
approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the City, within a thirty
(30) day period after service of the Notice of Abatement and provided that a
timely appeal therefrom has not been made.
   B.   The procedure in Subsection A shall not apply to public nuisances
constituting an imminent hazard. In such instances, the provisions in §
9.04.095 (“Emergency Action to Abate an Imminent Hazard”) shall be followed.
   C.   The City’s election to issue a Notice of Abatement pursuant to this
section shall not excuse responsible persons from their continuing obligation
to abate a public nuisance in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations
and legal requirements. Furthermore, the issuance of a Notice of Abatement
shall not obligate the City to abate a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.045 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   A.   The City shall provide responsible persons with a reasonable period to
elect between options of repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, as well as a
reasonable period of time to complete any of these options, before City
Personnel abate a public nuisance by demolishing a building or structure
pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   The City shall serve a Notice of Abatement on all secured lienholders
of record with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office in the event abatement
actions include demolition of a building or structure.
   C.   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
9.04.070.A of this Chapter, entry onto any real property to abate a public
nuisance by demolition of a building or structure, excepting in cases involving
an imminent hazard, shall be pursuant to a warrant or other order issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The provisions of this section of this Code shall not apply if
demolition is required to address an imminent hazard. In such situation, the
provisions of §
9.04.095 (“Emergency Action to Abate an Imminent Hazard”) shall apply.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.050 NOTICE AND ORDER TO VACATE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   A.   If the Building Official, Fire Chief, and/or Health Official (or
designees thereof) determine that a public nuisance exists at real property (or
any buildings or structures thereon) to such an extent that said property (or
any building or structure thereon) is immediately dangerous to the life, limb,
property, or safety of the occupants of the property or the general public, the
building or structure shall be ordered to be vacated.
   B.   If any building or structure is ordered vacated pursuant to § 
9.04.050.A, the Notice of Abatement issued pursuant to § 
9.04.040, in addition to the information required pursuant to §
9.04.040, shall include:
      1.   A determination that the Building Official, Fire Chief, and/or
Health Official (or designees thereof) has determined that the property (and/or
any building or structure thereon) constitutes an immediate danger to the life,
limb, property, or safety of the occupants of the property or the general
public;
      2.   A reference to the specific building(s) and/or structure(s) which
is/are being ordered vacated;
      3.   The date and/or time when the Order to Vacate becomes effective; and
      4.   Language that substantially states that “No person shall remain in
or enter any building or structure that has been ordered vacated until
authorized to do so by the Building Official, Fire Chief, and/or Health
Official (or designee thereof). No person shall remove, alter, or deface this
Notice after it has been posted at the property referenced herein until all
required repairs, demolition, or removal have been completed in accordance with
this Notice and until such time as the removal of this Notice has been
authorized by the Building Official, Fire Chief, and/or Health Official (or
designee thereof). Any person violating this Order to Vacate shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.”
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.055 SAMPLE NOTICE OF ABATEMENT.
   A.   The Notice of Abatement shall be written in a form that is
substantially consistent with the following:
Notice of Public Nuisance(s) and Intention to Abate with City Personnel
(“Notice of Abatement”)
[Date]
                                           [Responsible Person(s)]
                                                 [Mailing Address]
                                       [City, State and Zip Code]
Re:   Real Property a                                         , CA
   L.A. County A.P.N.:                                     
   Legal description [Optional]:                           
   Notice is hereby given that the following public nuisance conditions or
activities exist on the premises described above:
   (1)   [Describe condition or activities]
                                                                                         
in violation of Culver City Municipal Code [as well as County and State laws,
if applicable] Section
(s)                                                                                   
      (a)   Required Corrective Action(s):
      (with all required permits, approvals and inspections).
      (b)   Required Completion Date:
      [Repeat (1 a-b) for each additional public nuisance to be included in
this notice]
   The foregoing public nuisance conditions are subject to abatement by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, removal or termination.
   Please Take Further Notice that you may appeal this Notice of Abatement by
filing an appeal on a City approved form with the City Clerk’s office (located
at 9770 Culver Boulevard, Culver City, CA) within fifteen (15) calendar days of
service of this notice. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal.
Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of
your right to any further administrative appeal and renders the Notice of
Abatement final and binding. A written request for an appeal shall contain the
following information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is
appealing the Notice of Abatement (hereinafter, “appellant”), as well as
relationship of appellant to the public nuisance described in the Notice of
Abatement.
      2.   Address and description of real property upon which the City intends
to enter and abate a public nuisance.
      3.   Date of Notice of Abatement being appealed.
      4.   Specific action or decision being appealed.
      5.   Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the Hearing
Officer to understand the nature of the controversy.
      6.   The signature of at least one appellant.
Following appeal, in the case of a final decision by the City, judicial review
of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in
California Code of Civil Procedure sections 1094.6 et seq.
   Please Take Further Notice that, if the public nuisance violations are not
abated within the time specified and a timely appeal is not made, such nuisance
may be abated by City employees, representatives or contract agents (hereafter
“City Personnel”), in the manner stated in this Notice of Abatement. On such
occasions, all costs of the abatement, including, but not limited to, those
stated in
Chapter 9.04 of the Culver City Municipal Code, shall be assessed against the
responsible person(s) and/or the subject property, as a lien, or as a special
assessment, or as otherwise allowed by law.
   Please Take Further Notice that the City may record a Notice of Substandard
Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office against the premises if
the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required
approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the City, in the manner
and time set forth in this Notice of Abatement and provided that a timely
appeal therefrom has not been made.
   Please Take Further Notice that, in the event of abatement by City
Personnel, all buildings, structures, and/or personal property constituting a
public nuisance may be removed from the subject premises or from public
property and destroyed or disposed of, without regard to its actual or salvage
value.
Dated: This               day of                       20      .
                                                                                    Public
Official [Name and Title] [End of Form]
   A Notice of Abatement shall be deemed in substantial compliance with this
subsection regardless of form if all substantive information is contained in
such Notice of Abatement.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.060 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   A.   Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this Chapter,
any notice required by this Chapter may be served by personal delivery to any
responsible person or by first class mail. The date of service shall be the
date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service receptacle.
Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed Notice of
Abatement by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to
this Chapter.
      1.   In addition to being served upon a responsible party in accordance
with this Section, any Notice of Abatement that includes an Order to Vacate
shall also be posted at or upon the main entrance of the building or structure
being ordered vacated or at another prominent location if the entire property
is being ordered vacated.
   B.   Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this Chapter,
any notice issued to an owner of real property shall be sent to the mailing
address on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County
Assessor’s Office. Failure of any owner to receive a properly addressed notice
by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.065 RIGHT OF APPEAL FROM A NOTICE OF ABATEMENT.
   A.   A responsible person may contest a Notice of Abatement by filing a
written request for an appeal with the City Clerk’s office (located at 9770
Culver Blvd., Culver City, CA) within fifteen (15) calendar days of service of
the Notice of Abatement. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal.
   B.   A written request for an appeal shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is
appealing the Notice of Abatement (hereinafter, “appellant”).
      2.   Address and description of real property upon which the City intends
to enter and abate a public nuisance.
      3.   Date of Notice of Abatement being appealed.
      4.   Specific action or decision being appealed.
      5.   Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the Hearing
Officer to understand the nature of the controversy.
      6.   The signature of at least one appellant.
   C.   Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a
waiver of the right to contest a Notice of Abatement. In this event, the Notice
of Abatement is final and binding.
   D.   The provisions of this section only apply to instances where the City
has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate public
nuisances with City Personnel. In no event does this Chapter limit the right of
City officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations
to responsible persons or to cause the abatement of public nuisances in a
different manner, including without limitation, by court orders arising from
the City’s exercise of its criminal or civil remedies. In such instances, a
responsible person shall receive a right to hearing and other due process
rights through the court process.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.070 CONSEQUENCE FOR AN UNTIMELY APPEAL.
   A.   If a timely appeal is not received by the City Clerk, the right to
appeal is waived and the Notice of Abatement is final and binding. In such
instances, the City may, without any administrative hearing, cause the
abatement with City personnel of any or all of the nuisance conditions or
activities stated in the Notice of Abatement. Entry onto private real property
that is both improved and occupied shall, excepting instances of an imminent
hazard, be pursuant to a warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The
City shall follow the procedures stated in this Chapter for recovery of all
abatement costs, fees and expenses (incidental or otherwise).
   B.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall obligate the City to undertake
abatement actions pursuant to a Notice of Abatement, whether or not there is a
timely appeal.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.075 ABATEMENT BY RESPONSIBLE PERSON PRIOR TO HEARING.
   A.   Any responsible person shall have the right to abate a nuisance in
accordance with the Notice of Abatement at his or her own expense, provided all
corrective actions are completed with all required City permits, approvals and
inspections, prior to the date the matter is set for a hearing.
   B.   A hearing shall be cancelled if all nuisance conditions or activities
are, as determined by the City, fully and lawfully abated prior thereto.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.080 REVIEW BY HEARING OFFICER.
   A.   Any responsible person who contests a Notice of Abatement shall,
subject to filing a timely appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing
officer. The administrative appeal shall be scheduled no later than sixty (60)
calendar days, and no sooner than ten (10) calendar days, after receipt of a
timely filed request for appeal. The appellants listed on the written request
for an appeal shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and location of
the hearing at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing.
   B.   Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to
the City Clerk in writing no later than two (2) business days before the date
scheduled for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing for good
cause or on his/her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be
continued for more than thirty (30) calendar days without stipulation by all
parties.
   C.   At the place and time set forth in the notification of appeal hearing,
the hearing officer shall hear and consider the testimony of the appealing
person(s), the issuing officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any
documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the alleged public
nuisance(s).
   D.   Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply. The City bears the burden of proof to establish a
nuisance exists by a preponderance of evidence. The issuance of a Notice of
Abatement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation and the Code
Enforcement Officer who issued the Notice of Abatement, or another Enforcement
Services representative, is required to participate in the appeal hearing. The
appellant, and the enforcement officer issuing the Notice, as well as all other
responsible persons, shall have the opportunity to present evidence and to
present and cross-examine witnesses. The appellant and the enforcement officer
issuing the Notice of Abatement, or other responsible persons, may represent
himself/herself/themselves or be represented by anyone of his/her/their choice.
The appellant, or other interested persons, may bring an interpreter to the
hearing at his/her/their sole expense. The City may, at its discretion, record
the hearing by stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video
recording. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or
testifies at any hearing.
   E.   If the appellant fails, or other responsible persons fail, to appear,
or to otherwise submit any admissible evidence demonstrating the non-existence
of the alleged nuisance(s), the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and
send a notice thereof to the responsible person(s) by first class mail to the
address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to non-
appearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant’s waiver of the
right to appeal and a failure to exhaust all administrative remedies. In such
instances, the Notice of Abatement is final and binding.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.085 DECISION OF HEARING OFFICER; ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   A.   Not later than fifteen (15) calendar days following conclusion of the
hearing, the hearing officer shall determine if any nuisance condition exists
at the subject property. If the hearing officer determines that each nuisance
condition described in the Notice of Abatement is non-existent, the Notice of
Abatement shall be deemed cancelled. If the hearing officer determines that one
or more of the nuisance conditions described in the Notice of Abatement exists,
he/she shall issue a written Order of Abatement which shall contain the
following:
      1.   A finding and description of each nuisance condition existing at the
subject property.
      2.   The name of each person responsible for a nuisance condition or
conditions at the subject property, as well as the name of any person who is
not responsible therefor.
      3.   The required corrective action and a compliance period for each
unabated nuisance condition.
      4.   Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant or
related to the subject matter of the appeal.
   B.   The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive. The
decision shall also contain the following statement: “The decision of the
Hearing Officer is final and binding. Judicial review of this decision is
subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil
Procedure Sections 1094.6 et seq.”
   C.   A copy of the decision shall be served by first class mail on each
responsible person to whom the Notice of Abatement was issued. If the owner is
not an appellant, a copy of the Order of Abatement shall also be served on the
owner by first class mail and certified mail to the address shown on the last
equalized assessment roll. Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed
decision shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.090 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY RESPONSIBLE PERSONS PRIOR TO CITY ABATEMENT
ACTIONS.
   A.   Any responsible person shall have the right to fully abate a nuisance
in accordance with the Hearing Officer’s decision prior to the date of entry of
City personnel upon the subject real property, provided that all corrective
actions are completed with all required City permits, approvals and
inspections, prior to said entry date. In such instances, all administrative
proceedings shall be cancelled, with the exception of the City’s right to seek
recovery of its incurred incidental expenses, Code Enforcement Fees, and
Attorney’s Fees as provided by and pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Once the City enters a subject real property to abate a public
nuisance, it shall have the right to complete this action.
   C.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede, or
interfere with City Personnel in the performance of any act that is carried out
to abate a public nuisance.
   D.   All buildings, structures, and/or personal property that is removed by
City Personnel from premises in the abatement of a nuisance shall be lawfully
disposed of or destroyed without regard to its actual or salvage value.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.095 EMERGENCY ACTION TO ABATE AN IMMINENT HAZARD.
   A.   Notwithstanding any provision of the Culver City Municipal Code to the
contrary, the City Manager, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, or the Building
Official, or any of their designees, may cause a public nuisance to be
summarily abated if it is determined that the nuisance creates an imminent
hazard to a person or persons, or to other real or personal property.
   B.   Prior to abating nuisance that creates an imminent hazard, the City
Manager shall attempt to notify a responsible person by telephone or in writing
of the imminent hazard and request its abatement by said person; provided
however, that the City Manager may dispense with any attempt at prior
notification of a responsible person if, in the sole discretion of the City
Manager, the nature or severity of the hazard justifies such inaction. If
notice has been so given, but, in the sole discretion of the City Manager, the
responsible person(s) fail(s) to take immediate and meaningful steps to abate
the imminent hazard, the City may abate the nuisance with City Personnel
without further notice, and charge the costs and fees thereof to the
responsible person(s).
   C.   Within ten (10) business days following emergency action of City
Personnel to abate an imminent hazard, the City shall serve any responsible
person with a Notice of Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent
Hazard by both certified mail, return receipt requested, and first class mail.
Notice to a property owner shall be mailed to the mailing address set forth in
the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office.
Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed Notice of
Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard by mail shall not
invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this Chapter.
   D.   A Notice of Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard
shall contain the following provisions:
      1.   The name of all known responsible persons who are being served with
the Notice of Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard and
the address of the real property on which the imminent hazard was present.
      2.   A brief description of the condition(s) and reasons why it
constitutes an imminent hazard.
      3.   A brief description of the law prohibiting or pertaining to the
imminent hazard.
      4.   A brief description of the actions City Personnel took to abate the
imminent hazard.
   E.   Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a Notice of Emergency
Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard, whether in whole or in part,
or the failure of a responsible person to receive this document, shall not
render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this Chapter
invalid.
   F.   Emergency abatement of an imminent hazard by City Personnel shall not
preclude the City from recording a Declaration of Substandard Property in
accordance with the provisions of Section
9.04.135 of this Chapter, if conditions thereafter remain at the premises that
constitute a violation of law or a public nuisance.
   G.   The City shall be entitled to recover its fees and costs (incidental or
otherwise) for the abatement of an imminent hazard. In such instances, the City
shall follow the procedures set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.100 COMBINATION OF NOTICES.
   The notices that are authorized by this Chapter may be combined in the
discretion of the City.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.105 ESTABLISHMENT OF COSTS OF ABATEMENT.
   A.   The City shall keep an accounting of the Abatement Costs.
   B.   The City shall serve a Statement of Abatement Costs on the responsible
persons within ninety (90) calendar days of the City’s completion of nuisance
abatement actions. Service of this statement may be made in the manner provided
for in §
9.04.060 of this Chapter.
   C.   Unless a timely contest of the Statement of Abatement Costs is filed, a
responsible person shall tender the Abatement Costs in U.S. currency to the
City within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of service of the Statement
of Abatement Costs.
   D.   A responsible person has the right to contest a Statement of Abatement
Costs by filing a written request for contest with the City Clerk’s Office
(located at 9770 Culver Blvd., Culver City, CA) within fifteen (15) calendar
days of service of the Statement of Abatement Costs.
      1.   A written request for contest shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of each
responsible person who is contesting the Statement of Abatement Costs.
         (b)   Address and description of the real property upon which the City
abated a public nuisance.
         (c)   Date of the Statement of Abatement Costs being appealed.
         (d)   Description of the specific Abatement Cost being contested, and
a statement of the grounds for contest in sufficient detail to enable the City
Manager or designee thereof to understand the nature of the controversy.
      2.   No fee shall be due for the filing of a request for contest.
   E.   Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal request for
contest constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a Statement of Abatement
Costs and a failure to exhaust all administrative remedies. In this event, the
Statement of Abatement Costs is final and binding, and the City may proceed to
collect its Abatement Costs as contained in a final Statement of Abatement
Costs in any manner allowed by law.
   F.   If a timely request for contest is received by the City Clerk, a
hearing shall be set before the City Manager no later than sixty (60) calendar
days, and no sooner than ten (10) calendar days, of receipt of the request for
contest. A notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be served
on all responsible persons who contested the Statement of Abatement Costs by
first class mail to the address(es) stated on the request form at least ten
(10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Failure of a person requesting a
contest to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action
or proceeding by the City pursuant to this Chapter.
   G.   Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to
the City Clerk in writing no later than two (2) business days before the date
scheduled for the hearing. The City Manager may continue a hearing for good
cause or on its own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued
for more sixty (60) calendar days without stipulation by all parties.
   H.   At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the request
to contest the Statement of Abatement Costs, the City Manager shall hear and
pass upon the evidence submitted by City Personnel, together with any
objections or protests raised by responsible persons liable for said costs.
Testimony and evidence shall be limited to issues related to the abatement
costs, and no person shall be permitted to present evidence or testimony
challenging the existence of a public nuisance or manner of abatement as
described in the Notice of Abatement. Thereupon, the City Manager may make such
revision, correction or modification to the statement as it may deem just,
after which the statement, as it is submitted, or as revised, corrected or
modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
   I.   The decision of the City Manager is final.
   J.   The City Clerk shall cause a confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs to
be served upon all persons who contested the original statement by first class
mail to the address(es) stated on the request form. The City Clerk shall cause
a confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs to be served on the owner of the
property on which City personnel abated a public nuisance by first class mail
to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll (irrespective of
whether the owner contested the Statement of Abatement Costs). This document
shall also contain the following statement: “The determination of the City
Manager is final and binding. This document shall also contain the following
statement: “The decision of the City Manager is final and binding. Judicial
review of the this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set
forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 et seq.”
   K.   Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed confirmed statement
shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this
Chapter.
   L.   A responsible person shall tender the Abatement Costs in U.S. Currency
to the City within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of service of the
confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs. The City may thereafter proceed to
collect its Abatement Costs as contained in the confirmed Statement of
Abatement Costs in any manner allowed by law.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.110 COLLECTION OF ABATEMENT COSTS BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   A.   The City may cause a special assessment to be made upon real property
upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.5,
and future amendments thereto, in the event a Statement of Abatement Costs or a
confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs is not paid in a timely manner.
   B.   A Notice of Special Assessment shall be sent to the owner(s) of the
subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is imposed,
which shall contain the following recitals:
      The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for
unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be
affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment
may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal
taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal
taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal
taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real
property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or
conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide
encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date
on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the
cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but
instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   C.   The City Attorney or City Prosecutor shall establish the Notice of
Special Assessment form for use, or consideration by, the Tax Collector in
collecting a special assessment.
   D.   The Notice of Special Assessment shall be entitled to recordation with
the Los Angles County Recorder’s Office.
   E.   The amount of a Special Assessment shall also constitute a personal
obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.115 COLLECTION OF COSTS OF ABATEMENT BY NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN.
   A.   As an alternative to the procedure contained in §
9.04.110 of this Chapter, the City may cause a nuisance abatement lien to be
recorded upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.1, and future amendments thereto, in the event a
Statement of Abatement Costs or a confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs is not
paid in a timely manner.
   B.   A lien shall not be recorded prior to serving the owner of record of
the parcel of land on which the public nuisance is maintained, with a notice.
This document shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action
in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of
Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after
diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days and
publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Los
Angeles County pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 6062.
   C.   The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County
Recorder’s office in the County in which the parcel of land is located and from
the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment
lien.
   D.   A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the
amount of the lien for the City of Culver City, the name of the City department
on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement actions, the
street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on
which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of
the parcel.
   E.   In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied,
either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the
information specified in Subsection (D) shall be recorded by the City. A
nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the
grantor-grantee index.
   F.   A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the
City for a money judgment.
   G.   The City may recover from the property owner any costs incurred
regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the
property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.
   H.   The amount of a Nuisance Abatement Lien shall also constitute a
personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was
abated.
§ 9.04.120 RESTITUTION OF ABATEMENT COSTS IN JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the City from seeking an order of
restitution for abatement costs from a court of competent jurisdiction in
connection with a civil or criminal judicial proceeding seeking the abatement
of a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.125 TREBLE THE COSTS OF ABATEMENT.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.7 (or any subsequent amendment thereto),
upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two
(2) year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a public
nuisance except for public nuisance conditions abated pursuant to Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 17980 (“State Housing Law”), the court may order that person to
pay treble the costs of the abatement.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.130 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person who remains in or enters any building or structure that has
been ordered to be vacated pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with
Chapter 1.01 of Title 1 of this Code.
   B.   Any responsible person who fails to comply with an Order of Abatement
by completing each of the requisite corrective actions in the manner and time
set forth in the Order of Abatement is guilty of a misdemeanor offense
punishable in accordance with
Chapter 1.01 of Title 1 of this Code.
   C.   Any person who obstructs, impedes, or interferes with any
representative of the City engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating, or
demolishing and removing any property pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with
Chapter 1.01 of Title 1 of this Code.
   D.   Any person who defaces, alters, or removes any notice or order posted
as required in this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in
accordance with
Chapter 1.01 of Title 1 of this Code.
   E.   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this Chapter, or of any law
or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained
or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
RECORDATION, ENFORCEMENT FEES AND ATTORNEY’S FEES
§ 9.04.135 RECORDATION OF DECLARATION OF SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY.
   A.   Notwithstanding any provision of the Culver City Municipal Code to the
contrary, if the City determines that any property, building or structure, or
any part thereof, is in violation any provision of the Culver City Municipal
Code and said violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined
by the City, in the manner and time provided in a written notice to a
responsible person, then the City, in its sole discretion, may record a
Declaration of Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s
Office against said premises. As used herein, “fully abated or corrected”
includes the procurement of all required City approvals, permits, licenses and
the passage of all City required inspections.
   B.   A Declaration of Substandard Property shall not be recorded unless the
City has first issued a written notice (in any form) to the owner of real
property (i) identifying and requiring correction of a public nuisance
condition; and, (ii) disclosing that a Declaration of Substandard Property may
be recorded against the real property if the public nuisance condition(s) is/
are not fully abated or corrected in the manner and time delineated in said
notice, as determined by the City.
      1.   If the notice required pursuant to this Section was comprised of a
Notice of Abatement as defined in this Chapter or of an administrative citation
issued pursuant to Chapter 1.02 of this Code, a Declaration of Substandard
Property shall not be recorded unless the Notice of Abatement and/or
administrative citation is deemed a final and binding City decision.
   D.   The form that constitutes a Declaration of Substandard Property shall
be approved by the City Attorney or the City Prosecutor.
   E.   The City shall record a Notice of Rescission of Declaration of
Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office within ten
(10) business days of its determination that a violation or a public nuisance
has been fully abated or corrected.
   F.   The City shall cause copies of recorded Declarations of Substandard
Property and Notices of Rescission of Declaration of Substandard Property to be
served on all persons having an ownership interest in the subject real property
as shown in the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County
Assessor’s Office. Service thereof shall be by first class mail. Failure of any
person to receive such notices shall not invalidate any action or proceeding
pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.140 CODE ENFORCEMENT FEES.
   A.   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 54988 and Cal. Health & Safety Code §
17951 (and any successor statute thereto), the Building Code, and any other
applicable local, State, or Federal law, as well as by the City’s police powers
as authorized by the California Constitution, the City may charge and collect
Code Enforcement Fees from responsible persons who cause, allow, permit,
suffer, or maintain a violation in or upon any real property located within the
City to defray the City’s costs of code enforcement actions. Such fees shall
not exceed the amount reasonably required to achieve this objective and are
chargeable whether the City’s code enforcement actions occur in the absence of
formal administrative or judicial proceedings, as well as prior to, during, or
subsequent to, the initiation of such proceedings.
      1.   The amount(s) or rate(s) of Code Enforcement Fees for City Personnel
time and other resources that are used for code enforcement actions shall be
established, and may thereafter be amended, by resolution by the City Council.
      2.   The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to
any other fees or charges that responsible persons may owe in accordance with
any other provision of the this Code, or which are imposed pursuant to County,
State or Federal laws or regulations.
   B.   The City shall keep an accounting of the Code Enforcement Fees and
shall serve a Statement of Code Enforcement Fees upon the responsible persons.
The issuance, service, and contest of a Statement of Code Enforcement Fees and
the payment and collection of Code Enforcement Fees shall be made in the same
manner and in the same time frames as for the issuance, service, and contest of
a Statement of Abatement Costs and for the payment and collection of Abatement
Costs as set forth in §§
9.04.105 through
9.04.125 of this Code.
   C.   The City Manager, or a designee thereof, is authorized to establish
regulations for the uniform imposition of Code Enforcement Fees, and for
related administrative actions pertaining to such fees.
   D.   Code Enforcement Fees shall also be recoverable in conjunction with any
action, administrative proceeding, judicial proceeding, or special proceeding
to cause the abatement or cessation of, or otherwise to remove a violation or a
public nuisance, and is not limited to those proceedings wherein City Personnel
perform the necessary abatement actions.
   E.   Failure to pay Code Enforcement Fees shall constitute a debt that is
collectible in any manner allowed by law, including, but not limited to the
recordation of a lien with the County Recorder’s Office and/or with the
California Franchise Tax Board “Inter-Agency Offset Program” (pursuant to
Section Cal. Gov’t Code § 12419.10).
   F.   The City shall be entitled to recover its attorney’s fees and costs
pursuant to §
9.04.145 of this Chapter arising from an action to collect Code Enforcement
Fees imposed in accordance with this Chapter, as well as any other fee or
charge imposed or allowed by any City, County, State, or Federal laws or
regulations.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.145 RECOVERY OF ATTORNEY’S FEES.
   A.   The prevailing party of any action, administrative proceeding, or
special proceeding to abate a nuisance or to cause the abatement of a public
nuisance or other violation of this Code, or in any appeal or other judicial
action arising therefrom, shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney’s
fees. Attorneys’ fees shall not be recoverable unless the City Manager (or a
designee thereof) or an attorney for and on behalf of the City elects in
writing at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding to seek
recovery of its own attorneys’ fees.
   B.   Provided that the City has made an election to seek attorney’s fees, an
award of attorney’s fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable
attorney’s fees incurred by the City in that action or proceeding.
   C.   Unpaid attorneys’ fees shall be collectible in any manner allowed by
law.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
§ 9.04.150 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
   A.   This Chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of
property within the City. This Chapter shall supplement other provisions of
this Code and other statutes, ordinances or regulations now existing or
subsequently enacted by the City, the State or any other entity or agency
having jurisdiction.
   B.   The procedures for abatement set forth in this Chapter are not
exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions set forth in this Code or
by State law for the abatement of public nuisances.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 4 (part))
GRAFFITI
§ 9.04.200 PREVENTION AND REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.
   Whenever the City Manager or his designee determines that graffiti is
located on public property not owned by the City of Culver City, or on private
property, so as to be visible to a person utilizing any public street or
highway in the City of Culver City, including but not limited to any roadway,
parkway, sidewalk or alley, then the City Manager or his/her designee is
authorized to expend City funds for the removal of the graffiti. Removal of the
graffiti at public expense shall be restricted to the painting and repair of
only the area where the graffiti is located.
('65 Code, § 22-10.1) (Ord. No. 91-006 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22
(part))
§ 9.04.205 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following words and phrases are
defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set out, unless it is apparent
from the context that a different meaning was intended:
   AEROSOL CONTAINER. Any aerosol based container, bottle, spray device or
other mechanism, which is adopted or made for the purpose of spraying paint,
ink, dye or other similar substance.
   BONA FIDE EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Any document evidencing the age
and identity of an individual which has been issued by a Federal, State or
local government entity, and includes, but is not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act, or an identification issued by a member of the armed
forces.
   CITY MANAGER. The CITY MANAGER for the City of Culver City appointed by the
City Council, or his or her designee.
   FELT TIP MARKER. Any indelible marker, pen or similar implement which
contains a fluid which cannot be removed with plain water and has a flat,
pointed or angled tip which at its broadest width is greater than one-eighth
(1/8th) inch.
   GRAFFITI. Writings, drawings or inscriptions of any type which, in the
determination of the City Manager, has any of the following characteristics.
      1.   Insults or incites hatred or contempt of any racial, religious or
ethnic group;
      2.   Refers to the name of a gang or includes words or symbols associated
with a gang or individual;
      3.   Insults or threatens any identifiable individual or group;
      4.   Includes obscene or indecent language or depictions;
      5.   Constitutes an aesthetic blight or eyesore to a neighborhood;
      6.   Tends to attract more graffiti; and
      7.   Promotes criminal activity or promotes retaliatory action by an
individual(s).
   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. An aerosol container, a felt tip marker, nail polish,
shoe polish, paint stick, etching instrument, or any other device containing
paint, ink, chalk, dye or similar substance which when used or applied is
capable of defacing glass, metal, concrete, wood composites, or fabric.
   GRAFFITI OFFENSE. The unauthorized application of paint, ink, chalk, dye or
the use of any other instrument to deface, damage or destroy public and private
buildings, structures, or any portion thereof.
   PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK. Any device containing a solid form of paint,
chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance that cannot be removed with plain
water and is capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon
application, leaves a mark at least one-eighth (1/8th) inch in width.
('65 Code, § 22-10.2) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 §§ 19, 22
(part))
§ 9.04.210 GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to apply or attempt to apply graffiti to
any public or privately owned structure located on public or privately owned
real property within the City. There is no presumption that any person has a
right to apply graffiti, as herein described, on any public or private property
within the City.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant or other person
having present possession of a lot or parcel of land within the City to (1)
permit graffiti to remain upon such lot or parcel of land or (2) to maintain
any structure affixed to such lot or parcel or land with graffiti on such
structure or any portion thereof, for a period in excess of forty-eight (48)
hours following service by the City of a notice to abate graffiti. Each day the
graffiti is maintained beyond the initial forty-eight (48) hours period hereby
constitutes a separate offense and is subject to the penalties set forth in §
9.04.240.
('65 Code, § 22-10.3) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
§ 9.04.215 POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.
   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years and not in the presence of a
parent or legal guardian shall have in his or her possession a graffiti
implement, as defined by §
9.04.205, while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, public
recreational facility or any public right-of-way in the City unless necessary
in order to participate in any City or School District sponsored function. This
Section shall not apply to authorized employees of the City of Culver City nor
shall it apply to the authorized agents or contractors under contract with the
City.
('65 Code, § 22-10.4) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
§ 9.04.220 REMOVAL POLICY.
   The City Manager or his/her designee shall develop a graffiti removal
program to assist property owners in the expeditious removal of graffiti from
their property. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subchapter, the
City shall be authorized to recover its costs incurred in the removal of
graffiti from private property if:
   A.   The removal of graffiti or other inscribed material from privately
owned real property exceeds four (4) requests from the City to the property
owner or occupant or a maximum of six hundred (600) square feet per privately
owned real property during one (1) calendar year, which is not removed by the
property owner or occupant.
   B.   Where the removal of graffiti has been mandated pursuant to §
9.04.230, the owner of the affected property shall reimburse the City for such
services.
   C.   Nothing in this Subchapter shall prohibit the City Manager or his/her
designee from waiving the provisions of this Section if it can be determined
that the affected property owner has demonstrated a conscientious effort to
prevent graffiti from occurring on their property as exhibited by, but not
limited to, the installation of security devices such as surveillance cameras,
security lighting, sprinklers linked to motion sensors; protective or covering
landscaping; graffiti resistant building materials; or the application of
graffiti-resistant paint.
('65 Code, § 22-10.5) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22
(part))
§ 9.04.225 AUTHORIZATION TO REMOVE; METHODS.
   Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods:
   A.   Whenever the City Manager determines that writings or other
inscriptions constitutes “graffiti” as defined in §
9.04.205 and is so located on public or privately owned property within the
City so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public
right-of-way in the City, the City Manager is authorized to provide for the
removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material upon advising the property
owner that removal will be undertaken by the City if not removed within forty-
eight (48) hours of notification of the existence of graffiti. The City Council
has determined that the failure to remove graffiti constitutes a public
nuisance which permits the City by and through its authorized representative to
enter on private property to abate the declared public nuisance, without
additional notice to or authorization from the landowner.
      1.   In removing the graffiti or other inscribed material, the painting
or repair of a more extensive area shall not be authorized.
      2.   Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than this City,
the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material is authorized after
notifying the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure and such
entity fails to remove the graffiti within forty-eight (48) hours after receipt
of notice to abate the graffiti.
   B.   Graffiti which is located on privately owned structures on privately
owned real property within the City and which can be viewed by a person
utilizing any public right-of-way within the City may be removed by the City at
the owner's expense as a public nuisance pursuant to §
9.04.230. This Section shall apply under the following circumstances:
      1.   The private property owner has persuaded, allowed or encouraged the
graffiti problem;
      2.   TheCity Manager determines that the removal of graffiti or other
inscribed material from a privately owned property has exceeded four (4)
requests from the City or a maximum of six hundred (600) square feet per
privately owned real property during one (1) calendar year and the property
owner has not removed the graffiti within the required time after a notice to
abate has been given as described in §
9.04.230 below.
('65 Code, § 22-10.6) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22
(part))
§ 9.04.230 NOTICE TO ABATE; APPEAL; ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   Whenever the City Manager determines that graffiti is being maintained upon
the premises within the City in violation of §
9.04.210, the City Manager shall send, by registered or certified mail or post,
at a conspicuous place on the premises where the graffiti is located, written
notice to the owner, and to any lessee, occupant or other person having present
possession of a lot or parcel of land within the City that the graffiti must be
removed within forty-eight (48) hours from the date of service of the notice.
The notice shall be entitled “Notice to Abate Graffiti,” in letters not less
than one (1) inch in height, and shall cite this Subchapter as authority for
such abatement. The notice shall contain a general description of the property
on which the graffiti is located.
   A.   The notice shall be on City letterhead in substantially the following
form:
NOTICE TO ABATE GRAFFITI
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that under the provisions of Section
9.04.210 of the Culver City Municipal Code        you are required at your
expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly
known as          , City of Culver City, California, which is visible to public
view, within forty-eight (48) hours after the date of service of this notice.
The graffiti is visible to public view and therefore constitutes a public
nuisance. If you fail to comply with this order the City or its contractor will
enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance. The cost of the
abatement of the City or its contractor will be assessed upon your property and
such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.
All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matter are hereby
notified to submit an appeal to the Office of the City Manager within forty-
eight (48) hours from the date of this notice.
At the conclusion of this forty-eight (48) hour period the City may proceed
with the abatement of the graffiti on your property at your expense without
further notice.
   B.   If an appeal has been made to the Office of the City Manager, within
five (5) days from the date of the Notice to Abate Graffiti, the City Manager,
or his/her designee, shall hold an administrative hearing on appeal. The
decision of the City Manager or his/her designee shall be final and conclusive.
   C.   If an appeal has not been submitted as set forth in §
9.04.230 B. above, or if the appeal has been denied following an administrative
hearing, and if the private property owner fails to remove or fails to cause
the graffiti to be removed by the designated date, or such continued date
thereafter as approved by the City Manager, then the City Manager shall cause
the graffiti to be abated as a public nuisance by the City or its contractor,
and the City or its contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the
premises for such purpose.
('65 Code, § 22-10.7) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22
(part))
§ 9.04.235 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   Should the City Manager be required to abate the graffiti as a public
nuisance, as set forth in §
9.04.230 C., the City may recover, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 38773, the
costs of abatement through the assessment of a lien against the property on
which the nuisance is maintained.
   A.   Prior to the recordation of a lien against property for the recovery of
abatement and related administrative costs, the City, in accordance with Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 38773.1 or 38773.5, shall provide written notification, by
registered or certified mail, to the property owner that a lien will be
assessed against their property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the
land until paid. The notice of lien shall for purpose of this Subchapter be in
form substantially as follows:
NOTICE OF LIEN
Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §38773 and the authority of Ordinance            of
the City of Culver City, the City Manager of the City of Culver City did on or
about the          day of                      , 20    , cause the removal of
graffiti at the premises hereinafter described in order to abate a public
nuisance on said real property; and the City Council of the City of Culver City
did on the          day of                     , 20    , assess the cost of
such abatement upon the real property hereinafter described; and the same has
not been paid nor any part thereof; and that said City of Culver City does
hereby claim a lien for such costs of abatement in the amount of said
assessment to wit: the sum of          dollars; and the same shall be a lien
upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of
record.
The real property hereinabove mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is
that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Culver City, County
of Los Angeles, State of California, and particularly described as follows:
                          
                                                                              
Dated this         day of               , 20   .
               
City Clerk, City of Culver City
   B.   Between the first and fifteenth day of July of each year, the City
Manager shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the City a
notice that any person affected or aggrieved by an act or determination of the
City or the City Manager in connection with the provisions of this Subchapter
may appeal to the City Council. An appeal shall be in writing and shall be
filed with the Office of the City Clerk prior to the fifteenth day of July with
the appropriate fee, or from time to time thereafter may be determined by the
Council, the City Council shall hear and render a decision upon each appeal,
and the determination of the Council shall be final and conclusive. In the
event any determination of the City Manager is modified by determination of the
City Council or any assessment changed or corrected, the City Manager shall
cause the correction to be made upon the record showing the assessment.
   C.   The appellant shall bear the burden of proof which shall be a
preponderance of evidence. Oral testimony unsupported by physical evidence is
disfavored.
   D.   At the expiration of the time for appeal, or upon the determination by
the City Council of all appeals so filed, and in compliance with the
requirements of any determination so made, the City Manager shall deliver to
the County Auditor of the County of Los Angeles an abstract of each lot or
parcel of land within the City affected by this Section and the amount of each
such charge to be placed upon the assessment roll against the respective
parcel. Thereafter, the charges shall be of the same character and effect,
subject to the same penalties, and shall be collected in the same manner and at
the same time as City taxes. The provision of this Section shall not apply to
any lot or parcel of land if the charge against it has been paid prior to the
delivery of the abstract to the County Auditor.
   E.   No charges for removal of graffiti shall be imposed until after six (6)
months from the date of the adoption of this Subchapter unless amended by the
Culver City Council.
('65 Code, § 22-10.8) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22
(part))
§ 9.04.240 FAILURE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI UPON NOTICE.
   In addition to any costs incurred by the City for the abatement of graffiti
from private property, failure to voluntarily abate graffiti after notification
shall result in the following penalties:
   A.   The failure of any person, firm, partnership, or corporation, failing
to remove graffiti within the prescribed forty-eight (48) hour period as set
forth in §
9.04.210 B. hereby constitutes an infraction and is punishable by a fine of One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) upon first conviction thereof.
   B.   Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating §
9.04.210 B. of this Subchapter for a second time or any subsequent number of
times shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).
   C.   Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating §
9.04.210 B. of this Subchapter for a third time or any subsequent number of
times shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
   D.   Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation previously convicted
three (3) times under this Section, violating the provisions of §
9.04.210 B. hereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
9.04.260 hereof.
('65 Code, § 22-10.9) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
§ 9.04.245 ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS.
   The violation of any of the provisions of this Subchapter or any State law
pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement shall constitute
a nuisance and may be abated by the City through a civil process by means of a
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner
available to the City under provisions of applicable ordinances or State law.
('65 Code, § 22-10.10) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
§ 9.04.250 REWARD FOR INFORMATION.
   The City Council may, by resolution, offer and pay a reward for information
leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person who places graffiti or
other inscribed material as defined herein upon public or privately owned
structures within the City. In addition to any fines levied by the City for
violation of this Subchapter, any person who has damaged property by inscribing
graffiti on public or private property shall be liable for the amount of any
reward paid pursuant to this Subchapter and Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.5.
('65 Code, § 22-10.11) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
§ 9.04.255 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Pursuant to Cal. Civil Code § 1714.1(b), where graffiti is applied by an
unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian of said minor shall be
jointly and severally liable for payment of civil damages resulting from the
misconduct of the minor in an amount not to exceed Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00) for each such offense.
('65 Code, § 22-10.12) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
§ 9.04.260 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to
violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
Subchapter.
   A.   Except as provided in §
9.04.240, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision
of this Subchapter, or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or
by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this Subchapter, is committed, continued,
or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be
deemed punishable therefor as provided in this Subchapter.
   B.   Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in Subsection A. above, any
person who maliciously defaces, damages or destroys property with a graffiti
implement is guilty of vandalism, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 594, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the State prison or in
a County jail for a period not to exceed one (1) year, or by a fine of Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), but no more than Fifty Thousand Dollars
($50,000.00), depending upon the severity and the amount of defacement, damage
or destruction to property, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
('65 Code, § 22-10.13) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
§ 9.04.265 COMMUNITY SERVICE.
   A.   Upon conviction of any person for violation of §§
9.04.210 or
9.04.215, or any State law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti
implement, the City shall petition the sentencing court to impose community
service time, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 640.6. The sentencing court may
require the performance of community service within the City in addition to any
monetary penalties imposed. In the event the sentencing court approves
community service, the City shall request any adult or emancipated minor
convicted of vandalism, as defined by Cal. Penal Code § 594(a)(1) to:
      1.   Complete a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours, but no more than
forty-eight (48) hours of community services cleaning up, removing, and
repairing property damaged by graffiti for the first conviction; and
      2.   Complete forty-eight (48) hours, but no more than ninety-six (96)
hours of community services cleaning up, removing, and repairing property
damaged by graffiti for each subsequent conviction.
   B.   Any person who is under the age of eighteen (18) when he or she
violates any provision of this Subchapter or any State law pertaining to
vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, and is found to be a person
described in Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 602 by reason of the commission of
vandalism, may be required to perform community service time pursuant to Cal.
Welf. & Inst. Code § 742.16. For any minor adjudicated guilty of vandalism, the
City will petition the juvenile court and the court may, in addition to any
other penalties imposed by the City, require the unemancipated minor to provide
the necessary labor to clean up, repair, or replace defaced, damaged or
destroyed property, or otherwise make restitution to the property owner.
   C.   If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine levied for violating
any provisions of this Subchapter or is otherwise unable to make restitution
for damages, the minor's parent or legal guardian shall be liable for payment
of the fine or restitution. If the parent or legal guardian cannot make
restitution, the sentencing court may waive payment of the fine or community
service time by the parent or legal guardian upon a finding of good cause. If
the sentencing court waives payment of the fine by the parent or legal
guardian, the City shall petition the sentencing court, and the court, at the
court's option, may order the parent or legal guardian to provide the necessary
labor, equal to the number of hours assigned to the minor adjudicated guilty of
violating any provision of this Subchapter, to clean up, repair, or replace
property damaged by the unemancipated minor.
('65 Code, § 22-10.14) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
§ 9.04.270 SUSPENSION OR DELAY OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES.
   For each conviction of a person aged thirteen (13) to twenty-one (21) for
violation of §§
9.04.210 or
9.04.215, or any State law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti
implement, the City shall petition the sentencing court to suspend existing
driving privileges or delay the issuance of driving privileges in accordance to
Cal. Veh. Code § 13202.6.
('65 Code, § 22-10.15) (Ord. No. 94-027 § 3 (part))
CHAPTER 9.05: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
9.05.005   Purpose; declaration of nuisance
   
9.05.010   Definitions
   
9.05.015   Exceptions
   
9.05.020   Provisions not exclusive
   
9.05.025   Administration and enforcement
   
9.05.030   Right of entry for removal
   
9.05.035   Amount of cost assessment
   
9.05.040   Abatement and removal
   
9.05.045   Notice of intention to abate and remove
   
9.05.050   Public hearings
   
9.05.055   Appeals
   
9.05.060   Disposal of vehicles
   
9.05.065   Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles
   
9.05.070   Costs; nonpayment; assessment against land
   
9.05.075   Penalty
§ 9.05.005 PURPOSE; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   A.   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the State of California under Cal. Veh. Code § 22660 to
remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof
as public nuisances, the City Council hereby makes the findings and
declarations set forth in Subsection B.
   B.   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not
including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the
value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for
rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general
welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not
including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby
declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in
accordance with the provisions of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 22-15) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 9.04
§ 9.05.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. HIGHWAY includes
street.
   OWNER OF THE LAND. The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts
thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
   OWNER OF THE VEHICLE. The last registered owner and legal owner of record.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Does not include HIGHWAY.
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved,
or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
('65 Code, § 22-16) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1)
§ 9.05.015 EXCEPTIONS.
   A.   This Subchapter shall not apply to:
      1.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
      2.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   B.   Nothing in this Subchapter shall authorize the maintenance of a public
or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Cal. Veh.
Code §§ 22650 et seq. and this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 22-17) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1)
§ 9.05.020 PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   This Subchapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be
in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore
or hereafter enacted by the City, the State or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction.
('65 Code, § 22-18) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1)
§ 9.05.025 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Subchapter shall
be administered and enforced by the City Manager or his designee. In the
enforcement of this Subchapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon
private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain
information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal
of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this
Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 22-19) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 9.05.030 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR REMOVAL.
   When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any
person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon
private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle
or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 22-20) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1)
§ 9.05.035 AMOUNT OF COST ASSESSMENT.
   The City Council shall by resolution from time to time determine and fix an
amount to be assessed as administrative costs under this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 22-21) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1)
§ 9.05.040 ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL.
   Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property
within the City, the City Manager or his designee shall have the authority to
cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure
prescribed herein.
('65 Code, § 22-22) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 9.05.045 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE.
   A 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts
thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail
to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is
in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine
ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following
forms:
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND
REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE
OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
(Name and address of owner of the land)
   As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at
(address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to
Chapter 9.05 of the Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said
land an (or part of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle
registered to                , license number               , which constitutes
a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 9.05 of the Municipal Code.
   You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said
vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) within ten days from the date of mailing of
this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed
by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed
to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle)
is located.
   As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is
located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the
mailing of this Notice of Intention, request a public hearing, and if such a
request is not received by the City Manager or his designee within such ten-day
period, the City Manager or his designee shall have the authority to abate and
remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and
assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn
written statement within such ten-day period denying responsibility for the
presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your
reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for
hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any
hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may
present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at
such hearing.
Notice Mailed (date)
   /s/................
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND
REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE
OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle -
notice should be given to both if different)
   As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle
- make, model, license, and the like), you are hereby notified that the
undersigned pursuant to
Chapter 9.05 of the Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts
of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a
public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 9.05 of the Municipal Code.
   You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said
vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten days from the date of mailing
of this notice.
   As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts
of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the
mailing of this Notice of Intention, request a public hearing and if such a
request is not received by the City Manager or his designee within such ten-day
period, the City Manager or his designee shall have the authority to abate and
remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.
Notice Mailed (date)                                 /s/...............
('65 Code, § 22-23) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 9.05.050 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   A.   Request for hearing.
      1.   Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land
received by the City Manager or his designee within ten days after the mailing
of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held
by the officer on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or
parts thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and
the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the
vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which it is located.
      2.   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day
period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does
not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered
or certified mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the
land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition
that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a
request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the
notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to
abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without
holding a public hearing.
('65 Code, § 22-24)
   B.   Hearing; before whom held; action.
      1.   All hearings under this Subchapter shall be held before the City
Manager or his designee who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems
pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of
the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on
the said private property or public property. The City Manager or his designee
shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land
may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in
time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence
of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.
      2.   The City Manager or his designee may impose such conditions and take
such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out
the purpose of this Subchapter. He may delay the time for removal of the
vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At
the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Manager or his designee may find
that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is
inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the
property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and
determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged
against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a
description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification
number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.
      3.   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on
the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the City Manager or his designee shall
not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the
property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such
costs from such owner of the land.
      4.   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear,
or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the City Manager or
his designee but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the
decision.
('65 Code, § 22-25) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 9.05.055 APPEALS.
   A.   Any interested party may appeal the decision of the City Manager or his
designee by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk of said City
within five days after his decision.
   B.   Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm, amend
or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.
   C.   The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in this Subchapter.
   D.   In conducting the hearing the City Council shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence.
('65 Code, § 22-26) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 9.05.060 DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES.
   Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof
to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the
decision if such notice is required by this Subchapter, or fifteen days after
such action of the City Council authorizing removal following appeal, the
vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or
automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not
thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
('65 Code, § 22-27) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1)
§ 9.05.065 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof,
the City Manager or his designee shall give notice to the Department of Motor
Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time
there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of
registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of
title and license plates.
('65 Code, § 22-28) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 9.05.070 COSTS; NONPAYMENT; ASSESSMENT AGAINST LAND.
   If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to this Subchapter are not paid
within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an
appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 and shall be transmitted to the tax
collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other
City taxes.
('65 Code, § 22-29) (Ord. No. CS-763 § 1)
§ 9.05.075 PENALTY.
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, a violation of any of the provisions of
Chapter 9.05 shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000), six (6) months in jail, or both.
   B.   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
prosecuting a violation of
Chapter 9.05 as an infraction, at his/her discretion, as set forth in §
1.01.035 B. of this code.
   C.   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the City Attorney from bringing a
civil action, at his/her discretion, for violations of the provisions of this
Chapter, as set forth in §
1.01.050 of this code.
('65 Code, § 22-1) (Ord. No. 96-034 § 2)
CHAPTER 9.06: PARTIES AND GATHERINGS; PARADES
Section
Unruly Parties and Gatherings; Law Enforcement Expenses
   
9.06.005   Purpose and intent
   
9.06.010   Abatement procedures; responsibility for costs
   
9.06.015   Cost reimbursement required
   
9.06.020   Written notice
   
9.06.025   Penalty
Parades
   
9.06.100   Definitions
   
9.06.105   Permit compliance with conditions required
   
9.06.110   Application for permit
   
9.06.115   Permit fees
   
9.06.120   Investigation by Police Department
   
9.06.125   Alternative plan
   
9.06.130   [Reserved]
   
9.06.135   Conditions of granting permit
   
9.06.140   Granting of permit
   
9.06.145   Denial of permit
   
9.06.150   Alternative permit
   
9.06.155   Officials to be notified
   
9.06.160   Interference with parade
   
9.06.165   Appeals
   
9.06.170   Revocation of permit
UNRULY PARTIES AND GATHERINGS; LAW ENFORCEMENT EXPENSES
§ 9.06.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The City Council finds that unruly parties, gatherings, or other assemblages
of persons on private property and other gathering places on private property
within the City, can disturb the public peace, safety and welfare so as to
require law enforcement services over and above those normally provided. It is
in the best interests of the public safety and welfare for those persons
causing the need for law enforcement services beyond those normally provided to
the public at large to be required to pay all or part of such extraordinary law
enforcement expenses.
('65 Code, § 22-72) (Ord. No. 94-026 § 1 (part))
Cross-reference:
   Police Department, see
Ch. 3.04
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 9.04
§ 9.06.010 ABATEMENT PROCEDURES; RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
   When a party, gathering or other assemblage of persons occurs on private
property and is determined by a police officer at the scene to constitute a
violation of the California Penal Code or is otherwise disturbing the public
peace, health, safety or welfare, due to the magnitude of the crowd, noise,
disturbance or unruly behavior generated by the gathering, or by excessive
traffic or property damage caused by the gathering, then the Culver City Police
Department shall take such actions and give such direction as is necessary to
abate the violation or condition and shall advise the responsible party orally
and in writing if the violation or condition is not immediately abated, the
responsible party and/or property owner shall be held responsible for the cost
of providing any additional law enforcement services beyond the initial
response as provided in this Chapter. Such direction shall be given to the
person responsible for the party, gathering or other assemblage of persons or
on whose property it is located. If the violation or condition is not
voluntarily abated or if it otherwise becomes necessary to call in additional
Culver City Police Department personnel or take additional action in order to
terminate the gathering, quell any disturbance, direct traffic, cite illegally
parked vehicles or otherwise respond to the situation, then the cost of such
additional law enforcement services beyond the initial response shall be
reimbursed to the City as provided in §
9.06.015.
('65 Code, § 22-73) (Ord. No. 94-026 § 1 (part))
§ 9.06.015 COST REIMBURSEMENT REQUIRED.
   A.   The person or persons responsible for a party, gathering or other
assemblage of persons described in §
9.06.010, or on whose property the gathering is held, or if such person is a
minor, then the parents or legal guardians of the minor shall be jointly and
severally liable for the following costs attributable to the event, or, if
lower, the amount established by resolution of the City Council:
      1.   The actual cost to the City of law enforcement services beyond the
initial response by a police officer necessary to abate the violations or
conditions described in §
9.06.010.
      2.   Damage to public property resulting from such law enforcement
response; and
      3.   Injuries to law enforcement personnel incurred in such law
enforcement response.
      4.   Any legal costs associated with the collection of Subsections 1.,
2., or 3. above.
   B.   The Police Department shall compute the cost of providing such services
in accordance with the schedule of rates and charges for personnel and
equipment contained in the law enforcement service agreement with the City and
advise the City Manager of such costs, as well as any other costs of damage to
public property or injuries to personnel resulting from the law enforcement
response. The person responsible for the party, gathering or other assemblage
or on whose property the party, gathering or other assemblage takes place shall
be billed for these costs by the City Manager upon notice of the charges from
the Culver City Police Department and payment shall be due and payable within
fifteen (15) days of the billing date. Should the amount due not be paid, the
City may collect the debt, as well as any costs incurred in collecting the debt
due to nonpayment, pursuant to any available provision of law.
('65 Code, § 22-74) (Ord. No. 94-026 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 9.06.020 WRITTEN NOTICE.
   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to prepare appropriate
advisory procedures to be followed by police officers responding to a party,
gathering or other assemblage, including preparation of written materials
advising the responsible person or person of the provisions of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 22-75) (Ord. No. 94-026 § 1 (part))
§ 9.06.025 PENALTY.
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, a violation of any of the provisions of
this Subchapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000), six (6) months in jail, or both.
   B.   Nothing in this Subchapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
prosecuting a violation of this Subchapter as an infraction, at his/her
discretion, as set forth in §
1.01.035 B. of this code.
   C.   Nothing in this Subchapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
bringing a civil action, at his/her discretion, for violations of the
provisions of this Subchapter, as set forth in §
1.01.050 of this code.
('65 Code, § 22-1) (Ord. No. 96-034 § 2)
PARADES
§ 9.06.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any march or procession consisting of persons, animals or vehicles,
or combination thereof, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public
place which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or
controls.
(‘65 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
Cross-reference:
   Streets, sidewalks and parkways, see
Ch. 9.08
§ 9.06.105 PERMIT COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   A.   No person shall conduct, manage or participate in any parade without a
special event permit from the City.
   B.   No person shall violate any of the terms and conditions of a parade
permit.
(‘65 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.110 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A.   Any person desiring to conduct or manage a parade shall not less than
forty (40) nor more than one hundred and eighty (180) days before the date on
which the parade is proposed to be conducted file a verified application for a
special event permit with the City pursuant to section §
17.520.025.
      1.   The application shall contain:
         a.   The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the
parade chairman and the address and telephone numbers of each; the assembly
area, disbanding area and the route to be traveled; the assembly time, and the
starting time; and
         b.   So far as reasonably practicable, the disbanding time; the
maximum parade length; the total number of bands, sound vehicles or musical
units, if any, their type and number of members in each unit; the total number
of marching units, if any, their type and the number of members in each unit;
the number of animals, if any, and type; the number of floats, if any, their
size, type and how powered; the space between the units and their speed.
   B.   If such parade is to be held by or on behalf of any organization, other
than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file a statement in
writing from such organization, authorizing the applicant to apply for such
permit on its behalf.
   C.   The City Manager or their designee shall have authority, upon a showing
of good cause, to consider any application for a permit to conduct a parade
which is filed less than forty (40) days before the date such parade is
proposed to be conducted.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subchapter, if the
applicant for a parade permit files a declaration signed under penalty of
perjury, stating the reasons the proposed parade is topical and time is of the
essence and demands, in writing, immediate consideration of the application,
the Chief of Police, City Manager and Fire Chief, or their designees, shall
form an ad hoc committee to consider the application. Such ad hoc committee
shall consider the application no later than 5:00 p.m. on the first full
working day after the filing of the declaration and written demand. Such
consideration shall be limited by the provisions set forth in §
9.06.140.
(‘65 Code, § 3-3) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 84-035 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009
§ 22 (part); Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.115 PERMIT FEES.
   Any applicant for a parade permit shall pay a fee, as established by
resolution, at the time of filing any application for a parade permit.
(‘65 Code, § 3-4) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2007-002 § 6; Ord. No. 2025-
001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.120 INVESTIGATION BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Upon the filing of the application, it shall be referred to the Police Chief
or their designee for investigation, report and recommendation. The
investigation shall be completed and a report and recommendation made in
writing to the City Manager or their designee. If the report recommends denial
of the permit to the applicant, the grounds for the recommended denial shall be
set forth. At the time of the filing of the report and recommendation with the
City Manager or their designee, a copy thereof shall be served personally or by
certified mail on the applicant.
(‘65 Code, § 3-5) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.125 ALTERNATIVE PLAN.
   If the report and recommendation for denial of a permit prepared pursuant to
§
9.06.120 is based in whole or in part, on the date, hour, or route of travel,
the applicant may submit a proposed alternative date, route of travel or hours.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.130 [RESERVED]
§ 9.06.135 CONDITIONS OF GRANTING PERMIT.
   A.   The City, when granting a special event permit for a parade, shall
uniformly impose reasonable conditions concerning:
      1.   The assembly area and time therefor;
      2.   The starting time;
      3.   The minimum and maximum speeds;
      4.   The route of the parade;
      5.   The portions of streets to be traversed that may be occupied by such
parade;
      6.   The maximum number of platoons or units and the maximum and minimum
interval of space to be maintained between the units of such parade;
      7.   The maximum length of such parade in miles or fractions thereof;
      8.   The disbanding area and time;
      9.   The number of persons required to monitor the parade;
      10.   The number and types of vehicles, if any;
      11.   The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or
carrying device therefor;
      12.   Such other requirements as are found by the City to be reasonably
necessary for the protection of persons or property.
   B.   When a parade permit is granted, the City shall also impose the
following conditions:
      1.   Permittee shall advise all participants in the parade, either orally
or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit, prior to the
commencement of such parade;
      2.   The amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from sound
trucks, or bull horns be fixed and not variable;
      3.   The parade continues to move at a fixed rate of speed and that any
willful delay or willful stopping of the parade, except when reasonably
required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, shall constitute a
violation of the parade permit; and
      4.   Permittee agrees, in writing, to comply with all the conditions for
such permit.
   C.   Each permit shall contain such conditions in writing.
(‘65 Code, § 3-8) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.140 GRANTING OF PERMIT.
   Upon standards uniformly applied under similar conditions, the City shall
issue the special event permit unless the City finds that:
   A.   The time, route and size of the parade will disrupt to an unreasonable
extent the movement of other traffic; or
   B.   The parade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent reasonable police
protection to the City; or
   C.   The permittee has not provided for the services of monitors to control
the orderly conduct of the parade in conformity with such permit; or
   D.   The permittee has failed to provide reasonable means for informing all
the persons participating therein of terms and conditions of such permit; or
   E.   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly and
disbanding areas and along the parade route will prevent proper fire and police
protection or ambulance service; or
   F.   Such parade will not move from its assembly area to its disbanding area
expeditiously or without stopping en route except when reasonably required for
the safe and orderly conduct of the parade; or
   G.   Such parade will interfere with another parade for which a permit has
been granted; or
   H.   Such parade is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of advertising
any product, goods, wares, merchandise, or event, and is to be held for private
profit.
(‘65 Code, § 3-9) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.145 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The City Manager or their designee shall deny such permit only when:
   A.   The City makes any finding specified in §
9.06.140 as cause for not issuing such permit; or
   B.   The statements contained in the application are found to be false; or
   C.   The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all
conditions of the permit.
(‘65 Code, § 3-10) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.150 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   When the City Manager or their designee denies an application, it may
authorize the conduct of such parade on a date, or an hour, or over a route
different from that requested by the applicant. If the applicant desires to
accept the proposed date, time and route, a written notice of acceptance shall
be filed within three (3) days. The City Manager or their designee shall
thereupon issue a permit. Such permit shall conform to the requirements of §
9.06.125.
(‘65 Code, § 3-11) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.155 OFFICIALS TO BE NOTIFIED.
   Immediately upon the granting of a parade permit, the City Manager or their
designee shall send notice thereof to:
   A.   The Public Works Director;
   B.   The general manager or administrative head of each public
transportation utility, the regular routes of which will be affected by the
route of the parade;
   C.   The Postmaster of the Culver City Post Office;
   D.   The Fire Chief; and
   E.   The Police Chief.
(‘65 Code, § 3-12) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.160 INTERFERENCE WITH PARADE.
   No person shall join or participate in any permitted parade without the
consent of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or
orderly conduct.
(‘65 Code, § 3-13) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.165 APPEALS.
   The decision on an application for a special event permit for parade may be
appealed as provided in §
17.520.040.
(Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.06.170 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit for a parade issued hereunder may be summarily revoked by the
City at any time when by reason of disaster, public calamity or other
emergency, the City determines that the safety of persons or property demands
such revocation.
(‘65 Code, § 3-16) (Ord. No. 84-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 9.07: NOISE REGULATIONS
Section
   
9.07.005   Declaration of policy
   
9.07.010   Definitions
   
9.07.015   Violations; penalties
   
9.07.020   Noise disturbances prohibited; specific prohibitions
   
9.07.025   Street sales
   
9.07.030   Animals and fowl
   
9.07.035   Construction
   
9.07.040   Stationary nonemergency signaling devices
   
9.07.045   Emergency signaling devices
   
9.07.050   Domestic power tools
   
9.07.055   Amplified sounds
   
9.07.060   Exemptions from provisions
   
9.07.065   Conflict of provisions
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances declared and prohibited, see §
9.04.020
§ 9.07.005 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   A.   In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise in the
City of Culver City, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to
prohibit or limit such noise generated from or by all sources as specified in
this Chapter.
   B.   It shall be the policy of the City to maintain, preserve and enhance
the quiet atmosphere of the City, to implement programs aimed at retaining
ambient noise levels throughout the City, and to mitigate noise conflicts. It
is determined that certain noise levels are detrimental to the public health,
welfare and safety, and are contrary to the public interest. Therefore,
creating, maintaining, causing, or allowing to be created, caused, or
maintained, any noise in a manner prohibited by the provisions of this Chapter
is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such.
('65 Code, § 23-44.1) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.07.010 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used
in this Chapter are defined in this Section. All terminology used in this
Chapter not defined below shall be in conformance with applicable publications
of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The
following words, phrases, and terms as used in this Section shall have the
meanings as follows:
   AMBIENT NOISE. The composite of all noise from sources near and far, none of
which are particularly dominant. The AMBIENT NOISE constitutes the normal or
existing level of environmental noise at a given location.
   AMPLIFIED SOUND. Sound enhanced by use of electronic equipment.
   A-WEIGHTED NOISE LEVEL. The sound level in decibels as measured on a sound
level meter using the A-Weighted scale. The level so read is designated in dBA.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. A parcel of real property zoned and used entirely, or
partially, for commercial purposes.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, demolition, assembly, erection,
substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, or related services or
activities, for or of private property, structures, utilities, or public
rights-of-way.
   CUMULATIVE. An additive period of time composed of individual time segments
which may be continuous or interrupted.
   DECIBEL. A unit for measuring the amplitude of sound, equal to ten (10)
times the logarithm (to the base of ten (10)) of the ratio of the two (2) mean
square values of sound pressure, voltage, or current.
   DOMINANT NOISE SOURCE. The most significant source of noise at a given
location which is identifiable by the Officer.
   EQUIVALENT SOUND LEVEL (LEQ). Constant noise level that, in a given
situation and time period, contains the same acoustic energy as the actual
time-varying A-weighted sound level.
   EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
emergency.
   FIXED NOISE SOURCE. A stationary device which creates noise while in a fixed
or stationary position including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial
machinery and equipment, pumps, fan compressors, generators, air conditioners,
and refrigeration equipment.
   IMPULSIVE NOISE. A noise of short duration usually of high intensity with an
abrupt onset and rapid decay. Impulsive noise sources include but are not
limited to impact wrenches, pneumatic hammers, hammering devices, explosions,
fire arms and other similar noise sources.
   INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY. A parcel of real property which is zoned and used
entirely or partially for industrial purposes.
   INTRUSIVE NOISE. That alleged offensive noise which exceeds the existing
ambient noise at a given location.
   MOBILE NOISE SOURCE. Any noise source other than a fixed noise source.
   NOISE. An unwanted sound which is generally random in nature.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any noise which, as judged by a City employee or City-
employed agent that annoys or disturbs a reasonable person or exceeds the
standard set forth in this Chapter. Compliance with the quantitative standards
as listed herein shall constitute elimination of a noise disturbance.
   NOISE LEVEL (LN). The sound pressure level as measured with a sound level
meter.
   PERCENT NOISE LEVEL (%). That noise level expressed in decibels which
exceeds the specified (LN) value as a percentage of total time measured. For
instance, an L25 noise level means that noise level which is exceeded twenty-
five percent (25%) of the time measured.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or
corporation including any officer, employee, department, agency, or
instrumentality of a State or political subdivision of a State.
   PITCH. The frequency of a noise.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, parkway, trail, public way, sidewalk, bike
path, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental
entity.
   PURE TONE. Any noise which is judged as audible as a single frequency or a
set of single frequencies. Pure tones include but are not limited to noise from
whistles, bells, fans or other mechanical devices that emit audible tones.
   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person or a public right-of-way.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A parcel of real property which is zoned and used
either in part or in whole for residential purposes.
   SOUND. A pressure oscillation in air which is capable of evoking the
sensation of hearing.
   SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any device for the amplification of the human
voice, music, or any other sound, excluding automobile radios when used and
heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed,
and, as used in the Chapter, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles
or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety
purposes.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, output
meter, and frequency weighing networks for the measurement of noise and sound
levels, which satisfies the requirements pertinent for Type A meters in
American National Standards Institute specifications for Sound Level Meters,
S1.4-1983, or the most recent revision thereof.
   SOUND TRUCK. Any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, except public health
and safety vehicles, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or
stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound amplifying
equipment.
   VIBRATION. The minimum ground or structure-borne shaking motion necessary to
cause a normal person to be aware of the shaking by such direct means as, but
not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observations of moving objects.
   WEEKDAY. Any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a City specified
holiday.
('65 Code, § 23-44.2) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.07.015 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   A.   Prima facie violation. Any noise which is reasonably determined to be
excessively loud, piercing, or offensive to occupants of neighboring properties
or peace officers called to the location of the noise shall be deemed prima
facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Penalty for violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined in an amount not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or
be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months or by both fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Additional remedy. The operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this Chapter
which causes or creates noise levels exceeding the allowable limits as
specified, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement
summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction. Additionally, no provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to
impair by common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom,
or any person from injury or damage arising from any violation of this Chapter
or from other law.
   D.   Severability. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this
Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, or
application of the provisions of this Chapter, which are effective without the
invalid provisions or application and, therefore, the provisions of this
Chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
('65 Code, § 23-44.3) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.07.020 NOISE DISTURBANCES PROHIBITED; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall unnecessarily make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any noise disturbance. The following actions, and the causing or
permitting thereof, are prohibited and are declared to be in violation of this
Chapter.
('65 Code, § 23-44.4) (Ord. No. 94-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.07.025 STREET SALES.
   A.   It is prohibited for any person to offer for sale, sell or advertise
anything, by shouting or outcry within any area of the City. The provisions of
this Section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of
merchandise, food, and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs,
circuses, or other similar licensed public entertainment events.
   B.   It is prohibited for any person to operate a horn or bell or similar
signaling device on a lunch truck within a residential area.
('65 Code, § 23-44.5) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.07.030 ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   Any animal or fowl which emanates sound or outcry in an excessive,
continuous, or untimely fashion, shall be considered a public nuisance and is
subject to abatement pursuant to
Chapter 9.04 of the Culver City Municipal Code.
('65 Code, § 23-44.6) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part))
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful to keep a nuisance animal, see §
9.01.710
§ 9.07.035 CONSTRUCTION.
   A.   All construction activity shall be prohibited, except between the hours
of:
       8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Mondays through Fridays
       9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Saturdays
      10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Sundays
   B.   It is prohibited for any person to operate a device, which amplifies
music or sound, at a construction site in a manner that results in noise levels
that are audible beyond the construction site property line.
   C.   Construction activity of a specific nature (such as the pouring of
concrete), with a limited duration, in non- residential zoning districts (as
set forth in Article 2 of Title 17, Zoning, of this Code), on construction
sites one (1) acre or greater in size, during the times prohibited by
Subsection A. of this Section may be authorized, provided such exception has
been determined to be in the public interest and one (1) of the following
permits has been issued:
      1.   A land use permit, processed in accordance with the provisions of
Article 5 of Title 17, Zoning, of this Code. The request for extended
construction hours shall accompany the land use permit application and include
detailed facts showing that the public interest will be served by allowing the
extended construction hours. The request shall be considered in conjunction
with the project as a whole and shall be subject to conditions of approval as
determined to be necessary by the decision making authority.
      2.   A Temporary Use Permit approved by the City Council, processed in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.520. At least fifteen (15) days
prior to the anticipated date of decision on the Temporary Use Permit
application, notice of the Temporary Use Permit application shall be mailed to
all property owners and occupants within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of
the construction site. Applications for a Temporary Use Permit shall set forth
detailed facts showing that the public interest will be served by the issuance
of such permit.
   D.   In the case of an emergency, the Building Official may issue a permit
for construction activity for periods during which construction activity is
prohibited by Subsection A. of this Section. Such permit shall be issued for
only the period of the emergency.
   E.   The City Council shall retain the right to impose more restrictive
hours of construction upon any project by adding appropriate conditions to the
approval of any Use Permits that are required for the project.
   F.   Home repairs and routine maintenance of personal property such as
automobiles or boats are not considered construction.
   G.   All minor exterior home improvement construction activities such as,
but not limited to roof replacement, and patio construction shall be subject to
the provisions of this Chapter.
(‘65 Code, § 23-44.7) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 95-014 § 1; Ord.
2016-011 § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Administrative Assessment Cost Recovery Program, see §§
15.02.900 through
15.02.915
§ 9.07.040 STATIONARY NONEMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICES.
   A.   It is prohibited for any person to intentionally sound or permit the
sounding outdoors of any electronically-amplified signal from any stationary
bell, chime, siren, whistle, automobile or vehicle alarm or similar device
intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than
fifteen (15) seconds in any hour.
   B.   It is prohibited for any person to operate or permit the operation of a
horn or bell or any other signaling device on a parking lot sweeper except as
required by law.
   C.   Church bells and chimes sounding at a church site or Veteran's
Auditorium or other City facility shall be exempt from the provisions of this
Section.
('65 Code, § 23-44.9) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.07.045 EMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICES.
   A.   It is prohibited for any person to intentionally sound or permit the
sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle,
or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes
or for testing as provided in Subsection B. of this Section.
   B.   The testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur
except between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Any such testing shall only use the
minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed sixty (60)
seconds. The testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the
functioning of the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling
device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month.
   C.   It is prohibited for any person to sound or permit the sounding of any
exterior audible burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm
unless such alarm is automatically terminated within fifteen (15) minutes after
activation. Repetition of the sounding of the alarm within a twenty-four (24)
hour period for nonemergency reasons shall constitute a violation.
('65 Code, § 23-44.10) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part))
§ 9.07.050 DOMESTIC POWER TOOLS.
   A.   It is prohibited for any person to operate or permit the operation of
any power saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool, or
pneumatic or other air-powered tool except between7:30 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. so
as to be audible at or beyond the property line where the tool is located.
   B.   It is prohibited for any person to operate, or permit the operation of
any gasoline-powered lawn mower, leaf blowers, or similar equipment within the
City except between the hours of 8:00 a.m.and 6:00 p.m. Mondays through
Fridays, and between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays and
Sundays. Additional restrictions apply to the operation of leaf blowers, as set
forth in Section 9.04.015I. of this Code.
(‘65 Code, § 23-44.11) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017- 015, § 2)
§ 9.07.055 AMPLIFIED SOUNDS.
   A.   Electronic devices. It is prohibited for any person to permit the
transmission of, or cause to be transmitted, any amplified sound on any public
street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, park, or any other public place or
property which sound is audible at fifty (50) feet. This Section shall not
apply to any noncommercial public speaking, public assembly, or other activity
for which a permit has been issued.
('65 Code, § 23-44.12)
   B.   On private property. It shall be prohibited for any persons to operate
a loud speaker or sound amplifying equipment for the purposes of transmitting
messages, giving instructions or providing entertainment which is audible at a
distance of fifty (50) feet or beyond the subject's property line without first
filing an application and obtaining a permit as set forth in this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 23-44.13)
   C.   Permits. Every user of sound amplifying equipment on public or private
property, except block parties which have obtained a permit from the Chief of
Police or activities in public parks which have obtained a permit for use of
amplifying equipment from the Parks, Recreation and Community Services
Department shall file an application with the City at least ten (10) days prior
to the day on which the sound amplifying equipment is to be used.
      1.   Restrictions. The commercial and noncommercial use of sound
amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following restrictions:
         a.   The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech,
or both.
         b.   The operation of sound amplifying equipment shall occur only
between the hours of:
             8:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday
             8:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. Friday,
            10:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. Saturday,
            10:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. Sunday and City specified holidays
      2.   Exempt from these hours of operation are those activities which are
authorized by the City of Culver City or the public school districts serving
the residents of the City, including the use of the Civic Center facilities,
athletic fields and courts, community centers, and the conduct of City approved
special events.
(‘65 Code, § 23-44.14) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2002-005 § 1
(part); Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 9.07.060 EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS.
   A.   Emergency exemptions. The emission of noise for the purpose of alerting
persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of noises in the
performance of emergency work is exempted from the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Warning devices. Warning devices necessary for the protection of public
safety, as for example fire, police and ambulance sirens, including the testing
of such devices, are exempted from the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   Outdoor activities. Permitted activities conducted on public
playgrounds and public or private school grounds including but not limited to
school athletic and entertainment events are exempted from the provisions of
this Chapter.
   D.   Trash collection activities. All trash collection activities in
residential area within the City are exempted from the provisions of this
Chapter if after 7:00 a.m.
   E.   Public utilities. Public utilities operating under the authority of the
Public Utilities Commission are exempted from the provisions of this Chapter
only when specifically authorized through the City's permit system.
   F.   Filming activity.  Filming activity conducted in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 11.14 is exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 23-44.15) (Ord. No. 95-004 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2004-018 § 2)
§ 9.07.065 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   In the event of any conflict between this Chapter and any other provisions
of this Code, this Chapter shall prevail.
('65 Code, § 23-46) (Ord. No. CS-653 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 9.08: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PARKWAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
9.08.005   Definition
   
9.08.010   Obstructions prohibited
   
9.08.015   Obstructing view of traffic
   
9.08.020   Certain trees deemed obstruction
   
9.08.025   Sidewalk openings regulated
   
9.08.030   Water sprinkling prohibition
   
9.08.035   Use of public right-of-way for outdoor dining or other uses
   
9.08.040   Use of sidewalks for outdoor display of goods
   
9.08.045   Import and export of earth materials on public streets
Use of Streets for Moving Purposes
   
9.08.100   Moving regulations
   
9.08.105   Permits classified
   
9.08.110   Permit required
   
9.08.115   Compliance with site plan review requirements prior to issuance of
certain permits
   
9.08.120   Permit unobtainable; old buildings
   
9.08.125   Application; contents
   
9.08.130   Permit fees
   
9.08.135   Separate permits required
   
9.08.140   Permits supplemental to other required permits
   
9.08.145   Damage
   
9.08.150   Applicability of regulations
   
9.08.155   Fee waiver
   
9.08.160   Red light required
   
9.08.165   Look-outs to be maintained
Tree Removal
   
9.08.200   Definitions
   
9.08.205   Public works director authority and duties
   
9.08.210   Removal of trees in parkways; application procedure, notice and
appeals
   
9.08.215   Removal of trees in parkways related to private improvement or
development project
   
9.08.220   Director-initiated removal of trees in street medians and parkways;
notice and objections
   
9.08.225   Violations unlawful; penalties; administrative cost recovery
   
9.08.230   Conflict of provisions
Excavations
   
9.08.300   Definitions
   
9.08.305   Permit requirements
   
9.08.307   Rights-of-way management procedures, fees and standards
   
9.08.310   Exceptions
   
9.08.315   Annual blanket permit
   
9.08.320   Business license requirements
   
9.08.325   Permit; application and issuance
   
9.08.330   Permit fee and deposit; exceptions
   
9.08.335   Schedule of charges
   
9.08.340   Additional work; guarantee deposit
   
9.08.345   Liability insurance
   
9.08.350   Return of deposit and cancellation of bond
   
9.08.355   Decision of City Engineer final
   
9.08.360   Accounting of deposits
   
9.08.365   Obstructing street or fire hydrant
   
9.08.370   Display of permit
   
9.08.375   Work to be expedited; revocation of permit
   
9.08.380   Division of Public Works may repair damage; remove material or
debris
   
9.08.385   Authority to close streets
   
9.08.390   Barriers, lights and signs; wrongful removal
   
9.08.400   Duty to provide safe passage and drainage
   
9.08.405   Storage of materials
   
9.08.410   Compliance with specifications
   
9.08.415   Driveways; sidewalks
   
9.08.420   Underground installations
   
9.08.425   Removal of obstructions; notice; interference with utility
facilities
   
9.08.430   Damage to grass, plants and trees
   
9.08.435   Limitations
Use of Streets for Bus Benches
   
9.08.500   Definitions
   
9.08.505   Permits required
   
9.08.510   Award of contract; compliance with regulations
   
9.08.515   Proposal for contract
   
9.08.520   Location permits; application; terms
   
9.08.525   Existing benches
Newsracks
   
9.08.600   Definitions
   
9.08.605   Prohibition; newsracks on roadways, sidewalks, parkways
   
9.08.610   Insurance and indemnification
   
9.08.615   Location and placement
   
9.08.620   Moving of newsracks
   
9.08.625   Newsrack requirements
   
9.08.630   Noncompliance with provisions
   
9.08.635   Removal of machines
   
9.08.640   Summary removal of machines
   
9.08.645   Notice of impoundment
   
9.08.650   Impounded machines; return; sale or disposal
   
9.08.655   Request for hearing and appeal process; procedures
   
9.08.660   Display of certain matter prohibited
   
9.08.665   Applicability of provisions
   
9.08.670   Penalty
   
9.08.675   Severability
Parkway Landscaping Guidelines
   
9.08.705   Definitions
   
9.08.710   Residential parkway landscaping guidelines
   
9.08.715   Parkways in non- residential zones; permit required
   
9.08.720   Violations unlawful; remedies
   
9.08.725   Conflict of provisions
Cross-reference:
   Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund, see §
3.07.200
   Scattering of refuse on streets, and the like, see §
5.01.035
   Parades, see §§
9.06.100 through
9.06.170
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 9.08.005 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the word STREET shall include all streets,
parkways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or
other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated
and opened to public use.
('65 Code, § 30-1) (Ord. No. 460 § 1)
§ 9.08.010 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying, having
charge or control of any lot or premises, to allow, keep or maintain any of the
following obstructions:
   A.   Any tree, bush, grain or vegetation growing upon any lot or premises
abutting any street or sidewalk so that the limbs, twigs, leaves or parts of
such interfere with the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
   B.   Any soil, rubbish, papers, trash, garden refuse, tree trimmings, ashes,
tin cans, or other waste or refuse to remain upon any sidewalk or upon any
street which may interfere with or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles or which may become detrimental to the public health or welfare.
   C.   Any structure, building or other obstacle of any nature whatever upon
any sidewalk or street which will interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles.
   D.   Except as provided in §
9.08.040 of this Chapter, any merchandise, baggage, or any article of personal
property upon any sidewalk, except that boxes, barrels and other receptacles
for merchandise may be unpacked and their contents removed upon sidewalks, if
such containers are removed immediately thereafter.
('65 Code, § 30-2) (Ord. No. 460 § 2; Ord. No. 96-018 § 3)
§ 9.08.015 OBSTRUCTING VIEW OF TRAFFIC.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any hedge, wall or closed fence adjacent to a
driveway abutting a sidewalk or street to be kept or maintained at such height
as to obstruct the view of the driver of a vehicle backing into the street from
said driveway.
('65 Code, § 30-4) (Ord. No. 613 § 4)
§ 9.08.020 CERTAIN TREES DEEMED OBSTRUCTION.
   Trees or bushes of more than fifteen (15) feet in height growing in or upon
the portion of any premises abutting any street or sidewalk; shall be deemed to
interfere with and obstruct the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles within
the meaning of this Subchapter unless the lower limbs, twigs, or leaves of such
trees or bushes are kept removed at all times so as to have a clearance of at
least nine (9) feet above such street or sidewalk.
('65 Code, § 30-5) (Ord. No. 460 § 2)
§ 9.08.025 SIDEWALK OPENINGS REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any permanent
opening in any sidewalk, unless the same is constructed and maintained in the
manner required in this Subchapter.
   A.   Type of opening required. Every opening in any sidewalk shall be
covered with metal trap doors, the sides of which shall not be less than four
(4) feet from the outer edge of any curb, and no door shall have a width
greater than five (5) feet. Metal guards shall be provided and maintained at
each opening, each of which shall reach to the height of such doors when open
and shall be constructed of wire mesh, the meshes of which shall not exceed
three (3) inches in the greatest dimension. Every metal cover shall be flush
with the surface when closed and the upper surface shall be roughened. It shall
be capable of sustaining a load, at all points simultaneously, equal to four
hundred (400) pounds for each superficial foot of the surface thereof.
   B.   Requirements for opening. It shall be unlawful for any person to open a
door required herein covering any sidewalk opening, unless a metal guard, as
required herein, is placed on each side of the opening except when merchandise
is actually being conveyed from the opening and a person is stationed for the
purpose of warning passers-by.
('65 Code, § 30-6) (Ord. No. 460 § 3)
§ 9.08.030 WATER SPRINKLING PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause water to be thrown upon any
sidewalk in such a manner as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted
passage of any pedestrian thereupon.
('65 Code, § 30-7) (Ord. No. 460 § 4)
§ 9.08.035 USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR OUTDOOR DINING OR OTHER USES.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this Subchapter is to authorize the
administrative permitting of public right-of- way, including sidewalks and
curbside parking spaces, for outdoor dining and other uses as set forth in the
Outdoor Dining Standards and Procedures or Parklet Design Guidelines, in areas
where the establishment of such uses will promote commercial revitalization and
business opportunities in a manner that is consistent with the public health,
safety and welfare.. (‘65 Code, § 30-58.1)
   B.   Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      OUTDOOR DINING PERMIT AND LICENSE AGREEMENT. The permit issued by the
City to a person or business authorizing the use of the sidewalk for outdoor
dining or other uses as set forth in the Outdoor Dining Standards and
Procedures.
      OUTDOOR DINING STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES. Standards and procedures for the
design and operation of the sidewalk to be used for outdoor dining and other
uses, which shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
      PARKLET DESIGN GUIDELINES. Standards and procedures for the design and
operation of curbside parking spaces to be used for outdoor dining and other
uses, which shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
      PARKLET STREET USE PERMIT AND LICENSE AGREEMENT. The permit issued by the
City to a person or business authorizing the use of curbside parking spaces for
outdoor dining or other uses as set forth in the Parklet Design Guidelines.
      PERMIT. Individually or collectively, a valid Outdoor Dining Permit and
License Agreement and/or a valid Parklet Street Use Permit and License
Agreement.
      PERMITTEE. The holder of an Outdoor Dining Permit and License Agreement
or a Parklet Street Use Permit and License Agreement issued by the City.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Includes, but is not limited to, sidewalks and
curbside parking spaces.
   C.   Applicability.  
      1.   In order to use the public right-of-way for outdoor dining or other
uses as set forth in the Outdoor Dining Standards and Procedures or Parklet
Design Guidelines, a person or business must obtain, as applicable, an Outdoor
Dining Permit and License Agreement or Parklet Street Use Permit and License
Agreement as provided in this Subchapter.
      2.   Each permit shall provide for, but not be limited to, the
indemnification of the City by the permittee, a requirement to maintain
liability and other insurance coverage, and a refundable maintenance deposit
for damage that may be caused to the public right-of-way. (‘65 Code, § 30-58.2)
   D.   Public Works Director/City Engineer authority.
      1.   The Public Works Director/City Engineer is authorized to approve and
execute, on behalf of the City:
         a.   An Outdoor Dining Permit and License Agreement, subject to the
adopted Outdoor Dining Standards and Procedures; and
         b.   A Parklet Street Use Permit and License Agreement, subject to the
adopted Parklet Design Guidelines.
      2.   In addition to all other remedies provided by law or set forth in
the permit, the Public Works Director/City Engineer is authorized to suspend or
revoke:
         a.   An Outdoor Dining Permit and License Agreement for violation of
its terms and conditions or violation of the adopted Outdoor Dining Standards
and Procedures; and
         b.   A Parklet Street Use Permit and License Agreement for violation
of its terms and conditions or violation of the adopted Parklet Design
Guidelines.
(‘65 Code, § 30-58.3)
   E.   Placement and removal of fixtures and equipment in the public right-of-
way.
      1.   Notwithstanding §
9.08.010 of this Code, fixtures and equipment approved by the Public Works
Director/City Engineer pursuant to a permit may remain in and on the public
right-of-way during such time as a permit is in effect.
      2.   Upon revocation or termination of a permit, all fixtures and
equipment shall immediately be removed from the public right-of-way, and the
public right-of-way shall be restored to its original condition at permittee’s
sole cost and expense.
      3.   After revocation or termination of permit, permittee's failure to
remove all fixtures and equipment or to restore the public right-of-way to its
original condition, or both, shall be deemed a nuisance affecting the public’s
health, safety and welfare, and is prohibited. In such a case, permittee’s
maintenance deposit shall be forfeited.
(‘65 Code, § 30-58.4)
   F.   Use of public right-of- way for outdoor dining or other use prohibited.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person or business to use the public right-of-way for outdoor dining or other
use without first obtaining a permit. (‘65 Code, § 30-58.5)
   G.   Fees. The City Council, by resolution, may establish fees for the use
of the public right-of-way for outdoor dining and other uses.
(Ord. No. 94-015 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2021-011 § 1)
§ 9.08.040 USE OF SIDEWALKS FOR OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF GOODS.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this Subchapter is to authorize the
administrative permitting of the outdoor display of certain goods in specified
areas of the City where the establishment and operation of such outdoor
displays will promote commercial revitalization and business opportunities in a
manner that is consistent with the public welfare and safety.
('65 Code, § 30-59.1)
   B.   Applicability.
      1.   Outdoor displays of goods shall be permitted only in the Downtown
and East Washington Overlay Zones in the City, pursuant to the Zoning Code, as
set forth in Title 17 of this Code.
      2.   In order to use the sidewalk for the outdoor display of goods, a
person must obtain an Outdoor Display of Goods Permit, as provided in this
Subchapter, which shall provide for indemnification of the City and the
maintenance of liability insurance coverage. Regulations and Standards for the
operation of outdoor displays of goods shall be established by resolution of
the City Council.
('65 Code, § 30-59.2)
   C.   City Planner authority.
      1.   The City Planner is authorized to approve and execute, on behalf of
the City, an Outdoor Display of Goods Permit, subject to the Regulations and
Standards adopted by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   In addition to all other remedies provided by law or agreement, the
City Planner is authorized to suspend or revoke the Outdoor Display of Goods
Permit for violation of this Subchapter or the adopted Regulations and
Standards.
('65 Code, § 30-59.3)
   D.   Use of public sidewalk and private property for outdoor display of
goods prohibited. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, it shall
be unlawful for any person to use the public sidewalk and private property for
the outdoor display of goods without a valid Outdoor Display of Goods Permit.
('65 Code, § 30-59.4)
   E.   This section does not apply to sidewalk vending as regulated by
Chapter 11.18 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 96-018 § 4 (part); Ord. No. 2023-006 § 5)
(Ord. No. 96-018 § 4 (part))
Cross-reference:
   Street sales, see §
9.07.025
§ 9.08.045 IMPORT AND EXPORT OF EARTH MATERIALS ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   A.   Permit.
      1.   No person shall import or export more than one thousand (1,000)
cubic yards of earth materials along a public street to or from a site within
the City of Culver City without first having obtained a permit therefor from
the City Engineer.
      2.   The City Engineer may approve the issuance of the permit upon the
imposition of reasonable conditions, including but not limited to:
         a.   The times and date(s) during which the importing or exporting
shall be conducted.
         b.   The route along public streets to be followed during the
importing or exporting.
         c.   Requirements regarding dust control and noise control.
         d.   Submission of a bond, or other security, in an amount and form
subject to the approval of the City Attorney and City exporting activity is, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, in need of same.
         e.   Submission of evidence of insurance, in an amount and form
subject to the approval of the City Attorney, including the City and its
officers and employees as additional insureds and with endorsements as
required.
         f.   Any other reasonable condition that the City Engineer determines
necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare.
      3.   Before the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall pay a fee
based upon the total number of cubic yards of earth materials to be imported or
exported and upon the miles of public street to be traversed, excepting
freeways, at a rate as established by a resolution of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 30-60)
   B.   Establishing truck routes. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
Code, the City Engineer, after consultation with the Chief of Police and if the
public interest is better served, may permit the importing/exporting vehicles
to be driven along routes other than those officially designated as truck
routes.
('65 Code, § 30-61) (Ord. No. 84-023 § 1)
USE OF STREETS FOR MOVING PURPOSES
§ 9.08.100 MOVING REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall govern the moving of buildings, structures,
heavy machinery and equipment.
('65 Code, § 30-8)
§ 9.08.105 PERMITS CLASSIFIED.
   For purposes of this Chapter, permits shall be required for the moving of
buildings, structures, heavy machinery or equipment in accordance with the
following classifications:
   A.   Class A Permit - For any building or structure moved by animal-drawn
vehicles or motor truck or any vehicle propelled by its own power.
   B.   Class B Permit - For any heavy machinery or equipment moved by animal-
drawn vehicles or motor truck or any vehicle propelled by its own power, where
the weight of said machinery or equipment to be moved exceeds 8 tons.
   C.   Class C Permit - For any building or structure which, when loaded on
housemoving dollies or rollers, does not exceed 22 feet in height or 30 feet in
width.
   D.   Class D Permit - For any building or structure which, when loaded on
housemoving dollies or rollers, is more than 22 feet in height but does not
exceed 28 feet in height, and is more than 30 feet in width but does not exceed
40 feet in width.
   E.   Class E Permit - For any building or structure which, when loaded on
housemoving dollies or rollers, exceeds 28 feet in height or exceeds 40 feet in
width.
   F.   Class F Permit - For any building of structure, the walls of which are
constructed of brick or of concrete, which, when loaded on housemoving dollies
or rollers, exceeds 22 feet in height or exceeds 30 feet in width.
('65 Code, § 30-9) (Ord. No. 558 § 1)
§ 9.08.110 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move, or cause
to be moved, any house, building or structure, or any section or portion
thereof, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the Building Official.
The Street Maintenance Manager shall issue Class B permits, as well as approve
route and condition of streets to be traversed.
('65 Code, § 30-10) (Ord. No. 558 §§ 2, 8; Ord. No. 93-002 § 1)
§ 9.08.115 COMPLIANCE WITH SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF
CERTAIN PERMITS.
   The Site Plan review requirements of the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title
17 of this Code, shall be complied with prior to the issuance of Class C, D, E
or F permits.
('65 Code, § 30-11) (Ord. No. 558 § 10; Ord. No. 93-002 § 2)
§ 9.08.120 PERMIT UNOBTAINABLE; OLD BUILDINGS.
   No permit shall be granted for the moving of old dilapidated structures in a
state of disrepair.
('65 Code, § 30-12) (Ord. No. 558 § 10)
§ 9.08.125 APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   Application, in duplicate, for Class A, C, D, E and F permits shall be filed
with the Building Official and Street Maintenance Manager. The application
shall include or be accompanied by each of the following:
   A.   The name of the owner; type of building or structure; present and
proposed location; fair value and approximate age of structure to be moved;
route proposed to be followed; method of moving and time within which moving
will be commenced and completed.
   B.   Necessary authority and permits from operators of public utilities
which might be affected by moving operations.
   C.   A map or sketch of the property on which structure is to be placed,
showing proposed location and any other improvements.
   D.   Photographs of all sides of building or structure, together with
architectural plans of completed structure.
   E.   A Faithful Performance Bond, executed by a responsible surety company,
in an amount recommended by the Building Official as being necessary to bring
the structure up to standards of the immediate area.
   F.   Unless a bond in the sum of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), payable
to the City, is filed with the City Clerk by the moving agency, C, D, E and F
applications must be accompanied by a surety bond in the sum of Five Thousand
Dollars ($5,000.00), in favor of the City, for the benefit of any person, firm
or corporation damaged directly by the moving of a building or structure.
   G.   Any pertinent information required by the Building Official or Street
Maintenance Manager.
('65 Code, § 30-13) (Ord. No. 558 § 3, 4, 6, 10; Ord. No. 93-002 § 3)
§ 9.08.130 PERMIT FEES.
   Each application for permit shall be accompanied by as established by
resolution.
('65 Code, § 30-14) (Ord. No. 558 § 5; Ord. No. 2007-002 § 7)
§ 9.08.135 SEPARATE PERMITS REQUIRED.
   A special permit shall be required for each building, structure, piece of
machinery or equipment, or more than one section or portion thereof, and moving
operations must be completed within time specified in the application unless
the Building Official extends such time for causes which, in his/her opinion,
warrant the extension.
('65 Code, § 30-15) (Ord. No. 558 § 11; Ord. No. 92-002 § 4)
§ 9.08.140 PERMITS SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER REQUIRED PERMITS.
   Permits specified in this Chapter are in addition to all permits required
under any other Chapter of this Code, and all relocated buildings or structures
must conform to all requirements of the Building and other Codes of the City
relating to building, construction, and necessary installations incident
thereto.
('65 Code, § 30-16) (Ord. No. 558 § 12)
§ 9.08.145 DAMAGE.
   Damage to any street, public property or public utility shall be repaired by
the proper City Department and the cost thereof charged to the owner of the
property or the person, firm or corporation to whom moving permit was issued.
No permit shall be issued for repair or reconstruction until all such costs and
fees due the City have been paid.
('65 Code, § 30-17) (Ord. No. 558 § 7)
§ 9.08.150 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all persons, firms or
corporations moving buildings, structures, machinery or equipment within the
City or to the City from an outside location.
('65 Code, § 30-18) (Ord. No. 558 § 9)
§ 9.08.155 FEE WAIVER.
   Where the building, structure, machinery or equipment to be moved is owned
or is to be used or occupied by another public agency, or is located within the
City limits, or where distance moved is short enough to warrant modification of
fees or other requirements, deposit and permit fees may be waived.
('65 Code, § 30-19) (Ord. No. 558 § 9)
§ 9.08.160 RED LIGHT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation moving, or causing to be moved, any building,
structure, machinery or equipment, or section or portion thereof, over, upon,
along or across any public street, alley, or other public place, shall fail,
refuse or neglect to keep a red light burning at all times between sunset and
sunrise at each corner of such section or portion of building, structure,
machinery or equipment, or at the end of any projection thereof, at intervals
of not more than 10 feet, while the same or any part thereof is located in or
upon any public streets, highway, alley, or public place.
('65 Code, § 30-20) (Ord. No. 558 § 13)
§ 9.08.165 LOOK-OUTS TO BE MAINTAINED.
   During such time as any building, structure, machinery or equipment is being
moved and in motion, sufficient look-outs shall be maintained to safeguard
persons or property against injury or damage which might result from such
moving operations.
('65 Code, § 30-21) (Ord. No. 558 § 13)
TREE REMOVAL
§ 9.08.200 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained elsewhere in this Code, the
following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Subchapter, be
defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another
meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with any
other provision of this Code, these definitions shall prevail.
   APPLICANT.  An interested person who has submitted an application for
removal of a parkway tree.
   INTERESTED PERSON.  Except as otherwise provided in this definition, an
INTERESTED PERSON  is an owner, occupant or agent of real property located
within a 100 feet radius of the location of a parkway tree that is proposed for
removal. For purposes of this definition, an INTERESTED PERSON is limited to
owners, occupants and agents of real property located on the same street on
which the proposed parkway tree is located or on a street intersecting the
street on which the proposed parkway tree is located.
   PARKWAY.  That portion of a street right-of-way between the curb and the
sidewalk.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  The City of Culver City Public Works Director/City
Engineer or his/her designee.
   STREET MEDIAN.  A raised area containing landscaping, including trees and/or
hardscape features, located in the street between opposing lanes of traffic.
   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Includes all streets, parkways, sidewalks, highways,
avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in
the City, which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and opened to public
use.
(Ord. No. 2013-007, § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.205 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   The Public Works Director shall have authority over the City’s public right-
of-way and shall be in charge of and have control over the planting, trimming,
and removal of trees in parkways and other public places within the City.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Public Works Director shall
follow and be governed by the procedures set forth in the Tree Planting Act of
1931 (the “Act”) (Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§ 22000 et seq., as amended),
provided, however, that the authority provided to the Board under the Act shall
be vested in the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2013-007, § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.210 REMOVAL OF TREES IN PARKWAYS; APPLICATION PROCEDURE; NOTICE AND
APPEALS.
   A.   The Public Works Director shall have sole authority to cut, trim,
prune, replace or remove any tree in or on any parkway in the City. No other
person shall cut, trim, prune, replace, remove, deface, or in any manner injure
any tree in or on any parkway in the City, except as authorized by the Public
Works Director in the case of a private improvement project in accordance with
§ 
9.08.215.
   B.   Any interested person may request discretionary removal of a parkway
tree by submitting a written application to the Public Works Director, on a
form approved by the City. The written application shall state the name and
address of the applicant, the location of the tree, the reason for the request,
and any other information required by the Public Works Director. The written
application shall be accompanied by a filing fee, established by resolution of
the City Council. A filing fee is not required to request removal of a tree
that is suspected to be in a hazardous or unsafe condition.
   C.   The Public Works Director shall review the application and supporting
documentation to determine whether to approve the removal of the requested
tree. In determining whether any tree in or on the parkway shall be removed or
replaced, the Public Works Director shall determine whether the removal or
replacement is in the best interest of the City and the public health, safety
and welfare. Such determination shall be based on the criteria set forth in
either Subsection C.1 or Subsection C.2 as follows:
      1.   If any one of the following criterion is met:
         a.   The tree is dead, dying, or weakened by disease, age, storm, fire
or other injuries so as to pose an existing or potential danger to persons,
properties, improvements or other trees; or
         b.   The removal is necessary for construction of a Street improvement
project or other public improvement/repair work; or
         c.   The removal is necessary for a private improvement or development
project. Where the application for removal is related to a private improvement
or development project, see § 
9.08.215.
      2.   If two or more other criteria are met:
         a.   The tree is a known problem species or is otherwise found to be
an undesirable species for its location based on tree size relative to
available area for tree growth.
         b.   The tree roots are creating extensive and repeated damage to
public and/or private infrastructure, including sidewalks, sewer lines, or
other utility lines. A history of sewer line blockages from tree roots does not
alone provide sufficient reason for tree removal, but rather suggests the need
for sewer repair to stop leaks and the accompanying root intrusion that
results.
         c.   The tree is creating a public or private nuisance.
   D.   If a Parkway tree is approved for removal, following review of the
criteria listed in Subsection
9.08.210.C, such removal shall be accommodated subject to availability of city
resources and funds. In the event that the applicant desires the approved
removal occur prior to when it can be accommodated by the Public Works
Director, the applicant shall be given the option of paying for the removal, in
which case the tree will be removed at the first opportunity upon receipt of
payment.
   E.   The decision of the Public Works Director is final, unless appealed by
the applicant, a member of the City Council or an interested person. Appeals
shall be submitted in writing and filed with the City Clerk within 10 days
after the decision date identified in the notice of decision. The notice of
decision shall be prepared by the Public Works Director and sent to the
applicant and all interested persons with a copy provided to the City Council.
The number of days shall be construed as City Hall business days. Time limits
will extend to the following City Hall business day, where the last of the
specified number of days falls on a weekend, holiday, or other day when City
Hall is officially closed. An appeal shall include a general statement,
specifying the basis for the appeal, shall be based on an error in fact or
dispute of the findings of the decision, and must be accompanied by supporting
evidence substantiating the basis for the appeal. Appeals shall be accompanied
by a filing fee established by resolution of the City Council.
   F.   Appeals shall be heard by the City Council, which shall affirm the
decision of the Public Works Director, unless the appellant demonstrates, by
substantial evidence, that the decision is based on an error in fact or
disputed findings. The decision of the City Council on an appeal shall be
final.
(Ord. No. 2013-007, § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.215 REMOVAL OF TREES IN PARKWAYS RELATED TO PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT OR
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.
   A.   An application for removal of an existing parkway tree, in accordance
with §§ 
9.08.210.B and
9.08.210.C.1.c, as a necessity for the construction of a private improvement or
development project, shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a registered
consulting arborist, for review and approval by the Public Works Director. The
report shall explain the necessity of removing the tree and evaluate the
feasibility of transplanting the tree(s) to another location.
   B.   If the Public Works Director determines that transplanting the tree(s)
is feasible, the tree(s) shall be relocated, at the sole cost and expense of
the applicant, to a location specified by the Public Works Director. Applicant
has the option of performing this work or paying to the City the cost to have
the work performed by the City’s contractor.
   C.   If the requested tree(s) cannot be transplanted, then the applicant
shall provide sufficient evidence, to be reviewed and considered by the Public
Works Director, that the private improvement or development project cannot be
reasonably redesigned to avoid the removal of the tree(s). If the Public Works
Director determines that a project redesign is not feasible, then removal of
the tree(s) may be approved, on the condition that the applicant shall plant
two new street right-of-way trees or parkway trees for each tree that is
removed. The size and location of the replacement trees shall be determined by
the Public Works Director based on what is appropriate for the particular
Street Right-of-Way or Parkway. Where feasible and appropriate for the
location, the Public Works Director will require 36" box trees or larger for
replacement.
   D.   At the applicant’s sole cost and expense, the replacement trees shall
be planted along the site frontage of the private improvement or development or
in other street median or parkway locations in the City at the discretion and
direction of the Public Works Director. Applicant has the option of performing
this work or paying to the City the cost to have the work performed by the
City’s contractor.
   E.   All new or transplanted street median and/or parkway trees shall be
planted in a tree well with a tree grate, if required, as approved by the
Public Works Director. New or transplanted parkway trees that are located
adjacent to the applicant’s property shall be supplied with irrigation water
from the irrigation system located on the applicant’s property, which system
shall include a timer and rain sensor. With the exception of single family
developments, a landscape/irrigation plan for the new or transplanted parkway
trees, and any other required parkway landscaping, shall be prepared at the
sole expense of the applicant and submitted to the Public Works Director for
review, approval, and permitting.
   F.   Applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance of the transplanted
or new parkway trees that are located adjacent to the applicant’s property for
a period of one year. If a transplanted or new Parkway tree, adjacent to
applicant’s property or otherwise, does not survive during the first year, the
applicant shall be required to plant a replacement tree in accordance with the
requirements of this § 
9.08.215. Applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance of such
replacement tree for a period of one year.
(Ord. No. 2013-007, § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.220 DIRECTOR-INITIATED REMOVAL OF TREES IN STREET MEDIANS AND PARKWAYS;
NOTICE AND OBJECTIONS.
   A.   The Public Works Director has the authority to remove any street median
tree or parkway tree if he or she determines such removal is in the best
interest of the City and the public health, safety and welfare, based on the
criteria listed in § 
9.08.210.C.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in § 
9.08.220.E, prior to removal of any street median tree or parkway tree, the
Public Works Director shall provide to all interested persons 10 days written
notice of the date scheduled for removal of the street median tree or parkway
tree.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in § 
9.08.220.E, if any interested person objects to such removal, his or her
objection must be in writing and filed with the City Clerk at least three days
prior to the date scheduled for removal of the tree. The objection shall state
the name and address of the interested person, the location of the tree and the
reason for the objection.
   D.   Any objection(s) timely filed shall be heard by the City Council at a
regularly scheduled public meeting. The City Council shall consider the
objections and make a determination as to whether the tree shall be removed. In
order to overturn the Public Works Director’s decision, the City Council must
find the decision was based on an error in fact or dispute the findings that
were the basis of the Public Works Director’s decision.
   E.   In any case where the Public Works Director determines that a tree
poses a manifest public danger and its removal is an immediate necessity, the
notice and objection provisions of §§ 
9.08.220.B and
9.08.220.C shall not apply.
(Ord. No. 2013-007, § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.225 VIOLATIONS UNLAWFUL; PENALTIES; ADMINISTRATIVE COST RECOVERY.
   A.   A violation of any provision of this subchapter is unlawful.
   B.   The remedies provided by this subchapter are cumulative and in addition
to any other remedies available in law or equity, including those provided in
Chapters 1.01 and
1.02 of this Code.
   C.   A violation of any provision of this subchapter is subject to a civil
action brought by the City Attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than
one hundred dollars ($100) and not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) per
violation for each day, or part thereof, such violation occurs.
   D.   A violation of any provision of this subchapter may, at the discretion
of the City Attorney, be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor and subject
to the criminal penalties provided in §§ 
1.01.040 and
1.01.045 of this Code.
   E.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any
provision of this subchapter shall also constitute a violation of this
subchapter.
   F.   It is the intent of the City Council to recover the costs incurred by
the City from: (1) enforcing and obtaining compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter; and (2) damage to City property resulting from violations of
this subchapter. Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this
subchapter shall be responsible to the City for the payment of an
administrative assessment for all costs associated with said violation,
including administrative costs of enforcing and obtaining compliance with this
subchapter and actual costs of damage to City property. An administrative
assessment may be appealed in the same manner as an administrative citation,
pursuant to the procedures set forth in § 
1.02.045 of this Code.
   G. In addition to the administrative assessment and civil and criminal
penalties attached to violations of this subchapter, any violation of this
subchapter is hereby declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2013-007, § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.230 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   In the event of any conflict between this subchapter and any other
provisions of this Code or the Tree Planting Act of 1931, this subchapter shall
control.
(Ord. No. 2013-007, § 1 (part))
EXCAVATIONS
§ 9.08.300 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever in this Subchapter the following terms are used, they shall have
the meaning ascribed to them, unless it is apparent from the context thereof
that some other meaning is intended:
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City, or his authorized
representative.
   DIVISION. The Administrative Authority of the Division of Public Works of
the City.
   EXCAVATION. Any opening in the surface of a street made in any manner
whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of the
street, the top of which is flush with the adjoining street surface and so
constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the
street.
   FACILITY.  Any pipe, pipe line, tube, main service trap, vent, vault,
manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, electrolier,
signpost, pole, pole line, cross-arm or bracket, anchor, cable, junction box,
transformer or any other material, structure, or object of any kind or
character not particularly mentioned herein which is or may be lawfully
constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under, or over
any street or portion thereof.
   INCIDENTAL EXPENSES. All expenses incidental to any work authorized by
permit under this Subchapter or incidental to the inspection, supervision or
completion thereof, including a reasonable charge for overhead.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any object, material, instrumentality or impediment in, upon,
along, across, under or over any street, needed or useful for a limited period
of time in performing or doing work in, upon, along, across, under or over such
street or in or upon property in close proximity thereto, whether the same
obstructs travel or not; provided, however, that a barricade, torch, light or
sign when lawfully placed upon, along, or across a street in accordance with
the provisions of this Subchapter shall not be considered an obstruction within
the meaning of this definition.
   PERSON. Includes natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
   STREET BETTERMENT. The grading, paving of a street, gutter, sidewalk,
crosswalk, step, seat, fountain, curb, driveway, tunnel, subway, viaduct,
bridge, sewer, connecting sewer, instrumentality of sanitation, together with
the necessary outlet, drain, channel for drainage purposes with necessary
outlet, pole, post, wire, pipe, conduit, lamp, ornamental light standard and
any suitable or necessary appliance for the purpose of lighting any street,
street or house number, letter or name, hydrant and appliance for fire
protection, retaining wall, embankment or any appliance, attachment or
appurtenance in connection with any structure or object mentioned in this
definition, or any similar structure or object which will improve the whole or
any portion of any street.
   STREET IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement or portion thereof, which the City or
any instrumentality of the City is authorized law to make in, upon, along,
across, under, or over any street, used or useful in connection with travel on
the street.
   TEMPORARY DRIVEWAY. The facility required by this Subchapter at the location
upon any street designated in any permit issued hereunder authorizing a vehicle
to be driven or operated over any sidewalk, parkway, or curb at a point other
than where a driveway has been constructed.
('65 Code, § 30-22)
§ 9.08.305 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do or perform any of the following
acts without a permit so to do from the Division:
   A.   Make any excavation, tunnel or bore in or under the surface of any
street.
   B.   Construct, erect, place, or repair any facility in, upon, along,
across, under or over any street, or remove any facility from any street.
   C.   Repair, construct, reconstruct, erect or make any street betterment in,
upon, along, across, under or over any street or remove any street betterment
from any street when such work is done or performed by or at the insistence and
request of the owner of any real property abutting on said street.
   D.   Destroy or remove any street improvement or street betterment in, upon,
along, across, under or over any street.
   E.   Construct, leave, place or maintain any obstruction in, upon, along,
across, under or over any street.
   F.   Drive or operate any vehicle over any curb, parkway, or sidewalk
located upon any street at a point other than where a driveway has been
constructed.
   G.   Maintain any building material or debris of any kind whatsoever on any
street, parkway, sidewalk, or other public way without special permit to do so
from the Division.
   H.   All material or debris stored by the permittee in the street shall be
barricaded and illuminated, in accordance with §
9.08.390 A. of this Subchapter and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
   I.   No person other than one having a State License as General Engineering
Contractor Class A, Pipe Line Contractor Class C-34, or Sewer Contractor Class
C-42, shall be permitted to do any sewer repair, sewer connections or sewer
construction in the public way, except with a special permit issued by the
Division.
   J.   Every permit granted under this Subchapter shall be granted upon the
condition that the person to whom the permit was granted shall comply in every
respect with the provisions of this Subchapter.
   K.   The Division retains the right to refuse a permit for the storage of
any material or debris on any street, parkway, sidewalk or other public right
of way, at the discretion of the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 30-23)
§ 9.08.307 RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES, FEES AND STANDARDS.
   A.   In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the City
Council shall adopt by resolution a “Rights-of-Way Management Plan,”
establishing procedures, fees and standards for access to the public rights-of-
way.
   B.   The Rights-of-Way Management Plan may be amended from time-to-time to
conform to then current standards, taking into consideration developing
technologies affecting use of the public rights-of-way.
   C.   In accordance with §§
9.08.330 and
9.08.335 of this Code, the fees for such permitting shall be adopted as part of
the Schedule of Charges.
   D.   In the event of any inconsistency between elements within CCMC
Chapter 9.08 and the Rights-of-Way Management Plan, the Rights-of-Way
Management Plan shall control.
(Ord. No. 2000-014, §1)
§ 9.08.310 EXCEPTIONS.
   A.   Any person maintaining any pipe, conduit, or pole in any street by
virtue of any law, ordinance or franchise, may proceed with an excavation
without a permit as herein required when emergency circumstances require the
work to be done immediately for the preservation of the public peace, health,
safety or welfare, provided the permit could not reasonably and practically
have been obtained beforehand. Such person shall thereafter apply for a permit
on the first day on which the office of the Division is open for business, and
such permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun.
   B.   Any division, department, officer or employee of the City may perform
work without a permit as herein required when such work is a normal function of
or is within the responsibility or jurisdiction of such division, department,
officer or employee.
('65 Code, § 30-24)
§ 9.08.315 ANNUAL BLANKET PERMIT.
   The Division may issue to any person operating under a franchise granted by
the State of California or the City, an annual blanket permit to place or to
repair any facility which does not interfere with, disturb, destroy or remove
any street improvement or street betterment, or involve the making of any
excavation in or below the surface of the street or interfere with any
installation owned by any other person.
('65 Code, § 30-25)
§ 9.08.320 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   No permit shall be issued under this Subchapter until and unless the
applicant shall have first complied with the provisions of the laws of the
State of California and the Ordinances of this City requiring the possession of
licenses.
('65 Code, § 30-26)
§ 9.08.325 PERMIT; APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   Application for permit shall be made to the Division and shall describe
specifically the location, nature and extent of the proposed work, the purposes
thereof, and the right, if any, of the applicant to do such work. The
application shall be accompanied by a plat, in duplicate, showing the location
of each proposed excavation, the dimensions thereof, and such other details as
the Division may require. Where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the work
to be done is of a minor nature, the requirement for duplicate plats may be
waived and a sketch on the application form shall be submitted in lieu thereof.
Applications for annual blanket permits need not be accompanied by a plat or
sketch. If the applicant is lawfully entitled to do such work, or any portion
thereof, at the place and in the manner proposed, the Division shall issue a
permit for the doing of such work, or any portion thereof, as the case may be;
provided, however, that no permit shall be issued by the Division until the
applicant has paid the prescribed fee and deposited security for completion of
the work as hereinafter provided.
('65 Code, § 30-27)
§ 9.08.330 PERMIT FEE AND DEPOSIT; EXCEPTIONS.
   A.   Permit fee and deposit. Prior to the issuance of a permit under the
provisions of this Subchapter, each applicant shall:
      1.   Pay to the City an excavation permit fee and additional charges in
accordance with the Schedule of Charges adopted by the City Council as per §
9.08.335, except that no fee shall be required of the United States, State of
California, or any political subdivision, governmental agency, department or
contractor thereof, if in the opinion of the City Engineer the City will
benefit from the act to be performed.
      2.   Deposit or file with the City a sum of money, certified check
payable to the order of the City, or surety bond, in an amount sufficient to
cover the cost of inspection and other incidental expenses and to guarantee
restoration of the street to as good or better condition than it was before the
work was begun, as determined by the City Engineer. The amount of such deposit
or surety bond shall be determined from a schedule which will be prepared and
filed as set forth in §
9.08.335 of this Subchapter.
      3.   Each applicant for a permit under §
9.08.305, Subsection G., shall pay the permit fee and deposit as established by
resolution.
('65 Code, § 30-28)
   B.   Exceptions. Persons operating under a franchise granted by the State of
California or the City may be granted a permit exempt from the provisions of
Subsections A.2. and A.3., provided that in such cases permittees shall be
liable for the actual cost of any work required to be done by the Division or
its authorized representative in repairing damaged improvements to meet current
construction standards and specifications to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer. Such permittees also shall be liable for the cost of inspection and
other incidental expenses incurred by the Division in connection with the work.
The City Engineer may require deposits, as provided for in Subsections A.2., in
the event the work is to be performed by a contractor retained by the City.
('65 Code, § 30-29) (Ord. No. 92-009 § 2; Ord. No. 2007-002 § 8)
§ 9.08.335 SCHEDULE OF CHARGES.
   The Division shall and it is hereby authorized to establish, subject to the
approval and adoption by the City Council, a schedule of charges from which
will be computed the amounts of deposits or bonds required under §
9.08.330 A. of this Subchapter and to change such schedule from time to time,
subject to the approval of the City Council, in order to conform to the
prevailing prices for materials and labor. The schedule shall be open to public
inspection in the office of the Division, upon the demand of any person
interested therein.
('65 Code, § 30-29.1)
§ 9.08.340 ADDITIONAL WORK; GUARANTEE DEPOSIT.
   For any work not contemplated in the Schedule of Charges, the applicant
shall deposit a sum sufficient to guarantee restoration of the street and to
reimburse the City for the actual cost of the inspection and similar services
to be rendered by the City. This sum shall be computed by the Division and
approved by the City Engineer, and upon deposit thereof a permit for the work
may be issued by the Division.
('65 Code, § 30-30)
§ 9.08.345 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Any person making application for a permit to conduct any operations
regulated by this Subchapter shall furnish to the City, and maintain, a
certificate of public liability and property damage insurance as issued by an
insurance company approved by the City Engineer, with minimum limits of One
Hundred Thousand Dollars/Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00/
$300,000.00) personal injury liability and Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00)
property damage, to cover any liability created by the permittee in his
operations permitted hereunder and to insure the City from any and all
liability of any nature whatsoever connected directly or indirectly with said
work. Public utilities operating under the supervision of the Public Utilities
Commission, public utilities holding a franchise from the City, City
Departments and other governmental agencies, may be relieved of the obligation
of submitting such a bond by the City Engineer. No provision of this Section
shall be construed to impose upon the permittee or any of said permittee's
agents, servants or independent contractors, a greater or different duty of
care to third persons than would otherwise be involved by law in the absence of
such provision.
('65 Code, § 30-30.1)
§ 9.08.350 RETURN OF DEPOSIT AND CANCELLATION OF BOND.
   Any deposit or bond made pursuant to this Subchapter shall remain in effect
and shall be held by the City for a period of one year after the work is
completed; provided, however that when in the opinion of the City Engineer the
permittee's work is of such a nature that the damages, if any, may be
immediately determined, the deposit may be refunded or the bond may be
cancelled when the work is completed or at any time within one year thereafter,
subject to the condition that before such deposit is refunded or such bond
cancelled, there first shall have been paid to the City an amount sufficient to
cover the City's cost for inspection and other incidental expenses.
('65 Code, § 30-31)
§ 9.08.355 DECISION OF CITY ENGINEER FINAL.
   The decision of the City Engineer as to the cost of any work done or repairs
made by the Division or under its directions, pursuant to the provisions of
this Subchapter, shall be final and conclusive as to such cost.
('65 Code, § 30-32)
§ 9.08.360 ACCOUNTING OF DEPOSITS.
   The Division shall maintain for each special or general deposit made under
the provisions of this Subchapter, a full and accurate account thereof showing
the amount of any such deposit received and all deductions made therefrom. All
moneys refunded pursuant to the provisions of this Subchapter shall be paid
upon demands approved by the City Engineer, and audited and paid in the same
manner as other demands against the City.
('65 Code, § 30-33)
§ 9.08.365 OBSTRUCTING STREET OR FIRE HYDRANT.
   A.   Whenever an excavation or obstruction obstructs, or is likely to
obstruct, the use of a street or access to any fire hydrant in such a manner as
to deter or hinder the operation of the Fire Department in extinguishing or
controlling fire, the person making such excavation, street improvement, street
betterment, facility, equipment or obstruction shall promptly notify the Fire
Department, giving the exact location. This provision shall appear on or be
attached to every permit issued under this Subchapter.
   B.   No firm or person shall deposit or maintain any building material of
any kind whatsoever or any debris from any building or excavation in or upon
any street:
      1.   Within 25 feet of any fire hydrant.
      2.   Within 11 feet of the nearest rail of any railroad tract on such
street.
      3.   Where no railroad track exists, not more than 5 feet from curb into
the street.
      4.   In any manner as to prevent the passage of any vehicle.
      5.   In any manner as to obstruct the gutter space of the street, per §
9.08.400 of this Subchapter.
      6.   No building material, debris, or excavated material shall be stored,
stockpiled or maintained on any street, parkway, or sidewalk other than
immediately in front of the building in actual course of construction,
alteration, repair or demolition.
      7.   No person shall mix, make, place, or pile any mortar, plaster,
asphalt, tar, lime, concrete, or any similar substance or mixture upon any
surface of any street, parkway, sidewalk, or other public right of way; nor
shall any person wash any plaster mixer, mixing box, plaster tools, ar any
plastering equipment whatsoever onto any street, parkway, sidewalk or other
public right of way, nor shall any person cause to be washed or emptied in any
manner any concrete mixer or box, mixing truck, wheelbarrow or any tools, or
any other concrete equipment whatsoever; nor wash or empty any paint buckets,
paint-spraying equipment, tools or brushes onto any street, parkway, and the
like, nor allow any of the above-mentioned materials to leak or run onto any
street, alley, parkway or sidewalk, or remain to seep into or become bonded to
any paved street, alley or sidewalk. Any violation of this Subsection will
cause a Stop Work Order to be issued and the Division to have the necessary
clean-up work done, with all costs therefor to charged to the violator and paid
for before any Stop Work Order will be removed from any job where such
violation was committed.
('65 Code, § 30-34)
§ 9.08.370 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Every person holding a permit under this Subchapter and engaged in the
making or failing of any excavation, in any street, shall, on demand, while
work is in progress, exhibit to the representative of the Division the permit
issued for such work.
('65 Code, § 30-35)
§ 9.08.375 WORK TO BE EXPEDITED; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   A.   All acts regulated by this Subchapter shall be commenced within (60)
days after the issuance of a permit therefor, except that such time may be
extended by the Division. If not so commenced, the permit shall be revoked.
Permits thus revoked may be renewed for an additional sixty (60) day period
upon the payment of an additional permit fee as originally required. The doing
of such work and the repairing and restoring of the street to its original
condition shall be performed and prosecuted with diligence so as not to
obstruct the street or travel thereon any more than is absolutely necessary.
When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or
the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency
work, the Division shall have full power to order, at any time during the work,
that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee twenty-
four (24) hours a day to the end that such excavation work may be completed as
soon as possible.
   B.   The Division may revoke any permit granted under this Subchapter for
violation of any Section thereof. If, upon the investigation of a reported
violation of any part of this Subchapter, a violation is found to exist, a
minimum investigation fee, as established by resolution, shall be charged the
permittee for each investigation.
   C.   No person or firm shall continue to perform any work under any permit
after the permit has been revoked or an order to stop work has been issued
against a job by the Division.
('65 Code, § 30-36) (Ord. No. 2007-002 § 9)
§ 9.08.380 DIVISION OF PUBLIC WORKS MAY REPAIR DAMAGE; REMOVE MATERIAL OR
DEBRIS.
   A.   Where existing street improvements have been excavated or damaged as
the result of underground installations or other work for which a permit has
been issued under this Subchapter, or when the repairs made by the permittee
are found by the Division to be unsatisfactory, the Division may elect to have
the City restore said improvements at the permittee's expense, in which event
the restoration of said improvements shall be made by the Division and the cost
thereof charged to holder of the permit.
   B.   No person shall fail to remove all building material or debris of any
kind whatsoever deposited or maintained on any street, parkway or sidewalk
under permit, within five (5) days after the completion of the construction,
alteration, repair or demolition of any building or any other work, nor fail to
leave the street, parkway or sidewalk in as good or better condition, as the
same was prior to the depositing of such material or debris therein. Upon
failure of the permittee to remove such material, the Division shall proceed to
do such work or have the same done, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the
permittee.
('65 Code, § 30-37)
§ 9.08.385 AUTHORITY TO CLOSE STREETS.
   Whenever it shall appear necessary to the Division to close any streets for
construction or repair work, the Division may close or authorize the closing of
such street, or any portion thereof, from public travel; provided, however,
that the Division shall first notify the Police Department and the Fire
Department of such closing.
('65 Code, § 30-38)
§ 9.08.390 BARRIERS, LIGHTS AND SIGNS; WRONGFUL REMOVAL.
   A.   Barrier, lights and signs. The following barriers, lights and signs
shall be required:
      1.   Excavations. Every person excavating any street shall place and
maintain barriers at each end of such excavation and at such other places along
the excavation as may be necessary to prevent accident, and shall also place
and maintain lights at each end of such excavation and at distances of not more
than fifty (50) feet along the line thereof, from sunset of each day to sunrise
of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled. The person doing
the work of excavating may place or post signs directing traffic around the
excavation and any materials or equipment used in connection therewith. It
shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any
requirement contained herein.
      2.   Street closing.  Every street, or portion thereof, which is closed
to public travel, shall be barricaded. Warning lights shall be placed on the
barricades, as may be reasonably necessary, from sunset of each day to sunrise
of the following day. Signs or notices to the effect that the street is closed
shall be of a type approved by the City Engineer. Signs which direct traffic in
such cases may be placed or posted only by or with the approval of the
Division.
('65 Code, § 30-39)
   B.   Wrongful removal. No person shall willfully remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed, or
posted in accordance with the provisions of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 30-40)
§ 9.08.400 DUTY TO PROVIDE SAFE PASSAGE AND DRAINAGE.
   Every person excavating in any street shall, as may be necessary and/or in
compliance with any order of the Division, maintain safe crossings for vehicles
and pedestrians at street and alley intersections; safe crossings for
pedestrians at intervals of not more than 300 feet; safe passage for vehicles
and pedestrians when the excavation runs across the width of a street, and free
access to all fire hydrant and water gates. Whenever routing traffic over the
center line of the street is necessary, the Division shall be notified and it
shall cause traffic lanes to be marked by means of barriers, rubber cones,
striping, signs or similar devices, so as to leave no doubt as to where it is
intended that traffic should flow past the obstruction. All materials for
excavation shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept
trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to traffic. If
the street is not of sufficient width to handle the excavation material without
using a portion of the adjacent sidewalk, the person making the excavation
shall erect a tight board fence upon and along such sidewalk and keep a
passageway of at least two and one-half (2½) feet in width open upon and along
said sidewalk, provided that the City Engineer may require wider portions of
such sidewalk to be kept open in cases where such wider portions are considered
necessary for public safety, convenience or welfare. All gutters shall be
maintained free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and
for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line.
Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street, an adequate water way shall
be provided and maintained at all times.
('65 Code, § 30-41)
§ 9.08.405 STORAGE OF MATERIALS.
   Every holder of a permit for doing work in the public way under this
Subchapter is authorized to place materials necessary for doing such work in
the street, provided that such materials are barricaded and lighted as required
by §
9.08.390 A. or any ordinance of the City or law of the State. It shall be
unlawful for any person to haul any dirt, sand, gravel or similar material upon
or along any City street unless contained in a box or receptacle sufficiently
tight to prevent the same from sifting or dropping or spilling over the top of
such receptacle onto any street.
('65 Code, § 30-42)
§ 9.08.410 COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   All workmanship, materials, equipment, methods and conditions for doing work
authorized by this Subchapter shall be in accordance, unless otherwise
specified herein, with specifications therefor on file in the office of the
Division, provided, however, that such specifications shall have been approved
and adopted by the City Council.
('65 Code, § 30-43)
§ 9.08.415 DRIVEWAYS; SIDEWALKS.
   A.   The maximum width of any driveway installed under the provisions of
this Subchapter shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in the flat and all driveways
and sidewalks so installed shall otherwise conform to the driveway
specifications on file in the office of the City Engineer. Provided, however,
that the City Engineer, at his discretion, may approve exceptions to these
provisions.
   B.   Driveways or depressed curbs abandoned and no longer in use shall be
removed and replaced with full height curb and sidewalk on standard slope
without any cost to the City. No new driveway shall be constructed to serve any
lot until any existing unused driveway or depressed curb abutting or in front
of said lot is so removed and replaced.
   C.   Upon the completion of any building, addition or remodeling of any
building, structure, or swimming pool, and before calling for any final
building inspections, the owner or his contractor shall (without cost to the
City) cause the repair or replacement of any defective, damaged, off-grade, or
for any reason non-conforming sidewalk, drive approach, or non-conforming
conditions that may exist in the public way and be considered hazardous by the
City Engineer, or in the opinion of the City Engineer may become hazardous.
   D.   Requirements for temporary driveways:
      1.   Before any vehicle shall be driven or operated over any curb or
sidewalk at any point other than where a driveway has been constructed, a
permit to construct a temporary driveway shall be obtained from the Division.
      2.   Where said vehicle is to be operated over said sidewalk, planking of
a minimum thickness of not less than 1-5/8 inches shall in such a way as to
fully protect said sidewalk from damage. The outside ends of all planks so used
shall be evenly adjusted and beveled in such a manner as to render passage
thereover as easy and safe as possible.
      3.   Where said vehicle is to be operated over said curb, the gutter
shall be maintained free and unobstructed for the full depth of curb and at
least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line.
      4.   All portions of the sidewalk or curbing so protected shall be kept
open, clean and passable at all times, and lights and proper barricades shall
be maintained from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day.
      5.   Such driveway shall be maintained only during the life of the permit
issued therefor. The maintenance of said driveway over said curb and sidewalk
after the expiration of said permit shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a
public nuisance and may be abated by the City at any time thereafter by
removing same without notice to the permittee, and the cost of removal shall be
collected from the permittee in any manner authorized by law.
('65 Code, § 30-44)
§ 9.08.420 UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS.
   A.   Filing maps. Every person owning, using, controlling, or having an
interest in pipes, conduits, ducts, tunnels, or other structures under the
surface of any street, used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas,
electricity, communication impulses, water, steam, ammonia, gasoline, or oil,
in, to, or from the City or to or from its inhabitants, or for any other
purpose, shall file with the Division the following:
      1.   Complete map. On demand, a map or set of maps, each drawn to a scale
of not less than 200 feet to one inch, showing in detail the exact location,
size, description and date of installation, if known, of all mains, laterals,
valves, pressure regulators, drips, manholes, hand holes, transformers,
chambers or other appliances installed beneath the surface of the street
belonging to, used by, or under the control of such person, or in which such
person has any interest.
      2.   Corrected map. Before the first day of March of each and every year,
a corrected map or set of maps, each drawn to a scale of not less than 200 feet
to one inch, showing the complete installation of all such pipes, conduits,
ducts, tunnels, or other structures, including all installations made during
the previous year, to and including the last day of such year.
      3.   Portion of map.  Within twenty-four (24) hours after the receipt of
a written request to do so, copies of any portion of any map or maps of such
installation.
      4.   Affidavit.  Each map herein required shall be accompanied by an
affidavit endorsed thereon to the effect that the same correctly exhibits the
details required to be shown by this Section. Such affidavits are not required
where prints of current engineering maps are filed.
('65 Code, § 30-45)
   B.   Abandonment.
      1.   Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other structure located
under the surface of any street, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the person
owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall within 30 days
after such abandonment, file with the Division a statement, in writing, giving
in detail the location of the pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other structure
so abandoned. Each map, or set of maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this
Subchapter shall show in detail the location of all such pipes, conduits,
ducts, tunnels, or other structures abandoned subsequent to the filing of the
last preceding map or set of maps. If such lines are in the way, or
subsequently become in the way of an installation of the City or any other
public body, which installation is pursuant to a governmental function, the
owner shall remove such abandoned lines when exposed or pay the cost of removal
thereof, as required by the installation of a facility by the City or any other
public body.
      2.   The requirements herein shall not apply to abandoned service lines
designed to serve a single property owner.
('65 Code, § 30-46)
§ 9.08.425 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS; NOTICE; INTERFERENCE WITH UTILITY
FACILITIES.
   A.   Notice to owner.
      1.   Whenever the City Engineer shall determine that it is reasonable and
necessary that any property or facility located in, upon, over or under any
street be temporarily disconnected and reconnected or permanently moved,
relocated or removed from any street in order that the City or other
governmental agency or instrumentality may, in its governmental capacity, most
economically under modern engineering and construction methods, install,
construct, build or erect any public improvement or works in, on, over, under
or along such street, or any other street, the City Engineer shall notify the
person owning, maintaining or controlling such property to move, relocate or
temporarily disconnect the same, as may be determined by the City Engineer.
      2.   No one doing excavation work in a City street shall interfere with
any existing utility facilities without prior arrangements with the City
Engineer and the Public Utility. Where existing public utility facilities would
be intersected by new City owned installations or must be relocated to
accommodate such work, when related to governmental function, the cost of
relocation shall be borne by the Public Utility. Where existing public utility
facilities are temporarily cut and reconnected by the Public Utility solely for
the convenience of making new installations, the contractor making said new
installations shall make arrangements with and reimburse the Public Utility for
such work. Nothing in this Section is intended in any way to supersede or
override the terms and provisions of any applicable franchise, or prior rights
that otherwise exist in favor of said Public Utility.
('65 Code, § 30-47)
   B.   Contents of notice. Such notice shall identify and refer to the
property or facility to be moved, relocated or temporarily disconnected.
('65 Code, § 30-48)
   C.   Removal by owner or division. Every person given such notice shall,
within thirty (30) calendar days thereafter, begin the work of moving,
relocating or disconnecting his property or facility as designated therein and
shall prosecute such work diligently to completion; otherwise the Division
shall have the power to do the same and the cost necessarily incurred to do
such work may be recovered by the City from the person owning, maintaining or
controlling such property or facility.
('65 Code, § 30-49)
§ 9.08.430 DAMAGE TO GRASS, PLANTS AND TREES.
   Whenever any damage to grass, plants or trees in the street is caused by any
permittee in the performance of work authorized by this Subchapter, it shall be
the duty of the permittee to repair such damage to the satisfaction of the Park
Superintendent. If such repairs are not made, the Park Superintendent shall
cause notice thereof to be served, in person or by mail, upon the permittee and
if such damage is not satisfactorily repaired within ten (10) days from service
of said notice, the Park Superintendent shall repair the same and notify the
Division of such repair and the cost thereof. The Division thereupon shall
deduct from the deposit made by the permittee, or withhold cancellation of the
permittee's bond until paid, the amount so expended and reported for repairing
said damage.
('65 Code, § 30-50)
§ 9.08.435 LIMITATIONS.
   A.   Nothing in this Subchapter contained shall affect any ordinance or
requirements in this City now or which hereafter may be in effect, in regard to
inspection of plumbing, gas or electric construction, or as to making
connection with public sewers or other mains or conduits in said City, or as to
the payment required for the making of connections with public sewers financed
by public funds, or which funds are raised from the sale of bonds of said City.
   B.   Nothing in this Subchapter contained, and no fact, circumstances or
inference arising therefrom shall be deemed or considered to grant any
franchise or privilege in, over or under any public streets, alleys or other
public places in this City.
('65 Code, § 30-50.1) (Ord. No. CS-529)
USE OF STREETS FOR BUS BENCHES
§ 9.08.500 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
   BENCH. A seat for the accommodation of persons awaiting transportation;
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any public thoroughfare or way including the sidewalk,
the parkway, curb, and any other public or quasi public property or easement
bordering a public street or roadway.
('65 Code, § 30-52) (Ord. No. CS-736 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.505 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, install, relocate or maintain
any bench on any public right-of-way without authority therefor obtained from
the City Council following acceptance of a bid or an agreement for such
services and location permits approved by the Director of Transportation. A
blanket location permit shall be obtained, listing location of each bench, and
shall be applicable for designated locations only.
('65 Code, § 30-53) (Ord. No. CS-736 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.510 AWARD OF CONTRACT; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   A contract governing the exclusive placing and maintaining of benches within
the City shall be awarded to that individual proposer submitting the best
proposal for the rendering of such service. Such contract shall require an
agreement as to the following regulations:
   A.   No bench shall be placed, located or maintained within the City without
a location permit obtained from the Director of Transportation.
   B.   No bench shall be more than forty-two (42) inches high nor more than
two (2) feet six (6) inches wide nor more than seven (7) feet long, over all.
   C.   Each bench shall have conspicuously displayed thereon the name of the
permittee.
   D.   No advertising matter of any kind shall be displayed upon any bench
within the City.
   E.   No bench shall tend to obstruct passage along any right-of-way or to
create a hazard, inconvenience, or be detrimental to the public safety and
welfare.
   F.   No bench shall be placed or maintained at a point less than eighteen
(18) inches or more than thirty (30) inches from the face of the curb and each
bench must be kept parallel with the curb.
   G.   It shall be the duty of the permittee to maintain each bench at all
times in a safe, clean and painted condition and at its proper and lawful
location, and to inspect each bench periodically and to immediately remove any
bench which the Director of Transportation determines should be removed in the
public interest for any reason;
   H.   The City reserves the right to terminate any agreement entered into
pursuant to this Subchapter at its discretion upon giving thirty (30) days
written notice to the permittee within which thirty (30) day period the
permittee shall remove all benches required by the City to be removed.
   I.   In the event a permittee neglects or refuses to remove any bench
pursuant to such notice, the City may remove it and charge the permittee or
owner thereof a minimum charge performed by City crews for removal and storage,
as set forth by resolution, and at the end of sixty (60) days of storage, sell
or otherwise dispose of any benches remaining unclaimed.
   J.   The City Council may impose additional regulations and requirements or
modify the herein regulations by its resolution.
   K.   The permittee shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the City, its
agents, officers and employees from any and all loss, costs, damages, expenses
or liability which may result from or arise out of the granting of any permit
or the installation or maintenance of any bench. In connection herewith,
permittee shall at all times keep and maintain public liability insurance in
the sum of One Hundred Thousand Dollars/Three Hundred Thousand Dollars
($100,000.00/$300,000.00) and Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) property
damage.
('65 Code, § 30-54) (Ord. No. CS-736 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-809 § 3; Ord. No.
2007-002 § 10)
§ 9.08.515 PROPOSAL FOR CONTRACT.
   A contract shall be awarded to that responsible proposer who submits the
best proposal for the placing and maintaining of benches within the City in
accordance with the terms and requirements of the herein ordinance and such
additional terms as may be required by the City Council. The City Council may
accept or reject proposals in its discretion. In the event a proposal is
accepted, a contract, including the terms and requirements hereof, shall be
executed granting such successful proposer a license for the exclusive placing
and maintaining of benches within the City for such term as is determined by
the City Council and subject to revocation at the discretion of either party.
('65 Code, § 30-55) (Ord. No. CS-736 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.520 LOCATION PERMITS; APPLICATION; TERMS.
   Upon awarding a contract in accordance with the provisions hereof, the
proposer shall be required to apply for and duly receive location permits for
benches to be placed and installed within the City. All applications for
location permits shall contain the following:
   A.   Detailed plans and specifications of benches to be installed.
   B.   Name and address of owner of benches.
   C.   A statement by applicant that applicant is familiar with the provisions
of this Subchapter as same exists at the date of said application, and, if
granted the permit applied for, will observe, and abide by, and be bound by
such provisions.
   D.   The application shall be filed with the Director of Transportation who
shall grant the application or deny same within ten (10) days from filing of
the application.
   E.   All location permits shall be issued on an annual basis and shall be
revocable upon the determination of the Director of Transportation that the
public interest is served thereby.
   F.   A list showing location of each bench.
   G.   The permittee hereunder shall, in addition to the other fees required
herein, pay a license fee in the form and manner required by
Chapter 11.01 of this Code.
   H.   A semi-annual report on number of bus benches with advertisements on
them.
('65 Code, § 30-56) (Ord. No. CS-736 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.525 EXISTING BENCHES.
   All benches which have been placed and remain at any location on the streets
of the City at the time of the adoption of this subchapter shall be removed
within sixty (60) days from and after the effective date hereof unless, prior
to said removal date, a permit shall have been duly obtained in the form and
manner as required herein.
('65 Code, § 30-57) (Ord. No. CS-736 § 2)
NEWSRACKS
§ 9.08.600 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, certain words and phrases shall be
construed as set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context
that a different meaning is intended.
   BLOCK. One side of a street between two intersecting streets. For purposes
of this definition “street” does not include an alley or other right-of-way
unless it is of the same width as a regular residential minimum-width street
approved as part of a master plan of circulation.
   CUSTODIAN. That person, or persons, who places, maintains or services a
newsrack by, but not limited to, depositing and/or removing materials from such
newsrack and/or collecting monies from such newsrack.
   EXPLICIT SEXUAL ACTS. Depiction of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory
functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition
of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as
being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between
humans and animals, or other act of sexual arousal involving any physical
contact with the person's genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or
anal region or breast.
   NEWSRACK. Any self-service or coin-operated box, case, container, storage
unit or other dispenser, exclusive of any tray or base mount, installed, used
or maintained for the display or sale of any written or printed material,
including but not limited to, newspapers, news periodicals, magazines, books,
pictures, photographs and records.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street other than a roadway or sidewalk.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   STREET. All that area dedicated to public use for public right-of-way
purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys
and sidewalks.
('65 Code, § 22-30) (Ord. No. CS-807 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-998, § 1 (part))
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 9.04
§ 9.08.605 PROHIBITION; NEWSRACKS ON ROADWAYS, SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS.
   A.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects
onto, into or over any part of the roadway or alley of any public street or
which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway
or alley of any public street.
   B.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which, in whole
or in part, rests upon, in or over, any public sidewalk or parkway:
      1.   When such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of
persons or property; or
      2.   When a site or location is used for public utility purposes or
public transportation purposes; or
      3.   When such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes:
         a.   The flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including (i) any
legally parked or stopped vehicle, or (ii) the ingress into or egress from any
residence, place of business or legally parked or stopped vehicle; or
         b.   The use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants or
trash containers, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said
location; or
         c.   The cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk
cleaning machinery.
('65 Code, § 22-31) (Ord. No. CS-807 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-998 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.610 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   A.   Prior to any placement, the owner or custodian must file with the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, satisfactory to the liability
and property damage insurance in the amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000)
to indemnify the City against any personal injury, death, loss or damage
resulting from the permittee's activities. The City and its officers shall be
named as additional insureds. The policy must include a statement by the
insurance carrier that thirty (30) days written notice will be given to the
City before any cancellation or modification of coverage. The permittee must
maintain such insurance for as long as the permittee maintains a newsrack in
the public right-of-way; any lapse in coverage shall be grounds for removal.
Said policy shall be issued by a California company by an issuer rated in
Best's Insurance Guide with a rating of AAA or better.
   B.   The owner shall also execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by
the City prior to placement.
('65 Code, § 22-32) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.615 LOCATION AND PLACEMENT.
   A.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects
onto, into or over any part of the roadway or alley of any public street or
which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway
or alley of any public street.
   B.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which, in whole
or in part, rests upon, in or over, any public sidewalk, public easement or
parkway, except as provided herein.
   C.   The specific location of newsracks shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Where placement is next to a building, it shall be placed adjacent
and parallel to and within six (6") inches of the wall of the building;
      2.   Where placement is next to a curb it shall be situated parallel to
and no less than eighteen (18") nor more than twenty-four (24") inches from the
edge of the curb;
      3.   No more than six (6) newsracks shall be located on any public right-
of-way within a space of two hundred (200') feet in any direction within the
same block of the same street;
      4.   No more than sixteen (16) newsracks shall be allowed on any one
block;
      5.   No newsracks shall be placed on a sidewalk or parkway facing another
publication vending machine, group of such machines or newsstand, divided by
only the width of a sidewalk or pedestrian walk.
   D.   1.   In determining which newsracks shall be permitted to remain, the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall be guided solely by the
following criteria set forth herein. In the event there are six (6) or more
newsracks located on the public right-of-way within a space of 200 feet in any
direction within the same block of the same street in the aforementioned
locations on the effective date of this chapter, no additional newsracks shall
be approved until such time when there are fewer than six (6) newsracks within
a space of 200 feet in any direction within the same block of the same street
at such location. The applicant, upon request, may be placed on a waiting list
for such location. The waiting list shall be administered on a first come,
first served basis.
      2.   Priority system. In determining which newsracks shall be permitted
to remain, the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall be
guided solely by the following criteria.
         a.   First priority. First priority shall be given to newsracks used
for the sale of publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of
general circulation for Los Angeles County, pursuant to the procedure set forth
in Cal. Gov't Code§§ 6020 et seq.
         b.   Second priority. Second priority shall be given to newsracks used
for the sale of daily publications (those published on five (5) or more days in
a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general
circulation of Los Angeles County.
         c.   Third priority. Third priority shall be given to newsracks used
for weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five (5)
days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of
general circulation for Los Angeles County.
         d.   Conflict within priority categories. As between newspapers
included within any single category of priority above, the Director of Public
Works, or his or her designee, shall also be guided by the following criteria
of priorities whenever more than six (6) newsracks are proposed within 200 feet
of one another or more than sixteen (16) newsracks are proposed for any one
block:
             (1)   First priority shall be daily publications (published five
(5) or more days per week).
            (2)   Second priority shall be publications published two (2) to
four (4) days per week.
            (3)   Third priority shall be publications published one day per
week.
            (4)   In the event that there is a conflict between newspapers
within the same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient
newsrack spaces remaining to accommodate the competing newspapers after first
filling as many spaces as possible by utilizing the criteria set forth above,
then the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall assign the
space or spaces at random by placing the names of all applicants for the
remaining spaces at a location into a container from which the names shall be
drawn, one at a time until the particular spaces remaining of unfilled
newsracks have been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the public at a time
and date designated by the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee.
   E.   No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
      1.   Within five (5') feet of any marked crosswalk;
      2.   Within fifteen (15') of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
      3.   Within five (5') feet of any fire hydrant, fire callbox, police
callbox, trash container, utility box, traffic signal controller, street light
controller, or other emergency facility;
      4.   Within five (5') feet of any driveway;
      5.   Within five (5') feet ahead of, and twenty-five (25') to the rear of
any sign marking a designated bus stop;
      6.   Within six feet (6') of any bus bench;
      7.   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6') feet;
      8.   On or within three (3') feet of any area improved with lawn,
groundcover, flowers, shrubs or trees;
      9.   Within three (3') feet of any display window of any building,
abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or interfere
with the reasonable use of such window display purpose;
      10.   Within two (2) feet of any utility meter or ground level access
thereto; and
      11.   At any location where the newsrack unreasonably obstructs,
interferes with access to or the use and enjoyment of the abutting property.
('65 Code, § 22-33) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 99-003, § 1)
§ 9.08.620 MOVING OF NEWSRACKS.
   In the event of violations of §
9.08.615, the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, as an
alternative to removal under the provisions of §§
9.08.630 through
9.08.640, may move such machines in order to restore them to a legal condition.
('65 Code, § 22-34) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.625 NEWSRACK REQUIREMENTS.
   Newsrack installation shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Newsracks shall be the standard “K-Jack” model, standard KJ-100 Mini
View model or an equivalent model approved by the Director of Public Works, or
his or her designee, which shall be securely bolted to the sidewalk. Newsracks
that are in place as of June 1, 1996 and not in compliance with this Subsection
shall be replaced with conforming newsracks within four (4) months of June 1,
1996.
   B.   Newsracks which are required to conform to the requirements of this
Subchapter shall carry no advertising, including rack cards, except that the
name of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed may be displayed on the
bottom one-third (1/3) of the hood on the front access side of the newsrack.
Newsracks in place prior to December 24, 1994, may carry rack cards which
exclusively advertise the newspaper or periodical being dispensed.
   C.   The current name, address and telephone number of a responsible person
or entity who may be contacted at anytime concerning the newsrack shall be
displayed on the hood of the newsrack in such a manner as to be visible and
readable to a prospective customer.
   D.   Newsracks shall at all times be maintained in good working order, and
their exterior surface shall be maintained in a clean, untarnished and
attractive condition free of defects, physical damage, handbills, extraneous
markings and graffiti.
   E.   Upon the removal of any pedestal mount base from the parkway or
sidewalk, the person so removing shall be responsible for the repair of any
resulting condition, including the filling in of any holes. Such work shall be
done to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, or his or her
designee; and
   F.   No base mount or tray shall be maintained on a public sidewalk or
parkway unless there is attached thereto a newsrack as provided herein.
('65 Code, § 22-35) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.630 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.
   A.   Except as provided in §
9.08.640 hereof, if any publication vending machine is installed or maintained
in violation of any provision of this Subchapter, the Director of Public Works,
or his or her designee, shall attach a notice of violation to said publication
vending machine specifying the date and nature of the violation. The owner or
custodian of the vending machine or the publisher of the publication contained
therein, if the identity of such persons can be ascertained from the records of
the City or from the vending machine, shall be sent notice of said violation by
the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, within five (5) working days. Such notices shall
specifically describe the offending condition or conditions. Compliance with
these notification requirements shall constitute adequate notice of violation.
   B.   Upon receipt of notice of a violation of any provision of this
Subchapter, the owner or custodian of the vending machine or the publisher of
the publication contained therein, shall within ten (10) working days from the
date on which notice of said violation was attached to the publication vending
machine, either cause the violation to be corrected or file a written request
for a hearing pursuant to §
9.08.655.
('65 Code, § 22-36) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.635 REMOVAL OF MACHINES.
   A.   When a final determination has been made that the violation specified
on the notice attached to such publication vending machine has in fact
occurred, and the owner or custodian of the vending machine or the publisher of
the publication contained therein has failed to correct such violation within
ten (10) working days from the mailing of notice of such notice of
determination, said publication vending machine shall be removed by the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, and stored in a convenient
place.
   B.   Failure to maintain any newsrack in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall give the City the right to remove all newsracks of the
newsrack vendor who is in violation.
('65 Code, § 22-37) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.640 SUMMARY REMOVAL OF MACHINES.
   A.   If any publication vending machine is so located or maintained that it
poses a danger to pedestrians or vehicles as specified in §
9.08.615, said publication vending machines shall be summarily removed by the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, and stored in a convenient
place.
   B.   If any publication vending machine has been abandoned, said publication
vending machine shall be summarily removed by the Director of Public Works, or
his or her designee, and stored in a convenient place. A publication vending
machine shall be deemed abandoned when no new publication has been placed in
such publication vending machine for a period of seven (7) days.
   C.   If any publication vending machine does not have the identification
required by §
9.08.625 hereof, said publication vending machine shall be summarily removed by
the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, and stored in a
convenient place.
   D.   1.   If any publication vending machine has had a notice affixed
thereto of noncompliance with any Section of this Subchapter and the owner or
custodian of the vending machine or the publisher of the publication contained
therein has neither caused the violation specified on said notice to be
corrected or requested a hearing pursuant to §
9.08.655 within the time permitted, said publication vending machine shall be
summarily removed by the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, and
stored in a convenient place.
      2.   If a request for a hearing or appeal has been withdrawn by the owner
or custodian of the vending machine or publisher of the publication contained
therein, said publication vending machine shall be summarily removed by the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, and stored in a convenient
place. Such request shall be deemed withdrawn either by actual withdrawal or by
the failure of the applicant to fully comply with §
9.08.655.
('65 Code, § 22-38) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.645 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Whenever any publication vending machine is impounded pursuant to this
Subchapter, the owner or custodian of the vending machine or publisher of the
publication contained therein, if the identity of such persons can be
ascertained from the records of the City or from the vending machine, shall be
sent a notice of said action by the Director of Public Works, or his or her
designee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, within five (5) working
days thereafter. The owner or custodian of the vending machine or publisher of
the publication contained therein may, within ten (10) working days after the
mailing date of said notice, request a hearing as provided in §
9.08.655.
('65 Code, § 22-39) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.650 IMPOUNDED MACHINES; RETURN; SALE OR DISPOSAL.
   A.   Return of impounded machines. Any publication vending machine, together
with its contents, which has been impounded pursuant to this Subchapter shall
be returned to the owner or the custodian of the vending machine or publisher
of the publication contained therein:
      1.   Upon receipt of a fee established by resolution for removal and
storage of such publication vending machine by City crews; or
      2.   Upon a determination after a hearing by the Municipal Code Appeals
Committee, pursuant to §
9.08.655, that such impoundment was not authorized; or
      3.   Upon a decision by the City Council on appeal, pursuant to §
9.08.655, that such impoundment was not authorized.
('65 Code, § 22-40)
   B.   Sale or disposal of impounded vehicles. The Director of Public Works,
or his or her designee, may process as unclaimed property and dispose of any
impounded publication vending machine pursuant to the applicable provisions of
this Code and the laws of the State:
      1.   Upon failure of the owner or custodian of the vending machine or
publisher of the publication contained therein, to request a hearing pursuant
to §
9.08.655, within the time permitted.
      2.   After a final determination that said publication vending machine
was lawfully impounded and fees and costs assessed pursuant to Subsection A.
have not been received within thirty (30) working days from the date of the
final determination.
('65 Code, § 22-41) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2007-002 § 11)
§ 9.08.655 REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL PROCESS; PROCEDURES.
   A.   Any owner or custodian of a publication vending machine or publisher of
the publication contained therein may file a written request with the Director
of Public Works, or his or her designee, for a hearing by the Municipal Code
Appeals Committee for the purpose of demonstrating that a publication vending
machine was illegally impounded, or that a violation as specified on the notice
attached to a publication vending machine pursuant to §
9.08.630 has not in fact occurred.
   B.   Within five (5) working days from the date on which the request for
hearing is received, the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee,
shall notify the owner or custodian of the vending machine or publisher of the
publication contained therein of the date, time and place of said hearing by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Said hearing shall be set for a date
within ten (10) working days of the mailing date of the notice.
   C.   At the time set for such hearing or at the date to which such hearing
is continued, the Municipal Code Appeals Committee shall receive all evidence
relevant to the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the specified violation(s), the
compliance or noncompliance with any of the provisions of this Subchapter, and
any other relevant information. Such hearing need not be conducted according to
technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Oral evidence shall be
taken only on oath or affirmation.
   D.   Within five (5) working days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Administrative Hearing Board shall issue, in writing, its decision and the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall send by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of said decision to the owner or custodian of
the vending machine or publisher of the publication contained therein.
   E.   A decision of the Municipal Code Appeals Committee may be appealed to
the City Council. Appeals to the City Council shall be filed with the City
Clerk within ten (10) working days of mailing of the decision and shall state
the basis of such appeal. Appeals shall be acknowledged by the Clerk within
five (5) days of receipt. The Council shall hear the appeal within thirty (30)
days of receipt.
('65 Code, § 22-42) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.660 DISPLAY OF CERTAIN MATTER PROHIBITED.
   A.   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than for purposes dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
publications sold therein.
   B.   No person shall offer for sale or permit to be offered for sale to the
public on any public right-of-way by means of a newsrack any publication in
such a manner as to expose to the public view any of the following:
      1.   Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual
organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or
effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.
      2.   Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums,
anuses, or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as
its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront.
      3.   Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where
such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal,
gratification or affront.
('65 Code, § 22-43) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.665 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   A.   The provisions of this Subchapter shall apply to all newsracks, whether
installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the
provisions herein. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of the
said provisions shall be brought into compliance with said provisions within
one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date, hereof. Any newsrack not
brought into compliance within said compliance period shall be deemed to be in
violation of this Subchapter, except that one extension, not to exceed one
hundred twenty (120) days, may be obtained, in writing, from the Director of
Public Works, or his or her designee. Such extension shall be granted only if
the owner or custodian has made a good faith attempt to comply within the said
compliance period.
   B.   Any costs incurred by an applicant for the installation and maintenance
of any newsrack to comply with the provisions of this Subchapter of the Culver
City Municipal Code shall be borne by the applicant.
('65 Code, § 22-44) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
§ 9.08.670 PENALTY.
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, a violation of any of the provisions of
this Subchapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), six (6) months in jail, or
both.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
prosecuting a violation of this Subchapter as an infraction, at his/her
discretion, as set forth in §
1.01.035 B. of this code.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City Attorney from bringing a
civil action, at his/her discretion, for violations of the provisions of this
chapter, as set forth in §
1.01.050 of this code.
('65 Code, § 22-1) (Ord. No. 96-034 § 2)
§ 9.08.675 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, subpart or provision of this Subchapter, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the
remainder of the provisions of this Subchapter and the application of such to
other persons or other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
('65 Code, § 22-45) (Ord. No. 96-010 § 1 (part))
PARKWAY LANDSCAPING GUIDELINES
§ 9.08.705 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
   LANDSCAPING. Ornamental live plant materials (trees, shrubs, vines,
groundcover or turf) in containers or at grade, and decorative hardscape areas.
   PARKWAY. Land area between street curb and sidewalk.
   RESIDENTIAL PARKWAY LANDSCAPING GUIDELINES. The City of Culver City
Residential Parkway Landscaping Guidelines, established by resolution of the
City Council.
   TURF. Single bladed grass or sod.
(Ord. No. 2016-006 § 2 (part))
§ 9.08.710 RESIDENTIAL PARKWAY LANDSCAPING GUIDELINES.
   A.   All landscaping of residential parkways in the City shall conform to
the Residential Parkway Landscaping Guidelines adopted by resolution of the
City Council, except as provided in §
9.08.710.C.
   B.   The Residential Parkway Landscaping Guidelines apply to all residential
parkways of the City.
   C.   Non-conforming landscaping existing at the time of the adoption of the
Residential Parkway Landscaping Guidelines may remain, until replaced with new
landscaping, which must conform to this Section, unless the non-conforming
landscaping causes or results in an unsafe or hazardous condition.
(Ord. No. 2016-006 § 2 (part))
§ 9.08.715 PARKWAYS IN NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall plant or alter the landscaping in parkways located in non-
residentially zoned properties without first obtaining a permit to do so from
the City. Such permit shall state the variety of trees, shrubs, and plants to
be planted and the location and size thereof.
(Ord. No. 2016-006 § 2 (part))
§ 9.08.720 VIOLATIONS UNLAWFUL; REMEDIES.
   A violation of any provision of this Subchapter is unlawful and may be
enforced by any remedies available in law or equity, including those provided
in
Chapters 1.01 and
1.02 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2016-006 § 2 (part))
§ 9.08.725 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   In the event of any conflict between this Subchapter and any other
provisions of this Code or the Landscape and Lighting Act of 1972, this
Subchapter shall control.
(Ord. No. 2016-006 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 9.09: HELICOPTERS AND HELISTOPS
Section
   
9.09.005   Definitions
   
9.09.010   Zoning restrictions
   
9.09.015   Occasional use facilities; special landing permits
   
9.09.020   Helistop permit applications; processing procedures
   
9.09.025   Roof-top installations
   
9.09.030   Ground-level installations
   
9.09.035   General regulations governing helistops
   
9.09.040   Police helicopters exempted
§ 9.09.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY HELISTOP.  An area of land or a portion of a structure used by a
helicopter for takeoff and landing operations while participating in an actual
or perceived emergency/disaster, when operating pursuant to the directions of
the fire department, law enforcement, medical, or other public safety
authorities or when going to the immediate aid of any person in peril.
   HELICOPTER. A helicopter is a form of aircraft in the broad category of
rotorcraft which depends for its support and motion in the air principally upon
the lift generated by one (1) or more power driven rotors that rotate on a
substantially vertical axis, or any steep gradient aircraft.
   HELISTOP. An area on a roof of a building or other structure, or on the
ground, used by helicopters or steep gradient aircraft for the purpose of
picking up or discharging passengers or cargo, but not including fueling
service or any other maintenance of any kind.
('65 Code, § 17A-1) (Ord. No. CS-570 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 93-013 § 1)
§ 9.09.010 ZONING RESTRICTIONS.
   Helistops shall be permitted only in the M-1, M-2, and S Zones, subject to
the regulations of this Chapter and the provisions of a conditional use permit
regarding hours of use, types of helicraft, intensity of use, and other matters
affecting the public welfare.
('65 Code, § 17A-2) (Ord. No. CS-570 § 1 (part))
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Code, see
Title 17
§ 9.09.015 OCCASIONAL USE FACILITIES; SPECIAL LANDING PERMITS.
   Special landing permits for occasional landings at sites other than duly
established helistops may be issued by the City Manager, subject to such
conditions as may be imposed by the Fire Department. Such occasional use
facilities shall be at ground elevation, or at roof elevation when approved by
a licensed structural engineer.
('65 Code, § 17A-3) (Ord. No. CS-570 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 9.09.020 HELISTOP PERMIT APPLICATIONS; PROCESSING PROCEDURES.
   A.   Applications. An application for a helistop conditional use permit
shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Community Development, using
forms provided by that office. The application shall be accompanied by a
detailed plot plan showing location in relation to land use in the area, and
the size and detail of the proposed helistop. A filing fee in the amount
established by Resolution of the City Council for a Conditional Use Permit
shall be paid at the time of filing of the application.
('65 Code, § 17A-4)
   B.   Processing procedure. The application shall be set for hearing on the
approval of a helistop before the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days
following the filing thereof, unless said time is extended from time to time by
that Commission. Notice of said hearing shall be posted and published in the
manner required for noticing hearing of variance applications.
('65 Code, § 17A-5)
(Ord. No. CS-570 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-831 § 1)
§ 9.09.025 ROOF-TOP INSTALLATIONS.
   Helistops may be erected on the roofs of buildings, subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   On all touch-down or landing areas, whether elevated or flush with the
roof, provision shall be made for collecting volatile substances which may be
spilled in event of any emergency. Separator or clarifier tanks for collecting
spilled volatile substances shall be installed under approval and supervision
of the Fire Department.
   B.   The roof-top shall have at least two (2) conforming exits and they
shall be located in such a manner as to permit safe exit from the roof area in
the event one of the exits is blocked.
   C.   A wind indicating device shall be installed. A flag, banner, or similar
device is acceptable.
   D.   Two or more wet standpipes shall be provided and equipped with one and
one-half (1½) inch rubber lined fire hose not over one hundred (100) feet in
length. Hose shall be equipped with combination fog nozzles. Sufficient
pressure shall be available to afford a good fog pattern. Hose cabinets or
racks shall be located near the separate exits. Standpipe outlets shall be so
located that all portions of the roof area shall be within one hundred twenty
(120) feet of the outlet.
   E.   Two fire extinguishers of at least sixteen (16) BC rating shall be
provided, and be located remotely from each other.
   F.   No roof-top obstructions which may be difficult to see from the air
shall be permitted within the required glide slope.
   G.   Such lights as are installed to illuminate the touch-down pad shall be
directed on to the touch-down pad only, and in such a manner that the light
rays cannot interfere with the helicopter pilot's vision, or other aircraft
flying within the area of the landing facility.
   H.   No persons shall be permitted in the general landing area in any
location where any portion of their bodies will be higher than the touch-down
area surface while landing or take-off operations are underway.
   I.   Approved means of communication such as telephone, radio, fire alarm
box, or signaling device shall be provided adjacent to the landing area.
   J.   If the roof has no parapet wall, a substantial fence shall be provided
around the perimeter of the roof to insure the safety of all persons.
   K.   Roof-top markings. The bull's eye type marker shall be used for roof-
top helistops. The painted border line marking the take-off and landing area
may be a solid or broken line. The outer circle of the “bull's eye” should be
inscribed within the touch-down area whose sides should be tangent to the
circle. The dimensions of the bull's eye marker are thus determined by the size
of the touch-down area. Each roof-top heliport should have painted with the
bull's eye, in numerals not less than two feet in height, the maximum gross
weight in thousands of pounds of the equipment which the roof is stressed to
accept.
   L.   The helicopter landing facility should be located in such an area as
would permit a glide slope angle determined by a ratio of eight feet horizontal
distance for every one foot of vertical clearance required. Two such approaches
shall be available, at least 90 degrees removed from each other.
   M.   The touch-down area shall be surrounded on all sides by a clear roof
area averaging 15 feet in width, but with no side less than 5 feet wide. For
helicopters of less than 3,500 pounds gross weight, the touch-down area shall
be a minimum of 20 feet x 20 feet in size.
   N.   The touch-down area, if less than 3 feet above roof surface, should be
available normally by only one path of approach which shall be within view of
the pilot. If elevated more than 3 feet, two approaches opposite from each
other shall be provided. However, one approach, which is not in view of the
pilot, should be restricted and used only for emergencies.
   O.   The roof-top shall have two conforming exits and they shall be remote
from each other.
   P.   No light standards, roof vents, guy lines, TV aerials, or other similar
roof-top obstructions which may be difficult to see from the air, shall be
permitted within the required glide slope on three sides, or within a 270
degree arc.
   Q.   No refueling or repairing is to be accomplished at the helistop except
in extreme emergency and then only as approved by the Fire Department.
   R.   The roof-top shall be marked as prescribed by the Federal Aviation
Agency.
   S.   The City Engineer's approval of a building for use as a roof-top
facility shall be required as to structural adequacy.
('65 Code, § 17A-6) (Ord. No. CS-570 § 1 (part))
§ 9.09.030 GROUND-LEVEL INSTALLATIONS.
   A.   The helicopter landing facility should be located in such an area as
would permit a glide slope angle determined by a ratio of eight feet horizontal
distance for every one foot of vertical clearance required. Two such approaches
shall be available, at least 90 degrees removed from each other.
   B.   An area of approximately 125 feet x 125 feet shall be required. This
area shall be clearly defined by means of a substantial barrier providing
physical restraint to prohibit the entrance of unauthorized persons into the
landing area. A centrally located touch-down area at least 20 feet x 20 feet in
size shall be provided for helicopters of less than 3,500 pounds gross weight.
   C.   No unauthorized persons whatsoever shall be permitted within the
general landing area during flight operations.
   D.   The helicopter landing facility shall be marked as prescribed by the
Federal Aviation Agency.
   E.   Any light installed shall illuminate and be directed onto the touch-
down pad only, and in such a manner that the light rays cannot interfere with
the pilot's vision.
   F.   A wind indicating device shall be installed. A flag, banner, or similar
device is acceptable.
   G.   Two fire extinguishers of at least 16 BC rating shall be provided and
be located remotely from each other.
   H.   Where buildings or structures in proximity to the landing area present
a fire exposure hazard, there shall be provided at least two 1½ inches wet
standpipe outlets equipped with 1½ inches fire hose, not over 100 feet in
length, and a combination fog nozzle.
   I.   Approved means of communication such as telephone, radio, fire alarm
box, or signaling device shall be provided adjacent to the landing area.
('65 Code, § 17A-7) (Ord. No. CS-570 § 1 (part))
§ 9.09.035 GENERAL REGULATIONS GOVERNING HELISTOPS.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   A.   Operate a helicopter using a helistop within the City which is not
equipped with the latest and most effective type of noise suppression devices
and two-way radio communication equipment.
   B.   Repair or refuel a helicopter in a helistop except in the case of an
emergency.
   C.   Land a helicopter or take off prior to 7:00 a.m. or later than 8:00
p.m. of any day.
   D.   Permit, as operator of a helistop, a greater number of landings and
take-offs exceeding an average of five (5) or each per day, averaged monthly.
   E.   Violate the requirements of this Chapter or the regulations of the
F.A.A. or any condition imposed upon the operation and users of helistops as
contained in a conditional use permit or by a regulatory department of the City
in protecting public safety.
   F.   Operate a helicopter in landing or taking off on or from a helistop
within the City in a pattern contrary to the regulations of this Chapter or the
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission, City Council or F.A.A.
   G.   Operate a helistop or permit its use without at all times having
maintained in full force and effect public liability and property damage
insurance in the amount of at least One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00)
with respect to property damage, and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) single
limit bodily injury coverage.
   H.   Operate a helistop, or to use the facilities of a helistop within the
City for which a conditional use permit has not been duly issued.
('65 Code, § 17A-8) (Ord. No. CS-570 § 1 (part))
§ 9.09.040 POLICE HELICOPTERS EXEMPTED.
   The provisions of this Chapter, pertaining to the operation of helicopters,
shall not apply to any helicopter operated by the federal government, or a
state, county, or city agency engaged in law enforcement, or fire suppression,
or going to the aid of any person or the property thereof, so long as the same
is operated in accordance with federal and state regulations and by the
authorized personnel of said federal, state, county, or city agency.
('65 Code, § 17A-9) (Ord. No. CS-570 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 9.10: PARKS, PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY
Section
Regulation of Parks
   
9.10.005   Definitions
   
9.10.010   General administration
   
9.10.015   Policy on closing
   
9.10.020   Permits and use agreements
   
9.10.025   Reserved
   
9.10.030   Director authority to issue rules and regulations
   
9.10.035   Reserved
   
9.10.040   Reserved
   
9.10.045   Reserved
   
9.10.050   Obstructing pathways prohibited
   
9.10.055   Prohibitions
   
9.10.060   Hours of operation
   
9.10.070   Penalties
Public Buildings and Property
   
9.10.200   Prohibitions
   
9.10.205   Restroom, shower, changing room, and locker room facilities
   
9.10.210   Penalties
Skateboards and Other Wheeled Recreational Devices - Rules and Regulations
   
9.10.300   Public skateboard parks; rules and regulations
   
9.10.305   Skateboarding and the use of other wheeled recreational devices
prohibited in certain areas
   
9.10.310   Penalties
Off-Leash Dog Park
   
9.10.400   Rules and regulations
   
9.10.405   Penalties
Designated Dog Paths
   
9.10.600   Designated dog paths
   
9.10.610   Penalties
Camping in Public Spaces
   
9.10.700   Camping in prohibited public places
Cross-reference:
   Residential development park dedication and in lieu parkland fees, see §§
15.06.300 through
15.06.330
REGULATION OF PARKS
§ 9.10.005 DEFINITIONS.
   A.   As used in this chapter, DEPARTMENT means the Parks, Recreation and
Community Services Department.
   B.   As used in this chapter, DIRECTOR means the Parks, Recreation and
Community Services Director or his or her designee.
   C.   As used in this Code, a PUBLIC PARK or PARK is any of the following:
      1.   Any area within the City of Culver City owned, leased or operated by
the City, open to the general public for primarily recreational purposes,
regardless of any fee or age requirement, including but not limited to,
parkettes, community gardens, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports or athletic
fields, walking paths, hiking trails, skateboard parks and dog parks, pools or
bike paths, including the parking lot or parking area immediately adjacent
thereto;
      2.   The Veteran's Memorial Complex and Auditorium, Teen Center, and
Plunge locker and dressing room facility, and any other buildings or structures
within City parks, including the parking lot or parking area immediately
adjacent thereto; and
      3.   Any area within the City of Culver City owned or operated by another
public agency, open to the general public for primarily recreational purposes,
regardless of any fee or age requirement, including but not limited to,
parkettes, community gardens, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports or athletic
fields, walking paths, hiking trails, skateboard parks and dog parks, pools, or
bike paths, including the parking lot or parking area immediately adjacent
thereto.
(‘65 Code, § 25-1) (Ord. No. CS-290 Art. II § 1; Ord. No. 94-032 § 1; Ord. No.
2023-001 § 2; Ord. No. 2024-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.10.010 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.
   A.   Any person using or participating in any activity within a park or park
facility shall do so in accordance with the regulations of this chapter and all
applicable laws, including fire and safety regulations and applicable
provisions of this Code. Any person, group or organization holding a permit to
conduct certain activities within a park or park facility shall be bound by all
park rules and regulations and all applicable laws as though fully set forth in
the permit.
   B.   Any person, group of organization violating park rules and regulations,
applicable laws, or conditions of any permit shall be subject to the immediate
revocation of park or park facility use privileges authorized by the permit,
and any permit fees paid shall be nonrefundable.
   C.   The Department shall have the authority to revoke a park permit upon a
finding of the violation of park rules and regulations, applicable laws, or
conditions of any permit.
   D.   Any person, group or organization using a park or park facility shall
be liable and responsible for paying for any damage to any person or property
including, but not limited to, City property, arising out of or related to such
use.
   E.   Any person, group or organization that wishes to use a park, park
facility, or a portion thereof, on a repetitive basis, shall first obtain a
permit or use agreement from the Department authorizing said use prior to
occupying the park, park facility, or portion thereof, for said activities.
Repetitive uses include, but are not limited to, athletic league, team or group
sporting activities, including any games, practices, clinics, or other sport
related events. No person, group or organization shall violate any conditions
set forth in a use agreement or continue to conduct any activity or use for
which a use agreement is required upon revocation of such use agreement.
   F.   Any person, group or organization that wishes to use a park, park
facility, or a portion thereof to teach a class or conduct business shall first
obtain a permit or use agreement from the Department authorizing said use prior
to occupying the park, park facility, or portion thereof.
   G.   Use of a park or park facility for group activities or events shall not
interfere with the public enjoyment of the park or park facility; detract from
the health, safety, welfare or recreation of the general public; cause unusual
or extraordinary expense to the City; nor draw crowds in excess of the capacity
of the park or park facility or portion thereof.
   H.   The Department, in its discretion, may establish scheduling procedures,
use regulations, and application processes for City parks and park facilities.
(Ord. No. 2024-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.10.015 POLICY ON CLOSING.
   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may declare any park, either in
its entirety or a portion thereof, closed to the public or limited to certain
uses, at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at
regular and stated intervals.
(‘65 Code, § 25-3) (Ord. No. CS- 973 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-005 § 2 (part); Ord.
No. 2024-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.10.020 PERMITS AND USE AGREEMENTS.
   A.   Use of a park or park facility is allowed on a first come, first served
basis unless the Department has issued a permit or use agreement.
   B.   The Department may issue permits allowing the use of a park or park
facility, or portion thereof, by a person, group or organization, to the
exclusion of others, in connection with planned social occasions such as
birthday parties, programs and recreational activities. No person, group or
organization other than the person, group or organization authorized by the
permit shall enter or remain in the designated park or park facility, or
portion thereof, during the period covered by the permit. Park and park
facility permits are nontransferable and may only be used by the permit holder.
   C.   Use of an outside vendor, including any person or entity paid for food,
goods services, or merchandise, requires a City issued permit. An applicant for
a permit must list all outside vendors and all equipment, food, goods, services
and merchandise being provided by outside vendors. The applicant must provide
all required City-required licenses, permits, insurance, and fees.
   D.   The Department shall have the authority to post reservation notices at
a park or park facility, or portion thereof, notifying the public that a park
or park facility, or portion thereof, is reserved for exclusive use during a
specified time period, pursuant to a permit. No person shall use any park or
park facility, or portion thereof, including sites, tables or other public
accommodations, which have been posted with a Department issued reservation
notice.
   E.   Any person, group or organization not having a permit for the use of a
park or park facility shall surrender or turn over possession of the park, park
facility, or portion thereof, to any person, group or organization that is in
possession of a valid permit from the Department. A person, group or
organization not having a permit from the Department shall not refuse or fail
to surrender the use of such park, park facility, or portion thereof, to any
person, group or organization who has a validly issued permit for the use of
such park, park facility, of portion thereof.
(Ord. No. 2024-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.10.025 RESERVED.
§ 9.10.030 DIRECTOR AUTHORITY TO ISSUE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director is authorized to administer and enforce this chapter, which may
include promulgating guidelines, procedures, and rules consistent with the
provisions of this chapter. Such guidelines shall have the force and effect of
law.
(Ord. No. 2024-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.10.035 RESERVED.
§ 9.10.040 RESERVED.
§ 9.10.045 RESERVED.
§ 9.10.050 OBSTRUCTING PATHWAYS PROHIBITED.
   No person or persons shall assemble, collect or gather together in any
manner that blocks, impedes or obstructs, or leaves or causes to be left any
object that blocks, impedes or obstructs, access or egress to any park pathway,
sidewalk, walkway, passageway or recreational court or facility, or any
entrance, exit or approach to any public building or any park building,
structure, or recreational court or facility, except as authorized by the
Director or by City permit.
(‘65 Code, § 25-10) (Ord. No. CS-290 Art. II § 6; Ord. No. 2024-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.10.055 PROHIBITIONS.
   Within the limits of any public park it shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   Having charge, care, custody or control of any dog, except as permitted
by §§
9.10.400 or
9.10.600, or other animal, fowl, or reptile to cause, permit or allow the same
to be within the limits of any public park within the City, unless such person
or organization has obtained approval from the Department to conduct an
entertainment or exhibition in which an animal is a participant, or a film
permit in accordance with
Chapter 11.14 of this Code in which an animal or animals is part of the filming
activity.
(‘65 Code, § 5-12) (Ord. No. CS- 290; Ord. No. CS-405 § 1; Ord. No. 2004-015 2;
Ord. No. 2006-008 § 2)
   B.   To carry or discharge any air gun or firearm, or discharge any missile
or other projectile from a slingshot, bow, or mechanized or electronic device,
or bring, or have in his or her possession, or set off or otherwise cause to
explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other
fireworks or explosives or inflammable material, or discharge them or throw
them into any such areas from land or highway adjacent thereto. This
prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that in
conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of
the foregoing standpoints. This provision, however, shall not prevent the
holding of fireworks exhibitions or displays in public parks or places when
authorized by the City Council in accordance with § 9.02.220 of this Code.
   C.   To swim, bathe, wade in, or pollute the water of any fountain, water
feature or pond.
   D.   1.   To make, kindle or use a fire, barbecue, portable stove or burning
charcoal, except in a designated area pursuant to a permit issued by the
Department, with the approval of the Community Risk Reduction Division of the
Fire Department ("CRR"). This subsection shall not apply to use of a City-
designated barbecue grill. CRR shall have the authority to prohibit the use of
certain barbecue grill locations at any time in order to protect public health
and safety.
      2.   To use any substance other than charcoal in a City barbecue grill.
Any person using a City barbecue grill shall ensure the safe disposal of
charcoal.
      3.   To drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, or other
inflammable material, within any park area, or upon any public property,
highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
      4.   To smoke or dispose of any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia,
pursuant to §
9.11.115 of this Code.
      5.   To smoke or ingest cannabis, pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code
§ 11362.3.
      6.   To use a generator, except as allowed by City permit.
   E.   To engage in the activities or perform any of the actions prohibited by
§
9.10.700 of this Code.
   F.   To ride or drive any horse or other animal, or ride, operate or drive
any motorized bicycle, personal assistive mobility device, board, scooter,
skateboard, or other motorized device or vehicle elsewhere than on the roads or
drives provided for such purpose, unless in possession of a permit issued by
the Department. "Motorized" shall include mechanized vehicles and devices
reliant on electricity, gasoline, solar energy or any other power source. This
subsection shall not apply to any person who is operating (1) a non-motorized
bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller skates or other non-motorized vehicle or
device, provided such vehicle or device is not traveling greater than five
miles per hour (5 mph); or (2) a mobility device due to a physical disability,
and is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian.
   G.   To leave a bicycle, skateboard, or other non-motorized vehicle or
device, lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or
position where other persons may trip over or be injured by it, or park or
leave a non-motorized bicycle or scooter in a place other than a designated
location, such as a bicycle rack, when such location is provided and there is
space available. Motorized vehicles and devices shall not be parked or left
within the park, but must be parked or left in a parking lot or other
authorized area.
   H.   To use or cause to be used any park or park facility object, item,
amenity or equipment, including but not limited to trees, tables, seats,
benches, playground equipment or any other areas for anything other than their
intended use or purpose.
   I.   To announce, advertise or call public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire, or expose or offer for sale any article or
thing; nor shall a person station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here
made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the
authority and regulation of the Director, activities allowed by City permit,
and activities expressly allowed by
Chapter 11.18 (Sidewalk Vending).
   J.   To play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt
or carried on with cards, dice or other device, for money, chips, shells,
credit or any other representative of value, or maintain or exhibit any
gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming except as allowed by
state law and permitted by the Director.
   K.   To practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation,
business or profession without the permission of the Director, unless otherwise
expressly authorized by this Code or allowed by City permit.
   L.   To drive or have any dray, truck, wagon, cart, or other vehicle
carrying goods or regularly used or employed in carrying goods, merchandise,
lumber, machinery, oil, manure, trash, dirt, sand or soil or any article of
trade or commerce, except where authorized by permit from the Department or as
is authorized by
Chapter 11.18 (Sidewalk Vending).
   M.   1.   To take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown
or otherwise propelled objects such as corn hole, horse shoes, balls, stones,
arrows, boomerangs, or javelins, except in areas set apart for such forms of
recreation.
      2.   To play or engage in an organized game or sport, including, but not
limited to, baseball, softball, football, rugby, ultimate frisbee, soccer and
lacrosse, except in such areas specifically designated or set apart for such
purpose. For purposes of this subsection, "organized game or sport" shall mean
a game or sport that is directed by adult or youth leaders and involves rules
and/or formal practice and competition.
      3.   The use of steel cleats in the park is prohibited.
      4.   The Department may prohibit any game, sport or recreational activity
that is determined to be dangerous to participants or public safety, or is
found to cause damage to public parks.
   N.   To deposit, except in City-designated receptacles, any paper, fruit,
rubbish, debris, or any waste material of any kind generated as a result of
park and/or park facility use, or to use City-designated receptacles in parks
and park facilities to dispose of personal, household or commercial waste.
   O.   To fight or challenge another person to fight; to maliciously or
willfully disturb another person by loud and unreasonable noise; or to use
offensive words that are inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent
reaction from another person.
   P.   To interfere with or hinder any employee, agent or volunteer of the
City engaged in maintenance or repair of any park or park facility and/or any
such person carrying out duties or enforcing rules and regulations as
authorized by the Department at any park or park facility.
   Q.   To enter or use any area that is fenced off or locked, or any area in
violation of posted notices or any provision of this Chapter.
   R.   To fail to produce and exhibit any permit issued by the Department or
City, upon any City official's request to inspect the permit for the purpose of
enforcing compliance with any provision of this Code, any other City rules,
regulations and policies, and conditions of the permit.
   S.   To maliciously, willfully or unreasonably disturb or interfere with any
person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the
authority of a permit.
   T.   To enter any park, park area or park facility barricaded or fenced for
maintenance, repair or construction, or closed to the public, without the
authorization of the Department.
   U.   To conduct or perform any instructional activity for monetary
consideration, including, but not limited to, fitness training, yoga classes,
tennis classes, gyms, boot camps and other types of camps, without first
obtaining a permit from the Department.
   V.   To conduct any performance or exhibition for monetary consideration
without first obtaining a permit from the Department.
   W.   To take-off, land, or operate any unmanned aerial systems or model
airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
   X.   To engage in bullying, as defined by City Council resolution.
   Y.   To paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement, or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause
to be erected any sign whatsoever, except as authorized by the Director and as
defined by the location where the permit is issued.
   Z.   To puncture or stake any item in the ground, including soccer goal
posts and volleyball nets, when the stake is longer than twelve (12) inches.
   AA.   To play or practice golf (including, but not limited to, driving,
chipping or putting a standard or simulated golf ball), except in a golf
course, driving range and/or areas permitted by the Director, and subject to
all rules and regulations posted at such areas.
   BB.   To install a bounce house or other large play equipment without first
obtaining a use agreement or permit.
(‘65 Code, § 25-11) (Ord. No. CS-290 Art II § 7; Ord. No. CS-973 § 1; Ord. No.
CS-1006 § 1; Ord. No. 96-023 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-005 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2005-
012 §§ 1-10; Ord. No. 2023- 001 § 3; Ord. No. 2023-006 §§ 2- 4; Ord. No. 2024-
002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.10.060 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The City Council by resolution shall establish hours during which parks and
park facilities owned and operated by the City of Culver City shall be closed
to the public. In each park a sign shall be conspicuously displayed which
states the hours of operation of the park and the hours during which the park
is closed to the public.
(‘65 Code, § 25-11.1) (Ord. No. CS-1006 § 2; Ord. No. 2024-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.10.070 PENALTIES.
   Violation of this subchapter shall constitute an infraction, subject to
penalties as set forth in §
1.01.045 of this Code. Violations also may be enforced through the
administrative citation process set forth in
Chapter 1.02 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2024-002 § 1 (part))
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY
§ 9.10.200 PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following in public
buildings or on public property:
   A.   Cut, break, deface, mark or write upon, or in any manner injure or
damage any public building, or any fixtures, furniture or appurtenances
attached thereto, or damage any street tunnel, lighting standard, bench or
other publicly owned or operated structure, apparatus or property.
   B.   Climb, cut, break, detach, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant or
flower, or pluck, pull up, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower, or
attach any object to a tree within any parkway or other public area.
   C.   Take, remove or carry away any machinery, equipment, motor vehicle,
apparatus, wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, furniture or fixture of any kind from
any public building, playground, park, yard or other area without permission
from the custodian in charge of said buildings or premises.
   D.   Deposit any paper, food, rubbish, debris or any waste material of any
kind in any public restroom, except in City-designated receptacles.
   E.   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement,
or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any
sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.
   F.   Within any restroom, shower, changing room, and locker room in a public
building or on public property, to fight or challenge another person to fight;
to maliciously or willfully disturb another person by loud and unreasonable
noise; to use offensive words that are inherently likely to provoke an
immediate violent reaction from another person; or to engage in bullying, as
defined by City Council resolution.
   G.   Engage in the activities or perform any of the actions prohibited in
public parks by §
9.10.055 of this Code.
(‘65 Code, § 25-12) (Ord. No. CS-290 Art. II § 9; Ord. No. 2005-012 § 11; Ord.
No. 2023-001 § 4; Ord. No. 2024-002 § 2 (part))
§ 9.10.205 RESTROOM, SHOWER, CHANGING ROOM, AND LOCKER ROOM FACILITIES.
   A.   This section shall apply to restroom, shower, changing room, or locker
room facilities in a public building or on public property.
   B.   An individual shall not be requested or required to use gender-
segregated facilities that are inconsistent with that individual's gender
expression or gender identity, or to use separate or gender-neutral facilities.
   C.   Whenever feasible, the City shall provide options for privacy, such as
additional or single-use gender-neutral facilities, that are available to any
individual.
   D.   The same standards will be consistently applied to all facility users,
regardless of gender expression or gender identity.
(Ord. No. 2024-002 § 2 (part))
§ 9.10.210 PENALTIES.
   Violation of this subchapter shall constitute an infraction, subject to
penalties as set forth in §
1.01.045 of this Code. Violations also may be enforced through the
administrative citation process set forth in
Chapter 1.02 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2024-002 § 2 (part))
SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER WHEELED RECREATIONAL DEVICES
- RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 9.10.300 PUBLIC SKATEBOARD PARKS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   A.   Any person who rides or operates a skateboard or other wheeled
recreational device, in a publicly owned or operated skateboard park in the
City must wear a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads at all times and signage shall
be posted setting forth these requirements and the penalty for violation
thereof. For the purpose of this section and §
9.10.305, "other wheeled recreational device" shall include non-motorized
bicycles, scooters, inline skates, roller skates, or wheelchairs being used for
recreational purposes.
   B.   The Department is authorized to establish any administrative guidelines
or processes, and the City Council may establish by resolution any rules and
regulations, regarding the use of public skateboard parks within the City.
Signage setting forth all rules and regulations established by this subsection,
and the penalty for violation thereof, shall be posted at all public skateboard
parks within the City. A violation of any rule or regulation established by
this subsection shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in §
9.10.300.C.
(‘65 Code, § 25-15) (Ord. No. 99- 009, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2002-005 § 2
(part); Ord. No. 2007-006 § 1; Ord. No. 2024-002 § 3 (part))
§ 9.10.305 SKATEBOARDING AND THE USE OF OTHER WHEELED RECREATIONAL DEVICES
PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   Skateboarding and the use of other wheeled recreational devices in certain
areas of the City may be prohibited by resolution of the City Council.
(‘65 Code, § 25-16) (Ord. No. 99-009, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-002 § 3 (part))
§ 9.10.310 PENALTIES.
   Violation of this subchapter shall constitute an infraction, subject to
penalties as set forth in §
1.01.045 of this Code. Violations also may be enforced through the
administrative citation process set forth in
Chapter 1.02 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2024-002 § 3 (part))
OFF-LEASH DOG PARK
§ 9.10.400 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, a person may have charge,
care, custody or control of any dog in that portion of Culver City Park
designated as the Culver City Dog Park (the "Dog Park"), subject to all the
following conditions enumerated in this section.
   A.   The person who has charge, care, custody or control of any dog:
      1.   Must ensure the dog is currently licensed, vaccinated and over the
age of four (4) months, and provide proof of licensing upon request by any City
official;
      2.   Must not allow more than three (3) dogs to be in his or her charge,
care, custody or control while in the Dog Park;
      3.   Must use the appropriate areas of the Dog Park designated for
"Small/Timid" or "Large" dogs;
      4.   Is required to pick-up and dispose of the dog's feces in trash
receptacles both in and out of the Dog Park;
      5.   Must remain with the dog at all times while using the Dog Park, and
is solely liable for any and all injuries and/or damage caused by the dog;
      6.   Shall not permit a dog with a known communicable disease in the Dog
Park at any time;
      7.   Shall not permit a female dog in heat in the Dog Park;
      8.   Shall not permit an aggressive dog in the Dog Park;
      9.   Must have the dog restrained by a substantial chain or leash not
exceeding six (6) feet in length at all times, except while inside the fenced
areas of the Dog Park; and
      10.   Must remove any pronged or spiked collar or choke collar from the
dog prior to entry.
   B.   Children twelve (12) years of age and under are not permitted in the
Dog Park, unless accompanied and supervised by an adult at all times.
   C.   No person shall bring a stroller, carriage, baby carrier, bicycle,
skateboard, scooter, children's toy, food, dog toy, dog treat or dog food in
the Dog Park.
   D.   No person shall bring any animal, other than a dog, into the Dog Park.
   E.   1.   No person shall conduct any activity at the Dog Park which may be
an immediate danger to the public's health, safety and welfare.
      2.   Such activity must cease immediately when asked to do so by a City
official.
   F.   Smoking is prohibited in the Dog Park, pursuant to §
9.11.115 of this Code.
   G.   No person shall enter or use the Dog Park when it is closed.
   H.   No person shall operate or conduct a business within the Dog Park,
unless permitted by the City.
   I.   The use of the Dog Park in the City by an owner of a dog or by a person
having charge, care, custody or control of a dog shall constitute an agreement,
by said owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of a dog, to
protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City from any claim of injury
or damage arising from or in connection with the use of the Dog Park, including
but not limited to, injuries arising from dog bites.
   J.   A person entering, using or visiting the Dog Park expressly assumes the
risk of any injury or damage which may arise from or in connection with such
entrance, visit or use of the Dog Park, including but not limited to, injuries
resulting from dog bites.
   K.   The City shall not be liable for injuries or damages arising from or in
connection with the use of the Dog Park, including but not limited to, injuries
resulting from dog bites, by an owner of a dog or by a person having charge,
care, custody or control of a dog.
(Ord. No. 2004-015, 3; Ord. No. 2024-002 § 4 (part))
§ 9.10.405 PENALTIES.
   Violation of this subchapter shall constitute an infraction, subject to
penalties as set forth in §
1.01.045 of this Code. Violations also may be enforced through the
administrative citation process set forth in
Chapter 1.02 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2004-015, 4; Ord. No. 2024-002 § 4 (part))
DESIGNATED DOG PATHS
§ 9.10.600 DESIGNATED DOG PATHS.
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, a person may have
charge, care, custody or control of any dog upon the designated dog paths
established by resolution of the City Council; provided such dog is at all
times restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in
length, in the control of a competent person.
   B.   For purposes of this section, DESIGNATED DOG PATHS shall mean the
pathways established by resolution of the City Council as DESIGNATED DOG PATHS
and identified by conspicuously displayed signs indicating that they are
DESIGNATED DOG PATHS, and where the pathways themselves are marked with
pictures of paw prints.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall permit or allow any person having charge,
care, custody or control of any dog to permit or allow that dog to be in any
portion of any public park, except as permitted by §
9.10.400, other than on the DESIGNATED DOG PATHS established by resolution of
the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2006-008 § 3; Ord. No. 2009-003 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-005 § 1; Ord. No.
2024-002 § 5 (part))
§ 9.10.610 PENALTIES.
   Violation of this subchapter shall constitute an infraction, subject to
penalties as set forth in § §
1.01.045 of this Code. Violations also may be enforced through the
administrative citation process set forth in
Chapter 1.02 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2024-002 § 5 (part))
CAMPING IN PUBLIC SPACES
§ 9.10.700 CAMPING IN PROHIBITED PUBLIC PLACES.
   A.   No person shall camp in a prohibited public place.
   B.   No person shall leave or store personal property or camp facilities in
a prohibited public place.
   C.   For the purpose of this section:
      CAMP. To erect, maintain or occupy a camp facility for the purpose of
living accommodations.
      CAMP FACILITY. The use of, settling, fixing in place, setting up,
storing, locating, or leaving behind in a prohibited public place any or a
combination of the following: tents, huts, other temporary physical shelters,
cots, beds, or hammocks. CAMP FACILITY does not include sleeping bags,
blankets, pillows and/or similar bedding used while sleeping.
      PROHIBITED PUBLIC PLACE. Any of the following:
         a.   A public park as defined in §
9.10.005;
         b.   Public streets, public alleyways, public parking lots, public
passageways, public rights-of-way, public sidewalks, publicly owned landscaped
areas, parkways, medians, or greenbelts;
         c.   Public educational institutions, including properties owned by
the Culver City Unified School District;
         d.   Properties owned, leased or operated by other governmental
entities located within the City;
         e.   Other City-owned, leased or operated properties or facilities;
and
         f.   Any privately owned space required to be maintained as public
open space pursuant to a City-issued entitlement or permit.
      STORE. To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for
safekeeping, or to place or leave in a location.
   D.   The City Council may, by resolution, establish one or more specified
camping areas. Such camping areas, if any, may be located in prohibited public
places, except that such camping areas shall not be located within public
parks.
(Ord. No. 2023-001 § 1)
CHAPTER 9.11: SMOKING REGULATIONS
Section
Regulation of Smoking in Outdoor Areas
   
9.11.100   Purpose
   
9.11.105   Definitions
   
9.11.110   Smoking prohibited in outdoor dining areas
   
9.11.115   Smoking prohibited in city parks and recreational areas
   
9.11.120   Other prohibitions and requirements
   
9.11.125    Exemptions
   
9.11.130   Penalties and enforcement
   
9.11.135   Conflict of provisions
Regulation of Smoking in Multi-Unit Housing
   
9.11.200   Purpose
   
9.11.205   Definitions
   
9.11.210   Smoking prohibited by law in certain areas
   
9.11.215   Smoking prohibited in common areas except in designated smoking
areas
   
9.11.220   Nonsmoking buffer zones
   
9.11.225   Smoking restrictions in new units of multi-unit residences
   
9.11.230   Smoking restrictions in existing units of a rental complex
   
9.11.235   Required and implied lease terms for all new and existing units in
rental complexes
   
9.11.240   Smoking restrictions in existing units of a common interest complex
   
9.11.245   Required terms to be included in rules and regulations for all new
and existing units in common interest complexes
   
9.11.250   Remedies not exclusive
   
9.11.255   Penalties and enforcement
   
9.11.260   Private enforcement
   
9.11.265   Conflict of provisions
Cross-reference:
   Tobacco retailer licensing, see
Ch. 11.15
REGULATION OF SMOKING IN OUTDOOR AREAS
§ 9.11.100 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of the City Council to control exposure to secondhand
smoke, vapors and aerosol by prohibiting smoking and the use of electronic
smoking devices at certain locations, in addition to those places where smoking
is prohibited by state law. The California Air Resources Board has identified
environmental tobacco smoke, or secondhand smoke, as a toxic air contaminant,
which may cause and contribute to death or serious illness, including increased
risks of cancer, and is especially hazardous to children and people with asthma
and other respiratory problems. In addition, the California Department of
Public Health has identified electronic smoking device emissions as a health
concern for those exposed to secondhand aerosol (also known as vapor), which
results in nicotine absorption at levels comparable to secondhand smoke. The
intent and purpose of prohibiting smoking and the use of electronic smoking
devices at the locations identified in this chapter is to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare by reducing the number of locations in the city
where exposure to secondhand smoke, aerosol and vapors can occur. The
provisions of this chapter are intended to be a supplement to existing state
law smoking prohibitions and restrictions.
(Ord. No. 2008-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-005 § 1 (part))
§ 9.11.105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DESIGNATED SMOKING AREA. An area in the City Hall Courtyard that has
designated by the City, in its discretion, as an area where smoking is
permissible.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electronic device that can be used to deliver
an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component,
part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. ELECTRONIC
SMOKING DEVICE includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an
electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other
product name or descriptor.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE PARAPHERNALIA. Cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid,
smoke juice, tips, atomizers, ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE batteries, ELECTRONIC
SMOKING DEVICE chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the
preparation, charging, or use of ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area that is closed in by a roof and walls, with
appropriate openings for ingress and egress.
   NON-ENCLOSED AREA. A predominantly outdoor area that does not meet the
definition of “enclosed,” including but not limited to, OUTDOOR DINING AREAS.
   OUTDOOR BAR PATIO. Any non-enclosed area located on private or public
property utilized primarily for the serving and/or consumption of alcoholic
beverages, in which the serving and/or consumption of food is incidental to the
serving and/or consumption of such beverages, and where minors are not allowed
to enter and remain. OUTDOOR BAR PATIO does not include an OUTDOOR DINING AREA,
regardless of whether alcoholic beverages are served and/or consumed therein.
   OUTDOOR DINING AREA. Any non-enclosed area located on private or public
property, made available to or customarily used by the general public, that is
designed, established or regularly used for consuming food and/or beverages, or
where food and/or beverages are served, whether or not for compensation. This
includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, hotels, patios, and coffee shops.
This does not include OUTDOOR BAR PATIOS.
   PARK OR RECREATIONAL AREA. Any outdoor area, owned or operated by the City
of Culver City, open to the general public for primarily recreational purposes,
regardless of any fee or age requirement, including but not limited to, picnic
areas, playgrounds, sports or athletic fields, walking paths, gardens, hiking
trails, bike paths, skateboard parks and dog parks. A PARK OR RECREATIONAL AREA
shall include the City Hall Courtyard (except in DESIGNATED SMOKING AREAS),
Town Plaza, any paved public sidewalk immediately abutting the boundary of the
PARK OR RECREATIONAL AREA, or any parking area within the boundaries of the
PARK OR RECREATIONAL AREA.
   SMOKING or TO SMOKE. The possession of a lighted or operating TOBACCO
PRODUCT, lighted or operating TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA, or any other lighted weed
or plant, including a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any
kind; and the lighting or operation of a TOBACCO PRODUCT, TOBACCO
PARAPHERNALIA, or any other weed or plant, including a pipe, cigar, hookah
pipe, or cigarette of any kind, intended for human inhalation.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA. Any item designed or marketed for the consumption,
use, or preparation of TOBACCO PRODUCTS. TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA includes
electronic smoking device paraphernalia.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT shall mean:
      1.   Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine
that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to a cigarette, cigar, little cigar, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, or snus; and
      2.   Any ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE and any substances that may be
aerosolized or vaporized by such device, whether or not the substance contains
nicotine.
      3.   Notwithstanding the definitions set forth in subsections 1. and 2.
to the contrary, TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any component, part, or accessory of
subsections 1. and 2., whether or not any of these contains tobacco or
nicotine, including but not limited to filters, rolling papers, blunt or hemp
wraps, hookahs, and pipes.
      4.   TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include drugs, devices, or combination
products authorized for sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration,
as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
(Ord. No. 2008-009 § 1 (part); Ord. 2020-005 § 1 (part))
§ 9.11.110 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN OUTDOOR DINING AREAS.
   A.   Prohibition. Smoking is prohibited in all outdoor dining areas located
on private or public property, including the public right-of-way. Smoking is
further prohibited in all non-enclosed areas within five feet of any outdoor
dining area, except while actively passing on the way to another destination.
Outdoor bar patios are exempted from the provisions of this section, provided
the smoke does not enter adjacent areas in which smoking is prohibited by law
or by the owner, lessee, or licensee of the adjacent property.
   B.   Posting of signs. Every outdoor dining area subject to the prohibition
set forth in subsection A. above must have one or more conspicuously displayed
signs, stating that smoking is prohibited in the outdoor dining area. Such
signs must have text and/or graphics to clearly indicate that smoking is
prohibited in the outdoor dining area, and include an appropriate Culver City
Municipal Code citation. Any text must be clearly contrasted with the
background, and must be a minimum of one inch in height. The text must state
“No Smoking,” “Smoke Free Area,” or another phrase to clearly indicate that
smoking is prohibited. Any graphics must be substantially similar to the
international “No Smoking” symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of
a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it. Such
signs shall be posted in a quantity and manner reasonably likely to inform
individuals occupying the outdoor dining area that smoking is prohibited within
the outdoor dining area, and must be made of permanent, weather-resistant
materials.
   C.   Time of posting. Every business or property subject to subsection A.
above shall post the signs required by this section within 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter. Every business or property that becomes subject
to the provisions of this chapter after its effective date shall post the
required signs immediately upon commencing operations.
(Ord. No. 2008-009 § 1 (part))
§ 9.11.115 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS.
   A.   Prohibition. Smoking within any park or recreational area is
prohibited.
   B.   Exception. This Section shall not apply to any Designated Smoking Area,
which may be established in the City Hall Courtyard at the City’s discretion.
   C.   Tobacco waste. The disposal of any tobacco product or tobacco
paraphernalia within any park or recreational area is prohibited, except in a
city-designated waste receptacle, or unless being done as part of a scene in a
film, television or live performance production.
   D.   Posting of signs. The city shall cause the installation of “No Smoking”
signs, with letters of no less than one inch in height and including the
international “No Smoking” symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of
a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle crossed by a red bar. Such signs
shall
be clearly and conspicuously posted and maintained at all main entrances to a
park or recreational area, and additional signs shall be posted in a quantity
and manner reasonably likely to inform individuals occupying the park or
recreational area that smoking is prohibited within the area.
(Ord. No. 2008-009 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-005 § 1 (part))
§ 9.11.120 OTHER PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit smoking in any
area in which it is already prohibited by state or federal law, unless the
applicable state or federal law permits additional local regulation.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person an
affirmative right to smoke or permit smoking in any area in which smoking is
otherwise prohibited by this chapter or state or federal law, or prohibited by
a person with property rights in the no-smoking area.
   C.   No person shall smoke or knowingly permit smoking in an area under the
person's legal or de facto control in which smoking is prohibited by this
chapter or state or federal law, except a person who is already compelled to
act under state or federal law, unless the applicable state or federal law
permits additional local regulation.
   D.   No person shall willfully mutilate or destroy any sign required by this
chapter.
   E.   Signs required by this chapter are exempt from the sign requirements in
Chapter 17.330 of this code.
   F.   The absence of signs required by this chapter shall not be a defense to
a violation of any provision of this chapter.
   G.   No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any
reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to
attain compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2008-009 § 1 (part))
§ 9.11.125 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person acting in a
scene of a live performance production or a film or television production, as
long as a film permit has been obtained, if required pursuant to the provisions
of
Chapter 11.14 of this code.
(Ord. No. 2008-009 § 1 (part))
§ 9.11.130 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   B.   A violation of this chapter is subject to a civil action brought by the
City Attorney, punishable by a civil fine of not less than $100, and not
exceeding $1,000, per violation.
   C.   A violation of any provision of this chapter may, at the discretion of
the City Attorney, be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor. The City
Council shall, by resolution, establish the penalties for a violation of this
chapter, but in no event shall such penalties exceed the maximum penalties
permitted under state law.
   D.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.
   E.   Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. In addition, any violation of this chapter involving smoking is
hereby declared to be a private nuisance.
   F.   Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the
general public may bring a civil action to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2008-009 § 1 (part))
§ 9.11.135 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any other provision of
this code, this chapter shall control.
(Ord. No. 2008-009 § 1 (part))
REGULATION OF SMOKING IN MULTI-UNIT HOUSING
§ 9.11.200 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Culver City, in enacting
this Subchapter, to provide for the public's health, safety, and welfare by
discouraging the inherently dangerous activity of tobacco use around non-
consenting individuals, protecting children from exposure to smoking where they
live and play and protecting the public from nonconsensual exposure to
secondhand smoke in and around their homes.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.205 DEFINITIONS.
   Notwithstanding the definitions set forth in Section
9.11.100, et seq., for the purposes of this Subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ADJACENT PROPERTY.  Any unenclosed area of property, publicly or privately
owned, that abuts a multi-unit residence.
   COMMON AREA.  Every enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit
residence that residents of more than one (1) unit of that multi-unit residence
are entitled to enter or use, including, for example, halls and paths, lobbies
and courtyards, elevators and stairs, community rooms and playgrounds, gym
facilities and swimming pools, parking garages and parking lots, shared
restrooms, shared laundry rooms, shared cooking areas, and shared eating areas.
   COMMON INTEREST COMPLEX.  A multi-unit residence that is a condominium
project, a community apartment project, a stock cooperative, or a planned
development as defined by Cal. Civil Code § 4100.
   DESIGNATED SMOKING.  An area where smoking is permissible and has been
established in accordance with the provisions of Section
9.11.215 of this Subchapter.
   ENCLOSED AREA.  An area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to all
parts of that area, and includes an area that has:
      1.   Any type of overhead cover whether or not that cover includes vents
or other openings and at least three (3) walls or other vertical boundaries of
any height whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings; or
      2.   Four (4) walls or other vertical boundaries that exceed six (6) feet
in height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings.
   EXISTING UNIT.  A unit in existence on or before November 26, 2014.
   HOA.  An organization or entity established for the purpose of managing and/
or maintaining a common interest complex.
     LANDLORD.  Any person who owns property let for residential use, any
person who lets residential property, and any person who manages such property,
except that LANDLORD does not include a master tenant who sublets a unit as
long as the master tenant sublets only a single unit of a multi-unit residence.
   MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCE.  Residential property containing two (2) or more units
and shall include a rental complex and a common interest complex. The following
types of housing are specifically excluded from this definition:
      1.   A hotel or motel;
      2.   A mobile home park;
      3.   A single-family home; and
      4.   A single-family home with a detached or attached accessory dwelling
unit when permitted pursuant to Section
17.400.095 of this Code.
   NEW UNIT.  A unit that is issued a certificate of occupancy on or after
November 26, 2014.
   NONSMOKING AREA.  Any enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit
residence in which smoking is prohibited by:
      1.   This Subchapter or other law;
      2.   By binding agreement relating to the ownership, occupancy, or use of
real property; or
      3.   By designation of a person with legal control over the area.
   In the case of a smoking prohibition established only by private agreement
or designation and not by this Subchapter or other law, it shall not be a
violation of this Subchapter for a person to engage in smoking or to allow
smoking in that area unless:
      1.   The person knows that smoking is not permitted; or
      2.   A reasonable person would know that smoking is not permitted.
   RENTAL COMPLEX.  A multi-unit residence for which fifty percent (50%) or
more of units are let by or on behalf of the same landlord.
   SMOKE.  The gases and particles, released into the air as a result of
combustion when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion is human
inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting material contains no
tobacco, other weed or plant, or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is
solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term SMOKE
includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke and marijuana smoke, but
specifically excludes vapors from electronic smoking devices.
   SMOKING.  Engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as, for example, the
possession of a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any
other lighted weed or plant, including a lighted pipe, lighted hookah pipe, a
lighted cigar, or a lighted cigarette of any kind; or the lighting of a pipe, a
hookah pipe, a cigar, or a cigarette of any kind.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA.  Cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of
smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item
designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco
products.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco.
   UNENCLOSED AREA.  Any area that is not an enclosed area.
   UNIT.  A personal dwelling space, even where lacking cooking facilities or
private plumbing facilities, and includes any associated exclusive-use enclosed
area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck,
or patio. UNIT  includes, without limitation, an apartment; a condominium; a
townhouse; a room in a long-term health care facility, assisted living
facility, hospital and a room in a homeless shelter. UNIT includes an existing
unit and a new unit.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.210 SMOKING PROHIBITED BY LAW IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   A.   Smoking in a common area, other than in a designated smoking area
established pursuant to Section
9.11.215, is prohibited and a violation of this Subchapter.
   B.   Smoking in a new unit or existing unit, as set forth in Sections
9.11.225,
9.11.230 and
9.11.240, is prohibited and a violation of this Subchapter.
   C.   Smoking in a designated nonsmoking unit is prohibited and a violation
of this Subchapter.
   D.   Smoking in an exclusive-use unenclosed area, such as, for example, a
private balcony, porch, deck or patio, as set forth in Sections
9.11.220,
9.11.225,
9.11.230 and
9.11.240, is prohibited and a violation of this Subchapter.
   E.   Smoking in an unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence within twenty-
five (25) feet in any direction of any doorway, window, opening, or other vent
into an enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area, as set forth in Section
9.11.220.A, is prohibited and a violation of this Subchapter.
   F.   Smoking in an unenclosed area of adjacent property within twenty-five
(25) feet in any direction of any doorway, window, opening, or other vent into
an enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area, as set forth in Section
9.11.220.B, is prohibited and a violation of this Subchapter.
   G.   Smoking in any nonsmoking area is prohibited and a violation of this
Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.215 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN COMMON AREAS EXCEPT IN DESIGNATED SMOKING
AREAS.
   A.   Smoking is prohibited in all common areas, pursuant to Section
9.11.210.A, except that a person with legal control over a common area, such
as, for example, a landlord or HOA Board, may designate a portion of the common
area as a designated smoking area provided that at all times the designated
smoking area complies with Section
9.11.215.B below.
   B.   A designated smoking area:
      1.   Must be an unenclosed area.
      2.   Must be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any enclosed
area that is a nonsmoking area. A person with legal control over a common area
in which a designated smoking area has been established shall modify, relocate
or eliminate that designated smoking area so as to maintain compliance with the
requirements of this Section
9.11.215.B as laws change, as binding agreements are created, and as nonsmoking
areas on adjacent property are established.
      3.   Must be at least twenty-five (25) feet from unenclosed areas
primarily used by children and unenclosed areas with improvements that
facilitate physical activity including, for example, playgrounds, tennis
courts, swimming pools, and school campuses.
      4.   Must be no more than ten percent (10%) of the total unenclosed area
of the multi-unit residence for which it is established.
      5.   Must have a clearly marked perimeter.
      6.   Must be identified by conspicuous signs.
   C.   No person with legal control over a common area in which smoking is
prohibited by this Subchapter or other law shall knowingly permit the presence
of ash trays, ash cans, or other receptacles designed for or primarily used for
disposal of smoking waste within the area.
   D.   Clear and unambiguous "No Smoking" signs shall be posted in sufficient
numbers and locations to make common areas where smoking is prohibited by this
Subchapter or other law obvious to a reasonable person. The signs shall have
letters of no less than one inch in height or contain the international "No
Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle crossed by a red bar). Such signs shall be
maintained by the person or persons with legal control over the common areas.
The absence of signs shall not be a defense to a violation of any provision of
this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.220 NONSMOKING BUFFER ZONES.
   A.   Smoking is prohibited in unenclosed areas of a multi-unit residence,
including balconies, porches, decks, and patios, within twenty-five (25) feet
in any direction of any doorway, window, opening, or other vent into an
enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area, pursuant to Section
9.11.210.E.
   B.   Smoking is prohibited in unenclosed areas of adjacent property within
twenty-five (25) feet in any direction of any doorway, window, opening, or
other vent into an enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area, pursuant to Section
9.11.210.F.
   C.   Smoking is prohibited in all exclusive-use unenclosed areas associated
with a unit, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio,
pursuant to Section
9.11.210.D.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.225 SMOKING RESTRICTIONS IN NEW UNITS OF MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCES.
   A.   All new units of a multi-unit residence, including any associated
exclusive-use enclosed areas or unenclosed areas, such as, for example, a
private balcony, porch, deck, or patio, are hereby designated nonsmoking units.
   B.   Smoking in a designated nonsmoking unit is a violation of this
Subchapter, as provided in Section
9.11.210.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.230 SMOKING RESTRICTIONS IN EXISTING UNITS OF A RENTAL COMPLEX.
   A.   All existing units of a rental complex, including any associated
exclusive-use enclosed areas or unenclosed areas, such as, for example, a
private balcony, porch, deck, or patio, are hereby designated nonsmoking units
as of May 26, 2016.
   B.   Prior to the effective date of a new or amended lease, or at least six
(6) months prior to May 26, 2016, whichever occurs earlier, a landlord shall
provide each tenant with:
      1.   A written notice clearly stating that all units, including the
tenant's, unit, are designated nonsmoking units and that smoking in a unit
shall be prohibited as of May 26, 2016; and
      2.   A copy of this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.235 REQUIRED AND IMPLIED LEASE TERMS FOR ALL NEW AND EXISTING UNITS IN
RENTAL COMPLEXES.
   A.   Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a
rental complex, including new units and existing units, entered into, renewed,
or continued month-to-month after November 26, 2014, shall include the
provisions set forth in Section
9.11.235.B below on the earliest possible date such lease or other rental
agreement may be amended in accordance with applicable law, including providing
the minimum legal notice.
   B.   Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a
rental complex, including new units and existing units, entered into, renewed,
or continued month-to-month after November 26, 2014, shall be amended to
include the following provisions:
      1.   A clause providing that as of May 26, 2016, or an earlier date if
the landlord so determines, it is a material breach of the lease or other
rental agreement to allow or engage in smoking in the unit. Such clause shall
be substantially consistent with the following: "It is a material breach of
this agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the
tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in
smoking in the unit as of May 26, 2016 [or an earlier date if the Landlord so
determines]."
      2.   A clause providing that it is a material breach of the lease or
other rental agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of
the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in
smoking in any common area of the property other than a designated smoking
area. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following: "It is
a material breach of this agreement for tenant or any other person subject to
the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant
to engage in smoking in any common area of the property, except in an outdoor
designated smoking area, if one exists."
      3.   A clause providing that it is a material breach of the lease or
other rental agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of
the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to violate any
law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property. Such clause shall be
substantially consistent with the following: "It is a material breach of this
agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant
or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to violate any law
regulating smoking while anywhere on the property."
      4.   A clause expressly conveying third-party beneficiary status to all
occupants of the rental complex as to the smoking provisions of the lease or
other rental agreement. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the
following: "Other occupants of the property are express third-party
beneficiaries of those provisions in this agreement that concern smoking. As
such, other occupants of the property may seek to enforce such provisions by
any lawful means, including by bringing a civil action in a court of law."
   C.   Whether or not a landlord complies with Sections
9.11.235.A and
9.11.235.B above, the clauses required by those subsections shall be implied
and incorporated by law into every lease or other rental agreement to which
Sections
9.11.235.A and
9.11.235.B apply and shall become effective as of the earliest possible date on
which the landlord could have made the insertions pursuant to Sections
9.11.235.A and
9.11.235.B.
   D.   A tenant who breaches a smoking provision of a lease or other rental
agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental complex, or who knowingly
permits any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by
invitation or permission of the tenant, shall be liable for the breach to:
      1.   The landlord; and
      2.   Any occupant of the rental complex who is exposed to smoke or who
suffers damages as a result of the breach.
   E.   This Subchapter shall not create additional liability in a landlord to
any person for a tenant's breach of any smoking provision in a lease or other
rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental complex if the
landlord has fully complied with this Section and Section
9.11.230.
   F.   Failure to enforce any smoking provision required by this Subchapter
shall not affect the right to enforce such provision in the future, nor shall a
waiver of any breach constitute a waiver of any subsequent breach or a waiver
of the provision itself.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.240 SMOKING RESTRICTIONS IN EXISTING UNITS OF A COMMON INTEREST COMPLEX.
   A.   All existing units of a common interest complex, including any
associated exclusive-use enclosed areas or unenclosed areas, such as, for
example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio, are hereby designated
nonsmoking units as of May 26, 2016.
   B.   At least six (6) months before May 26, 2016, an HOA Board shall provide
each tenant with:
      1.   A written notice clearly stating that all units, including the
homeowner's unit, are designated nonsmoking units and that smoking in a unit
shall be prohibited as of May 26, 2016; and
      2.   A copy of this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.245 REQUIRED TERMS TO BE INCLUDED IN RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR ALL NEW
AND EXISTING UNITS IN COMMON INTEREST COMPLEXES.
   A.   All existing rules and regulations for a common interest complex shall
include the provisions set forth in Section
9.11.245.B below on the earliest possible date such rules and regulations may
be amended in accordance with applicable law, including providing the minimum
legal notice.
   B.   All existing rules and regulations for a common interest complex shall
be amended to include the following provisions:
      1.   A clause providing that as of May 26, 2016, or an earlier date if
the HOA Board so determines, it is a violation of the rules and regulations to
allow or engage in smoking in a unit. Such clause shall be substantially
consistent with the following: "It is a violation of these rules and
regulations for a homeowner or any other person subject to the control of the
homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to engage in
smoking in the unit as of May 26, 2016 [or an earlier date if the HOA Board so
determines]."
      2.   A clause providing that it is a violation of the rules and
regulations for the homeowner or any other person subject to the control of the
homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to engage in
smoking in any common area of the property other than a designated smoking
area. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following: "It is
a violation of these rules and regulations for a homeowner or any other person
subject to the control of the homeowner or present by invitation or permission
of the homeowner to engage in smoking in any common area of the property,
except in an outdoor designated smoking area, if one exists."
      3.   A clause providing that it is a violation of the rules and
regulations for homeowner or any other person subject to the control of the
homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to violate
any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property. Such clause shall be
substantially consistent with the following: "It is a violation of these rules
and regulations for a homeowner or any other person subject to the control of
the homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to
violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property."
   C.   Whether or not an HOA Board complies with Sections
9.11.245.A and
9.11.245.B above, the clauses required by those subsections shall be implied
and incorporated by law into all rules and regulations of a common interest
complex to which Sections
9.11.245.A and
9.11.245.B apply and shall become effective as of the earliest possible date on
which the HOA Board could have amended such rules and regulations pursuant to
Sections
9.11.245.A and
9.11.245.B.
   D.   A homeowner who violates a smoking provision of the rules and
regulations for a common interest complex, or who knowingly permits any other
person subject to the control of the homeowner or present by invitation or
permission of the homeowner, shall be liable for the violation to:
      1.   The HOA Board; and
      2.   Any occupant of the common interest complex who is exposed to smoke
or who suffers damages as a result of the violation.
   E.   This Subchapter shall not create additional liability in an HOA Board
to any person for a homeowner's violation of any smoking provision in the rules
and regulations for a common interest complex if the HOA Board has fully
complied with this Section and Section
9.11.240.
   F.   Failure to enforce any smoking provision required by this Subchapter
shall not affect the right to enforce such provision in the future.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.250 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions of this Subchapter are restrictive only and establish no new
rights for a person who engages in smoking. Notwithstanding:
   A.   Any provision of this Subchapter or other provisions of this Code;
   B.   Any failure by any person to restrict smoking under this Subchapter; or
   C.   Any explicit or implicit provision of this Code that allows smoking in
any place, nothing in this Code shall be interpreted to limit any person's
legal rights under other laws with regard to smoking, including, for example,
rights in nuisance, trespass, property damage, and personal injury or other
legal or equitable principles.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.255 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Notwithstanding the penalties and enforcement provisions set forth in
Section
9.11.130 of this Chapter, for a violation of this Subchapter
9.11.200, et seq., the following provisions shall apply:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in Section
9.11.255.B below, a violation of this Subchapter is not a misdemeanor or an
infraction. The enforcement of this Subchapter shall be by the private parties
involved.
   B.   A violation of Sections
9.11.215.B,
9.11.215.C,
9.11.215.D,
9.11.230.B,
9.11.235.A,
9.11.235.B,
9.11.240.B,
9.11.245.A and
9.11.245.B of this Subchapter:
      1.   In the discretion of the City Attorney, may be prosecuted as an
infraction or misdemeanor. The penalties for a violation of the aforementioned
Sections shall be consistent with the penalties set forth in Sections
1.01.040 and
1.01.045 of this Code, but in no event shall such penalties exceed the maximum
penalties permitted under State law;
      2.   Is subject to a civil action brought by the City Attorney,
punishable by a civil fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100) and not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) per violation; and
      3.   Is subject to enforcement through the imposition of an
administrative fine as set forth in
Chapter 1.02 of this Code.
   C.   Under no circumstances shall the City have any responsibility or
obligation to enforce or seek any legal redress, civil or criminal, for any
violation of this Subchapter. Nothing in this Subchapter shall create a right
of action in any person against the City of Culver City or its agents to compel
public enforcement of this Subchapter against private parties.
   D.   The remedies provided by this Section
9.11.255 and Section
9.11.260 are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law
or in equity.
   E.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any
provision of this Subchapter shall also constitute a violation of this
Subchapter.
   F.   Any violation of this Subchapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
   G.   No person shall intimidate, harass, or otherwise retaliate against any
person who seeks compliance with this Subchapter. Moreover, no person shall
intentionally or recklessly expose another person to smoke in response to that
person's effort to achieve compliance with this Subchapter.
   H.   Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the
general public may bring a civil action to enforce this Subchapter in
accordance with the provisions in Section
9.11.250 below.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.260 PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Any person, including a legal entity or organization or a government
agency, acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general public
may bring a civil action to enforce this Subchapter. Upon proof of a violation,
a court shall award the following:
      1.   Damages in the amount of either:
         a.   Upon proof, actual damages; or
         b.   With insufficient or no proof of damages, five hundred dollars
($500) for each violation of this Subchapter (hereinafter "statutory damages").
Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subchapter, no person suing on
behalf of the general public shall recover statutory damages based upon a
violation of this Subchapter if a previous claim brought on behalf of the
general public by another person for statutory damages and based upon the same
violation has been adjudicated, whether or not the person bringing the
subsequent claim was a party to the prior adjudication.
      2.   Exemplary damages, where it is proven by clear and convincing
evidence that the defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud, malice,
retaliation, or a conscious disregard for the public health.
   B.   The person may also bring a civil action to enforce this Subchapter by
way of a conditional judgment or an injunction. Upon proof of a violation, a
court shall issue a conditional judgment or an injunction.
   C.   Notwithstanding any legal or equitable bar against a person seeking
relief on its own behalf, a person may bring an action to enforce this
Subchapter solely on behalf of the general public. When a person brings an
action solely on behalf of the general public, nothing about such an action
shall act to preclude or bar the person from bringing a subsequent action based
upon the same facts but seeking relief on his, her or its own behalf.
   D.   Nothing in this Subchapter prohibits a person from bringing a civil
action in small claims court to enforce this Subchapter, so long as the amount
in demand and the type of relief sought are within the jurisdictional
requirements of that court.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
§ 9.11.265 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   In the event of any conflict between this Subchapter and any other provision
of this Code, including Subchapter
9.11.100, et seq., this Subchapter shall control.
(Ord. No. 2014-006 § 1)
CHAPTER 9.12:
VIEW PRESERVATION (OBSTRUCTION FROM TREES)
Section
   
9.12.003   Findings
   
9.12.005   Purpose and principles
   
9.12.010   Definitions
   
9.12.015   Rights established
   
9.12.025   Criteria for determining unreasonable obstruction
   
9.12.030   Criteria for determining appropriate restoration action
   
9.12.035   Hierarchy of restoration actions
   
9.12.040   City guidelines concerning restoration actions
   
9.12.045   Process for resolution of obstruction disputes
   
9.12.050   Apportionment of costs
   
9.12.055   Liabilities
   
9.12.060   Enforcement
   
9.12.065   Limitations
   
9.12.070   Trees owned and maintained by the City
§ 9.12.003 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds and declares as follows:
   A.   Views, trees and vegetation contribute to the aesthetic value, quality
of life, ambiance and economic value of properties within the City of Culver
City (“City”).
   B   Views, whether of the City, the Los Angeles Basin, the surrounding
hillside and canyons, or other natural and man-made landmarks, produce a
variety of significant and tangible benefits for both residents and visitors.
   C.   Trees and vegetation (defined in §
9.12.010 as “tree(s)” and hereinafter collectively referred to as “tree(s)”)
produce a wide variety of significant psychological and tangible benefits for
both residents and visitors to the community. Trees provide privacy, modify
temperatures. screen winds, replenish oxygen to the atmosphere, maintain soil
moisture, mitigate soil erosion, and provide wildlife habitat. Trees contribute
to the visual environment and aesthetics by blending, buffering, and reducing
the scale and mass of architecture. Trees within the City provide botanical
variety and a sense of history. Trees also create shade and visual screens, and
provide a buffer between different land uses. The benefits derived from
preexisting views may sometimes come into conflict with trees. The planting of
trees and their subsequent growth, particularly when such trees are not
properly maintained, can produce unintended harmful effects, both on the
property on which they are planted and on neighboring properties.
   D.   This Chapter shall be applicable to the affected hillside areas in the
City, including Hetzler/Tompkins, Blair Hills, and Culver Crest, as shown in
gray shading on the map attached to Ordinance No. 2006-002 and incorporated
herein by reference as Exhibit A.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.005 PURPOSE AND PRINCIPLES.
   A.   The purposes of this Chapter are to:
      1.   Establish the right of a residential real property owner, whose
property is located within the affected hillside areas, as depicted in Exhibit
A, to preserve preexisting views from unreasonable obstruction by the growth of
trees;
      2.   Establish that real property owners are in need of a process to
resolve disputes among themselves concerning views within the immediate
vicinity of their property that are unreasonably obstructed by the growth of
trees; and
      3.   Establish a process and evaluation criteria by which real property
owners may seek mutually acceptable resolution of such view disputes.
   B.   The rights and the restoration processes are based upon the following
general principles:
      1.   The City recognizes the desire of many of its residents and real
property owners for beautiful and plentiful landscaping, including trees. The
City realizes this desire may sometimes conflict with the preservation of
preexisting views, and disputes related to views are inevitable;
      2.   The City also recognizes residents and real property owners cherish
their views of and from the hills of the City. The City recognizes views
contribute greatly to the quality of life in the City, and promote the general
welfare of the entire community;
      3.   Real property owners and residents should maintain trees on their
property in a healthy condition, for both safety reasons and for preservation
of preexisting views. Before planting trees, real property owners and residents
should consider the potential for view blockage, both currently and at tree
maturity. Persons have the right to seek civil remedies when threatened by
dangerous tree growth;
        4.   The City shall establish a process by which a real property owner
may seek to preserve and restore views from unreasonable obstruction by the
growth of trees, when those views existed at the time they purchased their
property. The City shall also establish a list of factors to be considered in
determining appropriate actions to restore such views;
      5.   When a preexisting view-obstruction dispute arises, the parties
should act reasonably to resolve the dispute through friendly communication,
thoughtful negotiation, compromise, and other traditional means, such as
discussions with the appropriate neighborhood or homeowner association. Those
disputes not resolved through such means shall follow the procedure established
herein;
      6.   It is the intent of the City for the provisions of this Chapter to
receive thoughtful and reasonable application. It is not the intent of the City
to encourage clear-cutting or substantial denuding of any property of its tree
(s) by overzealous application of provisions of this Chapter; and
      7.   It is the intent of the City to discourage ill-considered damage to
trees, and to promote proper use of trees and landscaping establishment and
maintenance.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the meaning and construction of words and
phrases is as follows:
   ARBITRATOR. A neutral person who will conduct a process similar to a trial:
who will hear testimony, consider evidence, and make a binding decision for the
disputing parties.
   BINDING ARBITRATION. A legal procedure as set forth in Cal. Code Civ. Proc.
§§ 1280 et seq.
   COMPLAINANT. Any real property owner (or legal occupant with written
permission of the property owner) who alleges trees located within the
immediate vicinity and on the property of another person are causing
unreasonable obstruction of his or her preexisting views.
   CROWN REDUCTION/SHAPING. A method of comprehensive trimming that reduces a
tree’s height or spread. CROWN REDUCTION entails the reduction of the top sides
or individual limbs of a tree, by means of removal of leaders or the longest
portion of limbs to a lateral large enough to assume the terminal.
   MEDIATION. A process in which a neutral third person or persons facilitate
communication between the disputants to assist them in reaching a mutually
acceptable agreement, as further defined in Cal. Code Civ. Proc. §§ 1775 et
seq.
   MEDIATOR. A neutral, objective third person that assists people in finding
mutually satisfactory solutions to their problem.
   PREEXISTING VIEW. A view that existed at the time a complainant became owner
or occupant of a property.
   PRIMARY LIVING AREA.  The portion or portions of a residence from which a
view is observed most often by the occupants relative to other portions of the
residence. The determination of PRIMARY LIVING AREA is to be made on a case-by-
case basis.
   RESTORATION ACTION(S).  Any specific requirement to resolve a tree dispute
as discussed in this Chapter.
   STUMP GROWTH.  New growth from the remaining portion of the tree trunk, the
main portion of which has been cut off.
   THINNING. The selective and systematic removal of branches from a tree so as
to improve visibility through the tree and/or improve the tree's structural
condition.
   TOPPING. Elimination of the upper portion of a tree's trunk or main leader.
   TREE(S).  Any woody plant with the potential to obstruct views, including
but not limited to, trees, shrubs, hedges, bushes and other vegetation
References to “tree” shall include the plural.
   TREE CLAIM. The written basis for mediation, binding arbitration or court
action under the provisions of this Chapter.
   TREE OWNER.  Any person owning real property in the City upon whose land is
located a tree  alleged by a complainant to cause an unreasonable obstruction
to a preexisting view.
   TREE REMOVAL. The elimination of any tree from its present location.
   TRIMMING. The selective removal of portions of branches from a tree so as to
modify its shape or profile or alter its appearance.
   VIEW(S). A scene from the primary living area of a residence The term VIEW
(S) includes both upslope and downslope scenes, but is generally medium or long
range in nature, as opposed to short range. VIEW(S) include, but are not
limited to, skylines, landmarks, distant urban settings, distinctive geologic
features, hillside terrains, ridges and bodies of water. The term VIEW(S) does
not necessarily include an unobstructed panorama of these features.
   WINDOWING. A form of thinning by which openings or “windows” are created to
restore views.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.015 RIGHTS ESTABLISHED.
   A.   A real property owner shall have the right to preserve and seek
restoration of a preexisting view, when such view is from the primary living
area and has subsequently been unreasonably obstructed by the growth of one or
more trees; provided that such action has not been initiated against the same
real property by the complainant, with respect to the same tree, within a two-
year time period prior to the initiation of the most recent action.
   B.   In order to establish such rights pursuant to this Chapter, the person
must follow the process established in this Chapter. In addition to the above
rights, private parties have the right to seek remedial action for imminent
danger caused by trees.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter is intended to provide any authority
or process for the permitting of alterations to or the removal of City-owned
and -maintained trees.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.025 CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING UNREASONABLE OBSTRUCTION.
   The following criteria are to be considered (but are not exclusive) in
determining whether unreasonable obstruction has occurred:
   A.   The extent of obstruction of a preexisting view from the primary living
area of the complainant, both currently and at tree maturity.
   B.   The quality of the preexisting views being obstructed, including
obstruction of landmarks, vistas, or other unique view features.
   C.   The extent to which the trees have grown to obscure the enjoyment of
the view from the complainant's property, compared with the view that was
available at the time the complainant acquired or occupied his or her home.
   D.   The extent to which the complainant's preexisting view has been
diminished over time by factors other than tree growth.
   E.   The deleterious effect of the trees upon the complainant's vegetation
through loss of heat and light, except that the dropping of leaves or
maintenance factors shall not be considered a criterion under this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.030 CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING APPROPRIATE RESTORATION ACTION.
   When it has been determined per §
9.12.025 of this Chapter that an unreasonable obstruction has occurred, the
following unweighted factors shall be considered in determining the appropriate
restoration action:
   A.   The hazard posed by a tree to any person or structure on the property
of the complainant party, including but not limited to, fire danger and the
danger of falling limbs or trees.
   B.   Variety of the tree, its projected rate of growth and maintenance
requirements.
   C.   Aesthetic quality of the tree, including but not limited to, species
characteristics, size, growth, form and vigor.
   D.   Location with respect to overall appearance, design, or use of the tree
owner's property (i.e., blending, buffering or reduction in the scale and mass
of adjacent architecture).
   E.   Soil stability provided by the tree, considering soil structure, degree
of slope, and extent of the tree's root system.
   F.   Privacy (visual and auditory) and wind screening provided by the tree
to the tree owner and to neighbors.
   G.   Energy conservation and or climate control provided by the tree.
   H.   Wildlife habitat provided by the tree.
   I.   The extent to which the tree provides historical context due to its
age, and rare and interesting botanical species.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.035 HIERARCHY OF RESTORATION ACTIONS.
   A   If an unreasonable obstruction of a preexisting view exists, a mediator
shall recommend, or an arbitrator or court shall order, restoration action
based only on this Chapter. Restoration action may include written directions
as to appropriate timing for such restoration action to be taken. Restoration
action shall be structured and implemented in accordance with the hierarchy
established herein. Restoration action includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Trimming;
      2.   Thinning or windowing;
      3.   Crown reduction;
      4.   Topping;
      5.   Removal with replacement plantings; and
      6.   Removal without replacement plantings.
   B.   In each case, restoration action shall only be required to the extent a
preexisting view is proven by the complainant, based on documentable evidence.
   C.   Restoration action may include written conditions (including ongoing
maintenance) and directions as to appropriate timing of such actions, as well
as recordation of an agreement containing covenants or other documentation to
memorialize the conditions and make them applicable. Where tree removal is
required, replacement by appropriate species should be considered. The tree
owner may elect tree removal with replacement plantings as an alternative to
trimming, thinning, and topping.
   D.   In cases where trimming windowing, or other restoration action may
affect the health of a tree that is to be preserved, such actions should be
carried out in accordance with standards established by the International
Society of Arboriculture for use in the State of California.
   E.   A tree, which has been subject to restoration action under the terms of
this Chapter, is exempt from being part of another tree claim for a period of
two (2) years after the date of the satisfactory completion of the restoration
action
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.040 CITY GUIDELINES CONCERNING RESTORATION ACTION.
   The City provides the following general guidelines concerning restoration
actions:
   A.   Stump growth. Stump growth generally results in the hazard of weak
limbs and its protection is not desirable. When considering restoration action
for stump growth, aggressive action is preferred. Restoration action, which
will result in future stump growth, should be avoided.
   B.   Trimming. Trimming is the most minor form of physical restoration
action. This option is recommended when minor unreasonable obstruction has
occurred, provided that ongoing maintenance is guaranteed.
   C. Thinning or windowing. When simple trimming will not resolve the
unreasonable obstruction, thinning or windowing may be necessary. This action
should be supervised by a certified arborist.
   D.   Crown reduction. Crown reduction may be necessary when thinning and
windowing will not resolve the unreasonable obstruction. However, as with
thinning and windowing, crown reduction should be supervised by a certified
arborist.
   E.   Topping. Topping as a restoration action should be used with caution.
Topping can have deleterious effects on a tree's health, appearance, and cost
of maintenance. Topping frequently results in stump growth. Tree removal with
replacement plantings may be a preferable alternative
   F.   Tree removal. Tree removal may be required where it is essential to
preserve preexisting views. While normally considered a drastic measure, tree
removal can be the preferred solution in certain circumstances.
   G.   Maintenance. In order to achieve lasting preservation of preexisting
views, ongoing tree maintenance requirements are strongly recommended as part
of restoration action.
   H.   Permanence. To help notify subsequent real property owners of their
applicability, conditions of restoration action should be memorialized in a
recordable document for all affected properties.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.045 PROCESS FOR RESOLUTION OF OBSTRUCTION DISPUTES.
   The following process shall be used in the resolution of preexisting view
disputes between parties:
   A.   Initial discussions.
      1.   Complainant, who believes tree growth on the property of another has
caused unreasonable obstruction of a preexisting view from the primary living
area, shall first notify the tree owner in writing of such concerns;
      2.   The notification should, if possible, be accompanied by personal
discussions to enable the complainant and tree owner to attempt to reach a
mutually agreeable solution, and shall be followed up with a written
confirmation of any agreed-upon resolution and schedule for the required work
of view restoration. If personal discussions fail, then neighborhood
associations may be willing to assist with the resolution of the obstruction
dispute;
      3.   The initial notification from the complainant to the tree owner
shall provide a copy of this Chapter. In the initial notification, the
complainant shall invite the tree owner to view the alleged obstruction from
the complainant property, and the tree owner is urged to invite the complainant
to view the situation from the tree owner’s property. Failure of the tree owner
to respond to the written request for initial discussion within thirty (30)
days after the date of the posting shall be deemed a refusal by the tree owner
to participate in the initial discussion phase of the process; and
      4.   After the initial discussion, if the parties do not agree as to the
existence and nature of the complainant's obstruction or to the appropriate
restoration action, or if the initial discussion is refused, the complainant
may proceed with the subsequent dispute resolution process outlined herein with
respect to tree claim preparation, mediation binding arbitration, and
litigation.
   B.   Tree claim preparation. In the event the initial discussion process
fails to resolve the dispute, the complainant must prepare a tree claim, and
provide a copy to the tree owner, in order to pursue mediation, binding
arbitration, or litigation under the authority established by this Chapter. A
tree claim shall consist of all of the following:
      1.   Evidence of preexisting view. A written description of the nature
and extent of the alleged obstruction, including pertinent and documentable
physical evidence. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, photographic
prints, negatives or slides, as well as written testimony or declarations from
residents living in the area. Such evidence must prove the absence of the
obstruction at any documentable time during the tenure of complainant. Evidence
confirming the ownership and the date of property acquisition of the
complainant’s property must be included;
      2.   Evidence regarding unreasonable tree blockage. The location of all
trees alleged to cause the obstruction, the address of the property upon which
the trees are located, and the present tree owner's name and address;
      3.   Evidence of attempted resolution. Evidence that an initial
discussion, as described in §
9.12.045A., to resolve the dispute has been made and has failed. The
complainant must provide physical evidence that written attempts at
reconciliation have been made and have failed. Evidence may include, but is not
limited to, copies of and receipts for certified or registered mail
correspondence; and
      4.   Desired action. Specific view restoration actions proposed by the
complainant to resolve the unreasonable view obstruction.
   C.   Mediation.
      1.   If the initial discussion attempt fails, then the complainant shall
send to the tree owner a written request to participate in a mediation process
as a timely means to settle the obstruction dispute;
      2.   Acceptance of mediation by the tree owner shall be voluntary, but
the tree owner shall have no more than thirty (30) days after service of notice
to either accept or reject the offer of mediation. Failure to respond shall be
deemed formal refusal of the mediation process. If mediation is accepted, then
the parties shall mutually agree in writing to the selection of a mediator;
      3.   It is recommended the services of a professionally trained mediator
be employed;
      4.   The mediation meeting may be informal. The mediation process may
include the hearing of viewpoints of lay or expert witnesses, and shall include
a site visit to the properties of the complainant and the tree owner. Parties
are encouraged to contact immediate neighbors and solicit input; and
      5.   The mediator shall consider the purposes and policies set forth in
this Chapter in attempting to help resolve the dispute. The mediator shall not
have the power to issue binding orders for restoration action, but shall strive
to enable the parties to resolve their dispute by written agreement, in order
to eliminate the need for binding arbitration or litigation.
    D.   Binding arbitration.
      1.   In those cases where the initial discussion process fails and where
mediation is declined by the tree owner or has failed to resolve the
complainant's complaint, the complainant must offer in writing to submit the
dispute to binding arbitration.
      2.   Acceptance of binding arbitration by the tree owner shall be
voluntary. The tree owner shall have thirty (30) days after service of notice
to accept or reject binding arbitration. Failure to respond shall be deemed a
formal refusal of binding arbitration. If accepted, the parties shall agree on
a specific arbitrator and shall indicate such agreement in writing; and
      3.   The arbitrator shall use the provisions of this Chapter to reach a
fair resolution of the tree claim, and shall submit a complete written report
to the complainant and the tree owner. This report shall include the
arbitrator's findings with respect to §§
9.12.025 and
9.12.030 of this Chapter, a pertinent list of all mandated restoration actions,
with any appropriate conditions concerning such actions, and a schedule by
which the actions must be completed. Upon completion, a copy of the
arbitrator's report shall be filed with the City Clerk. Any decision of the
arbitrator shall be enforceable pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Code Civ.
Proc. §§ 1280 et seq.
    E.   Litigation.
      1.   In those cases where binding arbitration is declined by the tree
owner, then civil action may be pursued by the complainant for resolution of
the view obstruction dispute under the rights and provisions of this Chapter;
and
      2.   The litigant must state in the lawsuit that binding arbitration was
offered and not accepted, and a copy of the lawsuit was filed with the City
Clerk. A copy of any order or settlement in the lawsuit shall also be filed
with the City Clerk.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.050 APPORTIONMENT OF COSTS.
   A.   Cost of mediation and arbitration. Unless the parties agree otherwise,
the costs and fees for mediation and arbitration shall be subject to provisions
of Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 1284.2, which states among other things that parties
to an arbitration should pay their own costs and a pro rata share of the
arbitrator’s fees and costs.
   B.   Cost of litigation. To be determined by the court or through a
settlement.
   C.   Cost of restoration action. To be determined by mutual agreement, or
through mediation, binding arbitration, court judgment, or settlement.
   D.   Compensation to tree owner. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed
to deny compensation to which a tree owner is entitled under any other
provision of law.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.055 LIABILITIES.
   The issuance of mediation findings, a binding arbitration report, or a court
decision shall not create any liability of the City with regard to the
restoration actions to be performed. Failure of the City to enforce provisions
of this Chapter shall not give rise to any civil or criminal liabilities by or
against the City.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.060 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   A violation of this Chapter is not a misdemeanor or infraction. The
enforcement of this Chapter shall be by the private parties involved. The
complainant shall have the right to bring injunctive action to enforce any
restoration action ordered pursuant to this Chapter.
   B   Under no circumstances shall the City have any responsibility or
obligation to enforce or seek any legal redress, civil or criminal, for any
decision made concerning a tree claim.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.065 LIMITATIONS.
   A.   In adopting this Chapter, it is not the intent of the City to affect
obligations imposed by an existing easement, already existing City Council and/
or Planning Commission entitlements, or a valid preexisting covenant or
agreement.
   B.   It is the intention of the City that all other portions of this Chapter
shall remain in effect in the event a portion of it is invalidated by court
action.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
§ 9.12.070 TREES OWNED AND MAINTAINED BY THE CITY.
   Trees owned or maintained by the City are exempt from the provisions of this
Chapter. For consideration in accordance with policies adopted by the City,
requests or complaints regarding trees owned or maintained by the City should
be made in writing to the Public Works Director.
(Ord. No. 2006-002 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 9.13: MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY OF VACANT AND/OR UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY
Section
   
9.13.005   Maintenance and security standards for vacant, abandoned, or
undeveloped property
§ 9.13.005 MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY STANDARDS FOR VACANT, ABANDONED OR
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY.
   A.   Every person who owns, possesses or has control of an abandoned,
vacated or undeveloped property, area or place, including buildings and
structures thereon, shall maintain and secure said property in such a way that
it will not be injurious to public health, safety and general welfare or to the
stability of real property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property, nor become attractive to unauthorized persons, including but
not limited to juveniles and transients, nor constitute a health, fire or
safety hazard.
   B.   Every person who owns, possesses or is in control of any undeveloped
real property in the City or any other real property in the City that has been
vacant or abandoned for a period in excess of thirty (30) calendar days shall
do the following:
      (1)   Unsecured access points. All means of ingress or egress to the
property or structure on the property, including but not limited to, windows,
doors, gates and fences that have been breached, vandalized, or damaged, shall
be boarded up and/or secured in compliance with Federal Housing Authority
board-up standards to ensure the property or structure is secured against
unauthorized entry.
      (2)   Paint. All boards securing a breach in any ingress or egress on a
structure shall be fully painted in such a manner as to complement or match the
paint color of the structure.
      (3)   Temporary fencing. Any undeveloped real property within the City,
or any other vacant real property in the City that an Enforcement Officer has
determined in writing, based upon specific findings regarding the conditions of
said real property and surrounding area(s), poses a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of the general public, shall be enclosed by a temporary
security fence as approved by the Community Development Director or designee
thereof. Notwithstanding the provisions of Title 17 (“Zoning Code”) of this
Code, said security fencing shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') in height
measured from grade and shall be erected in accordance with all requisite City
approvals, permits, and inspections. Conditions that shall be considered when
determining the necessity of a temporary security fence include, but shall not
be limited to, instances of unauthorized entry and/or vandalism, and the degree
of decay, deterioration, dilapidation, or neglect of the real property and
structures thereon.
      (4)   Signage and emergency contact. Signs prohibiting trespassing, and
the name and phone number of the person or entity responsible for the
maintenance and security of the vacant property shall be posted on all vacant
structures and/or security fencing surrounding vacant properties. Security
fencing shall be kept clear of all other signs.
      (5)   Letter of agency.  Submit a “Letter of Agency” (or other similarly
entitled authorization) to the Culver City Police Department every ninety (90)
calendar days authorizing the Police Department to remove and/or arrest all
unauthorized persons from the property.
(Ord. No. 2013-009, § 6)
TITLE 11: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
11.01.   GENERAL LICENSING
         
11.02.   HOTELS AND MOTELS
         
11.03.   [RESERVED]
         
11.04.   ALARM SYSTEMS
         
11.05.   CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
         
11.06.   GAMES, AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
         
11.07.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
         
11.08.   [RESERVED]
         
11.09.   PAWNBROKERS; SALE OF GOODS
         
11.10.   TAXICABS
         
11.11.   TOWING AND STORAGE OPERATIONS
         
11.12.   OIL, GAS AND HYDROCARBONS
         
11.13.   ADULT USE REGULATIONS
         
11.14.   FILMING ACTIVITY
         
11.15.   TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSING
         
11.16.   PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG REGULATIONS
         
11.17.   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES
         
11.18.   SIDEWALK VENDING PROGRAM
         
11.19.   FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
         
11.20.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
         
11.21.   CABLE SYSTEMS
         
11.26.   PASS THROUGH TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
         
11.30.   CABLE TELEVISION
         
11.32.   CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
         
11.34.   COMMERCIAL TENANT EVICTION PROTECTIONS
CHAPTER 11.01: GENERAL LICENSING
Section
General Provisions
   
11.01.005   Definitions
   
11.01.010   Requirements to operate business
   
11.01.015   Fees and tax as a debt due city
   
11.01.020   Authority of Tax Collector to make rules and regulations
   
11.01.025   Issuance of license
   
11.01.030   Change of address or ownership
   
11.01.035   Branch establishments
   
11.01.040   Independent concessions
   
11.01.045   Tax certificates must be exhibited; vehicular tax certificates
   
11.01.050   Vehicle decals
   
11.01.055   Expired licenses
   
11.01.060   Audits and adjustments
   
11.01.065   Civil action authorized for failure to pay business license tax
   
11.01.070   Interstate commerce; relief from undue burden
   
11.01.075   Unlawful businesses prohibited
   
11.01.080   Scope of provisions
   
11.01.085   Tax Collector to take acknowledgements or verifications
   
11.01.090   Penalty for violations
Business Tax Regulations
   
11.01.200   Business license tax; time and manner of payment
   
11.01.205   Nonpayment of business tax; penalty established by resolution
   
11.01.210   Statement of gross receipts filed with Tax Collector
   
11.01.215   Statement of gross receipts confidential
   
11.01.220   Computation of taxes and fees
   
11.01.225   Statement of gross receipts verification
   
11.01.230   Exemptions
   
11.01.235   Refunds; filing claims
   
11.01.240   Assessments; administrative proceedings
   
11.01.245   Business tax rates on gross receipts; flat tax rate machines
   
11.01.250   Annual business tax imposed; schedule of rates
   
11.01.255   Determination of business classifications
Certificates of Compliance; Permit Requirements 
   
11.01.300   Certificates of compliance and permits
   
11.01.305   Schedule of businesses requiring additional certification
   
11.01.310   Special requirements for trade shows
   
11.01.315   Enclosed building requirement
   
11.01.320   Permits required for certain businesses
   
11.01.325   Application for permit
   
11.01.330   Investigation of application and decision
   
11.01.335   Notice of hearing on application
   
11.01.340   Basis of determination and conditions for granting application
   
11.01.345   Issuance of permit
   
11.01.350   Assignment of permit
   
11.01.355   Revocation of permit
   
11.01.360   Hearing on revocation
   
11.01.365   Suspension of permit
   
11.01.370   Authority of Committee to pursue withdrawals, surrenders,
suspensions, expirations and the like
Administrative Fines
   
11.01.600   Legislative findings and statement of purpose
   
11.01.605   Definitions
   
11.01.610   Authority
   
11.01.615   Contents of notice
   
11.01.620   Service procedures
   
11.01.625   Satisfaction of order to comply
   
11.01.630   Appeal of order to comply
   
11.01.635   Hearing Officer
   
11.01.640   Hearing procedures
   
11.01.645   Hearing Officer's decision
   
11.01.650   Failure to pay fines
   
11.01.655   Right to judicial review
   
11.01.660   Notices
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11.01.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
   ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS AND MARKETING. All places of business the
principal function of which is the advertising of any service, event,
commodities, materials, goods, wares or merchandise by means of billboards,
illuminated signs, banners, posters, or statuary, and carrying on any
advertising business by any process or method similar, kindred or related to
those enumerated in this Chapter.
   AMUSEMENT MACHINES. Any person engaged in the business of maintaining any
amusement machine, such as music box, jukebox, motion picture or photograph
machine, kiddie rides, shooting gallery, pinball games, video games, batting
cages, air hockey, shuffleboard, electronic games, etc., or any other device
furnishing entertainment for the amusement of the public, maintained for
entertainment and amusement purposes only and not contrary to any State or City
regulation, and requiring for its operation the insertion of any coin, plate,
disk, token key, or the payment of any fee therefor, for which a license fee is
not specifically required under any other section of this Code, providing that
no certificate of compliance shall be required for any adult use regulated
pursuant to
Chapter 11.13.
   ARTS, CRAFTS. The service rendered individually for compensation by
artisans, artists, and teachers of the arts and sciences.
   AUCTIONEERS. Any person not having a fixed place of business in the City
engaged in selling at auction any real estate, goods, wares, materials, or
merchandise, or any similar, kindred or related thing, for which a license fee
is not specifically required under this Code, providing that no additional fee
shall be required of any person otherwise licensed to do business in the City
personally carrying on an auction sale in the regular course of his business.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. All places of business the principal function of which is
the operation of any shop or place wherein is offered to the public for
compensation, work or service for the repair, construction, building or
assembling of any motor, motor vehicle or any part thereof, or the sale or
offering for sale of motor vehicle accessories, or the storing, washing,
lubricating or rendering of any other work or service to any motor vehicle,
commonly and ordinarily carried on in a public garage.
   BARS. All places of where alcoholic beverages are sold or served to the
public for consumption on the premises, excluding business licensed by the
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control as a bona fide public eating place, as
the same is defined in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 23038 and 23038.1.
   BILLBOARD ADVERTISING. All places of business the principal function of
which is the advertising of any service, event, commodities, materials, goods,
wares or merchandise by means of billboards, illuminated signs, banners,
posters, or statuary, and carrying on any advertising business by any process
or method similar, kindred or related to those enumerated in this Chapter.
   BUSINESS. Professions, crafts, trades, occupations and callings of every
kind and nature which are carried on for profit or in which goods, materials,
commodities, wares, merchandise or services are sold or offered for sale to the
public, regardless of whether a profit is actually realized, but shall not
include services rendered by an employee to his or her employer.
   CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS. Any person engaged in the business of calling on
residents, with a previously made appointment, or going place to place
soliciting business of any kind or character, including selling or taking
orders for or offering to sell or take orders for materials, photographs,
commodities, goods, wares, demonstrators, or merchandise or other things of
value for future delivery or for services to be performed immediately or in the
future. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in business operating from or
connected with a fixed place of business which is specifically licensed
elsewhere in this Chapter shall be entitled to one solicitor without charge.
   CITY. City shall refer to the City of Culver City.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY RENTALS. All building structures of any kind rented or
leased to tenants using the premises for other than dwelling purposes.
   CONTRACTING. The business carried on as a contractor by any person engaged
in building, lathing, acoustical installation, plastering, paving, cement and
concrete work, painting, decorating, paperhanging, metal work, heating and
ventilating, house and building moving and wrecking, electrical work, plumbing,
structural work, well drilling, pest control, awning work, burglar alarm
installations, window decorations, and the like.
   COST OF OPERATIONS. All expenses incurred in the operation of a business,
including, without limitation, the cost of personnel, equipment and supplies,
rent, lease, or mortgage payments, utilities, depreciation, and fixed charges.
   FIRST RENEWAL PERIOD. The calendar year following that in which a business
is commenced in the City. Each calendar year thereafter is a further renewal
period. The Tax Collector may assign a renewal period to a business other than
a calendar year to achieve the purposes of this Chapter.
   GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS. All places of business the principal function of
which is to sell or offer for sale gasoline, or any oil or byproducts of
petroleum or other like product, or in which is maintained tire repair and
automobile repair service.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. Except as otherwise specifically provided, GROSS RECEIPTS
shall mean the gross receipts of the twelve (12) months preceding the beginning
of the annual tax certificate period, and shall include the total amount of the
sales price of all sales and total amount charged or received for the
performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, including any
rental, lease, lease consideration, exchange of value or values, or
considerations for the leasing, renting, bailing or otherwise authorizing,
permitting or contracting for the use, possession, enjoyment or right to use,
control, possess or enjoy, for which a charge is made or credit allowed,
whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with
the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise. Included in GROSS RECEIPTS
shall be all receipts, cash credits and property of any kind or nature, without
any deduction therefrom on account of the value of property sold in a non-cash
or partly non-cash transaction, the cost of the material used, labor or service
cost, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever.
Excluded from GROSS RECEIPTS are the amount of gross receipts used as a measure
of business tax paid to another jurisdiction; cash discounts allowed and taken
on sales; credit allowed or property sold in a non-cash or partly non-cash
transaction; any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase
price and collected from the consumer or purchaser, and such part of the sales
price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of
sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit.
   HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS. Any person engaged in the business for hire or gain
of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills, or promotional material,
other than newspapers maintaining a fixed place of business in the City, and
which newspapers pay a business tax fee under any other provision of this Code,
and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the
distribution of such handbill, or promotional material; provided that no
business tax shall be charged for the distribution of any noncommercial
handbill, the principal purpose of which is to disseminate information relating
to any political, economic, religious, philosophical, sociological or related
subjects and not connected with any commercial enterprise.
   HOTELS, MOTELS, APARTMENTS, ROOMING HOUSES AND AUTO COURTS. All places of
business, the principal function of which is to provide guestrooms, shelter, or
space at a fixed rental for the accommodation of the public.
   INITIAL PERIOD. The period from the commencement of business in Culver City
to the sooner of end of the calendar year in which the business is commenced in
the City or to the termination of business in Culver City. The Tax Collector
may assign another initial period to a business to achieve the purposes of this
Chapter.
   ITINERANT MOTION PICTURE/ TELEVISION PRODUCERS. Every person not maintaining
a fixed place of business in the City engaged in the producing, making, taking,
developing, trading or dealing in motion pictures, television, photoplays,
sound film, animated cartoons, and the like.
   LAUNDRY. All places of business the principal function of which is the
laundering of any garment, household linen, fabric, or other material or
article commonly and ordinarily accepted for laundry service.
   LICENSE. The certificate issued by the Tax Collector after payment of the
business tax fee as hereinafter set forth in this Chapter. The term "business
tax certificate" is synonymous and interchangeable with the term LICENSE.
   MACHINE, WOODWORK AND REPAIR SHOPS. All places of business the principal
function of which is to render, offer for sale, or sell to the public for
compensation, work or services relating to the construction or repair of any
machine or mechanical device, facility or equipment.
   MANUFACTURING. All places of business, the principal function of which is
the manufacturing, making or developing of any machines, device, article,
thing, commodity, goods, wares, merchandise, product, equipment, material or
substance for sale, lease, bailment, or any other method of transferring the
right to use, exploit or possess by whatever term it may be called or otherwise
distribute to the public or to any person, firm or business entity, either at
wholesale, retail, or by whatever term it may be called.
   MINIMUM ENTERTAINMENT. Any act, presentation or performance offered for the
pleasure, amusement or benefit of the customers of the establishment, including
but not limited to live performances, whether of a musical nature or otherwise,
and motion picture presentations, but not including entertainment provided by
the public airways of the television medium: provided that no more than one (1)
individual entertainer is engaged in entertaining the customers of the
establishment at any time.
   MOTION PICTURE STUDIOS. All places of business the principal function of
which is producing, making, taking, developing, trading or dealing in motion
pictures or photoplays, sound film, or animated cartoons, and the like.
   MULTIMEDIA BUSINESS. A business that primarily:
      1.   Produces films, disks, tapes, software or other recording devices,
whether visual or audio, through the integration of two (2) or more media,
which media include, without limitation, computer generated graphics and video,
film, slides, video tapes, audio tapes and photographs.
      2.   Provides computer programming services on a contract or fee basis to
the producer of films, disks, tapes, software or other recording devices,
whether visual or audio, through the integration of two (2) or more media,
which media include, without limitation, computer generated graphics and video,
film, slides, video tapes, audio tapes and photographs, such services to
include computer software design and analysis, modification of custom software,
digital imaging and other related programming services; and
      3.   Develops online and internet services, including the design of WEB
sites, for clients.
   OIL STORAGE TANK STATIONS. All places of business the principal function of
which is maintaining tankage facilities for the storage of petroleum, petroleum
products, compound, or any hydrocarbon substance, and shall include wholesale
distributors of such petroleum, petroleum products or compound, or hydrocarbon
substances.
   OIL WELL OPERATIONS. The business of operating any well producing oil,
petroleum, gas, or other hydrocarbon substance, or any similar, kindred or
related substance, and for the producing or manufacturing for which a license
fee is not specifically required under any other Section of this Code.
   PER YEAR. As used in §
11.01.245, PER YEAR shall mean "for a one-year period or any part thereof."
   PERMIT. Permission granted by the City Manager or their designee as a
prerequisite to issuance of a license.
   PERSON. All domestic and foreign corporations, firms, associations,
syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs,
business, or common law trusts, societies, and individuals engaged in any
business as defined herein, in the City.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. Any personal service rendered by any person offering to
the public personal services for compensation, and not specifically covered
under any other Section of this Code, and shall include barbers, beauticians,
cosmeticians, (manicurists, hairdressers, and the like), bootblacks, checkroom
operators, and any person engaged in rendering any service to the person, or
personal services similar, kindred or related to any of these enumerated in
this Section, and for which a license fee is not specifically required under
any other Section of this Code.
   PRINTING AND PUBLISHING. Any person engaged in carrying on the business of
job printing, or producing or publishing any newspaper, magazine, or other
printed publication for public dissemination.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Any professional service, as that term is ordinarily
and commonly used and understood, wherein individuals are engaged in the
business of offering to the public, professional or semiprofessional services
for compensation, and not specifically covered under any other section of this
Code, and shall include the services rendered by any person engaged in the
practice or profession of law; medicine; surgery; dentistry; optometry;
chiropractic; osteopathy; podiatry; veterinary; real estate agent; real estate
broker; telephone message service; civil, mechanical, electrical, industrial,
or other class of engineer; architect; draftsman; designer; landscape
architect; accountant; income tax consultant and other consultants.
   RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT. This business classification applies to any
person or entity engaged in providing recreation, entertainment, or amusement
opportunities. Examples of businesses within the recreation and entertainment
classification include, but are not limited to, museums, dance halls, night
clubs, golf courses, bowling alleys, billiards/pool halls, rides, and rinks:
ice skating, roller skating, etc.
   REGULAR ENTERTAINMENT. The availability of dancing facilities for use by
customers of the establishment, or any act, presentation or performance offered
for the pleasure, amusement or benefit of customers of an establishment,
including but not limited to live performances, whether of a musical nature or
otherwise, and motion picture presentations, but not including entertainment
provided by the public airways of the television medium, provided that more
than one (1) individual entertainer is engaged in entertaining the customers of
the establishment at any time.
   RESTAURANT. All places of business licensed by the Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control as a bona fide public eating place, as the same is defined in
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 23038 and 23038.1.
   RETAIL. A business selling goods, wares, or merchandise to ultimate
consumers.
   SATELLITE MASTER ANTENNA SYSTEM COMPANY. Any person, who for a fee, operates
a satellite master antenna system on a subscription basis to the users of the
system or provides programming on a subscription basis for a fee to a satellite
master antenna system owned or operated by another. SATELLITE MASTER ANTENNA
SYSTEM COMPANY does not include either of the following: An individual who owns
a satellite antenna exclusively for his or her own use, or a cooperative or
association made up exclusively of owners or tenants of a condominium or
apartment complex or other multiple family dwelling complex which owns and
maintains a satellite antenna exclusively for their own use. Notwithstanding
this exception, however, all satellite antennas shall be subject to the
provisions of this Code regulating the construction and maintenance of
antennas.
   SCHOOLS. All places of business the principal function of which is to
conduct any nursery or private school as that term is ordinarily and commonly
used and understood, other than parochial schools, and shall include any place,
school or institution operated for profit wherein facilities and accommodations
are offered to the public for compensation in connection with the care,
instruction and education of children, or for the teaching of any subject, art,
science, practice, trade, vocation, craft or profession.
   TAX COLLECTOR. A person authorized by the City Manager to enforce this
Chapter and any person, whether or not a City employee, authorized to assist
that person in doing so.
   TELECOMMUNICATION COMPANY. A telecommunication company is defined as all
forms of data processing and computer systems and communications systems and
networks for the transmission and receipt of voice, data, images and video
communications, including but not limited to, writings, signs, signals,
pictures, numbers and sounds of all kinds by aid of wire, cable, radio,
television, satellite, microwave, light waves, fiber optics, coaxial cable or
other like connection between points of origin and reception of such
transmissions, including all instrumentalities, networks, facilities,
apparatus, and services, whether mobile or fixed, including the receipt,
forwarding, and delivery of communication, incidental to such transmission.
   TRUCKING AND TRANSPORTATION. The business carried on by any person engaged
in trucking or transporting by vehicle, for hire or compensation, baggage,
express, freight, household goods, building or other materials, rubbish, goods,
wares or merchandise, and the like.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   WHOLESALE. A business of selling goods, wares, or merchandise usually for
resale.
('65 Code, §§ 19-10, 19-11, 19- 12, 19-13, 19-14, 19-14.1 and 19- 15) (Ord. No.
CS-49 §§ 31.01, 51.01, 71.03, 71.04 and 71.05; Ord. No. CS-572 § 1; Ord. No.
CS-655 §§ 1, 2 and 3; Ord. No. CS-700 §§ 1, 2 and 3; Ord. No. CS-714 § 1-2;
Ord. No. CS-852 § 1 (part); Ord. No. CS-900 § 1; Ord. No. 83-019, § 1; Ord. No.
84-026 § 1; Ord. No. 83-0010 § 2; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No. 90-018 §§ 1, 2
and 3; Ord. No. 91-004 § 8; Ord. No. 98-006, § 4; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.010 REQUIREMENTS TO OPERATE BUSINESS.
   A.   Except as provided in §
11.01.200 (regarding grace period for new businesses) and §
11.01.220 (regarding business license tax due for the initial period) no person
acting as principal, agent, clerk, employee, corporate officer, partner,
trustee or otherwise, for himself/herself or for any other person, shall
commence or operate any business in the City, whether or not at a fixed place
of business, without having first:
      1.   Applied for and received a business tax certificate applicable to
such business;
      2.   Paid the required application fee;
      3.   Paid the required business license tax;
      4.   Obtained any permit required by the City;
      5.   Paid any permit fee required; and
      6   Paid any investigation or inspection fee required.
   B.   The issuance of the business tax certificate for an adult use, as that
term is defined in
Chapter 11.13, shall be made within fifteen (15) calendar days of the
applicant's application being deemed complete.
   C.   A business tax certificate or permit may be issued to a business
operating under a fictitious name that has complied with all applicable
requirements under the Business and Professions Code. In all other cases, a
business must obtain a business tax certificate, and if required, a permit, in
the true name of the applicant or applicants.
('65 Code, § 19-16) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.01; Ord. No. 89-016 § 1; Ord. No. 98-
006, § 5; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.015 FEES AND TAX AS A DEBT DUE CITY.
   The amount of any fee or tax imposed by this Chapter shall be deemed a debt
to the City, and any person carrying on any business covered in this Chapter
without having lawfully procured a tax certificate from the City to do so,
shall be liable in an action in the name of the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction, for the amount of the required fees or tax.
('65 Code, § 19-17) (Ord. No. CS- 49 § 11.02; Ord. No. 89-016 § 2; Ord. No.
2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.020 AUTHORITY OF TAX COLLECTOR TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Tax Collector of the City may make such rules and regulations as are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter of the Culver City Municipal
Code as are necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions
of said Chapter. When, by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the
United States or the Constitution of the State of California, the business tax
imposed by this Chapter cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment
according to the amount of business done within the City, or in the State, as
the case may be, the Tax Collector may make such rules and regulations for the
apportionment of the taxes as are necessary or desirable to overcome the
constitutional objections. Such rules, regulations and apportionment thereunder
shall be approved by the City Attorney prior to becoming effective.
('65 Code, § 19-18) (Ord. No. CS-655 § 4; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-
012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.025 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   A.   The Tax Collector shall prepare and issue a business tax certificate to
every person, firm or corporation complying with the provisions of this
Chapter. The business tax certificate shall state the period of time covered by
the business tax certificate, and the name and location of the business.
   B.   A licensee shall report the loss of any business tax certificate to the
Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall issue a duplicate license and cancel the
lost or stolen license upon payment of the prescribed fee.
('65 Code, § 19-19) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.04; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No.
2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.030 CHANGE OF ADDRESS OR OWNERSHIP.
   A.   Every taxpayer who changes his or her place of business, or who locates
a business previously operated without a fixed place of business, shall notify
the Tax Collector in writing of the new address of the business. The Tax
Collector may refer a notice of changed or new addresses to the appropriate
city officers for determination as to whether the proposed business activity
and the premises in which it to be conducted comply with applicable law. If it
is determined that the business may not be conducted at the proposed location
in compliance with applicable law, the Tax Collector shall so inform the
taxpayer and no new or renewed tax certificate may be issued.
   B.   Every taxpayer who transfers all or part of the ownership of his or her
business shall notify the Tax Collector in writing of the change in ownership.
At the time any such tax certificate is assigned or transferred, the person
applying for such transfer shall pay to the City a fee established by
resolution for each such transfer or assignment.
   C.   Notices required under this section must be received by the Tax
Collector within thirty (30) days of the change of address or ownership.
('65 Code, § 19-20) (Ord. No. CS-655 § 5; Ord. No. 89-009 § 1; Ord. No. 89-016
§ 3; Ord. No. 2007-002 § 12; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.035 BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS.
   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
location of the business engaged in and for each separate type of business at
the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only
in the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in
such license; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in
connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of
this Subchapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch
establishments.
('65 Code, § 19-23) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.08; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.040 INDEPENDENT CONCESSIONS.
   Every person who operates an independent concession for a business purpose
within another place of business must obtain a license therefor pursuant to the
provisions of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 19-24) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.09; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.045 TAX CERTIFICATES MUST BE EXHIBITED; VEHICULAR TAX CERTIFICATES.
   A.   Every business tax certificate holder maintaining a fixed place of
business within the City must post the business tax certificate in a
conspicuous place upon the business premises, or if no fixed place of business
is maintained, it shall be kept upon the holder's person at all times while
engaged in such business, or if the business is conducted by means of a
vehicle, it shall be affixed in a manner readily accessible thereto so as to be
plainly visible at all times.
   B.   Business tax certificate holders issued a business tax certificate for
the conduct of business from a vehicle shall obtain a vehicle decal which shall
be stamped with the expiration date the year of such business tax certificate.
Applicants for such vehicular business tax certificates shall file with the Tax
Collector a statement showing the vehicle identification number, State vehicle
license number and type of each vehicle used in the business covered by such
business tax certificate, and such business tax certificate issued pursuant to
such application shall be limited to the vehicle designated in such application
and shall not be transferable unless with prior approval of the Tax Collector.
('65 Code, § 19-25) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.10; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No. 89-
016 § 4; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.050 VEHICLE DECALS.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated a vehicle within the City of
Culver City as an integral part of a business without having displayed thereon
a current decal as provided by the City Treasurer. For purposes of this
Section, vehicles used as an integral part of a business include, but are not
limited to, delivery trucks, contractor vehicles, gardener vehicles, and
itinerant restaurant vehicles.
('65 Code, § 19-26) (Ord. No. 87-003 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.055 EXPIRED LICENSES.
   No person shall exhibit a delinquent or revoked business license.
('65 Code, § 19-27) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.11; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.060 AUDITS AND ADJUSTMENTS.
   A.   Any person engaged in a business taxed under this chapter shall
maintain and preserve, for a period of at least four years, suitable records as
may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax due under this Chapter and
shall, upon request of the Tax Collector, provide the necessary records to
substantiate the tax paid or due for such business. If upon audit of such
records, the Tax Collector determines the tax imposed by this chapter has not
been paid in full, the Tax Collector shall notify the taxpayer of the balance
due, including any accrued penalties. Such amount shall be paid within thirty
(30) days after notice is issued by the Tax Collector.
   B.   If an audit reveals an overpayment, the Tax Collector shall notify the
taxpayer of the amount overpaid. Unless the taxpayer requests a refund of the
overpayment within thirty (30) days after notice is issued by the Tax
Collector, the overpayment shall be applied as a credit against the next annual
tax due.
   C.   If an audit reveals an underpayment of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or
less, the Tax Collector shall take no action to collect the underpayment.
   D.   Rather than request information and conduct an audit, the Tax Collector
may request an applicant to file a corrected application for tax certificate.
If such an application is filed and the Tax Collector is satisfied with its
accuracy, the existence of any underpayment or overpayment under this section
shall be determined with reference to that corrected application.
   E.   Although this Chapter permits projections of gross receipts and
operating costs for the first renewal period, no taxpayer may use such
projections following the first renewal period. Any tax remaining due with
respect to the first renewal period after that period shall be calculated on
the basis of the taxpayer's financial records of its actual financial activity.
(Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.065 CIVIL ACTION AUTHORIZED FOR FAILURE TO PAY BUSINESS LICENSE TAX.
   In addition to a misdemeanor prosecution, the Tax Collector, with the advice
and assistance of the City Attorney, may use all civil remedies to obtain
payment of the amount of business license tax due.
('65 Code, § 19-33) (Ord. No. CS-668 § 10; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-
012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.070 INTERSTATE COMMERCE; RELIEF FROM UNDUE BURDEN.
   None of the business license taxes or investigation or inspection fees
provided for by this Chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden
upon interstate commerce. In any case in which a licensee or applicant for
license believes a business license tax or such fees, in whole or in part,
places an undue burden upon such commerce, they may apply to the Tax Collector
for an adjustment of the tax so that such tax, fees, or combination thereof,
shall not be discriminatory or an unreasonable burden as to such commerce. Such
application may be made before, at, or within six (6) months after payment of
the prescribed business license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and
supporting testimony, show h their method of business and the gross volume or
estimated gross volume of business, and such other information as the Tax
Collector may deem necessary to determine the extent, if any, of such undue
burden on such commerce. The Tax Collector shall then conduct an investigation,
and, after having first obtained written approval of the City Attorney, shall
fix as the business license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable
and nondiscriminatory, or if the business license tax has already been paid,
shall order a refund of the amount over and above the business license tax so
fixed. In fixing the business license tax to be charged, the Tax Collector
shall have the power to base the business license tax upon a percentage of
gross receipts or any other measure which will ensure that the business license
tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature,
so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business license tax as
prescribed by this Chapter. Should the Tax Collector determine the gross
receipts measure of business license tax to be the proper basis, the applicant
may be required to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's
business in the City, or at the end of each three (3) month period, a sworn
statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of business license tax
therefor, provided that no additional license tax during anyone calendar year
shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the
annual business license tax as prescribed in this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 19-35) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.18; Ord. No. CS-572 § 2; Ord. No.
2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.075 UNLAWFUL BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.
   No business tax certificate issued hereunder shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business,
or the furnishing, sale or provisioning of any service, good or product that is
illegal under this Code, the laws of the State of California, or the laws of
the United States of America. A business tax certificate may be granted for
businesses permitted under
Chapter 11.17 of this Code, provided the applicant has complied with all other
provisions of this Code and state law. Business tax certificates may also be
issued to commercial cannabis delivery-only retailers that hold a valid
cannabis operating permit from another jurisdiction and a valid cannabis
license to operate issued by the state.
('65 Code, § 19-37) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.22; Ord. No. 2008-005 § 1; Ord. No.
17-018 § 3; Ord. No. 17-020 § 3; Ord. No. 2018-007 § 3; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1
(part))
§ 11.01.080 SCOPE OF PROVISIONS.
   It is the intent and purpose of this Chapter to license, either for revenue
or regulation, or both, all businesses, occupations, trades, callings or
professions carried on within the City, other than those herein specifically
excepted, and if the application for license is made for any business not
specifically referred to in this Chapter or not included in any of the
provisions hereof fixing license or permit fees, the Tax Collector shall cause
the applicant to file an application for permit for its consideration, and if
the permit is granted, then the Tax Collector shall fix the license fees to be
paid by such applicant.
('65 Code, § 19-40) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 81.03; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No.
2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.085 TAX COLLECTOR TO TAKE ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OR VERIFICATIONS.
   The Tax Collector shall be authorized and empowered to take acknowledgments
or verifications on any matter appertaining to this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 19-41) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 81.04; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No.
2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.090 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   A.   Definitions. Whenever VIOLATE or VIOLATION is used herein, it shall be
deemed to mean:
      1.   The performance of an act, or permitting, or causing of the
performance of an act prohibited or declared to be unlawful or an offense by
this Chapter or any ordinance incorporated in or referred to in this Chapter.
      2.   The failure to do any act required by this Chapter or any ordinance
incorporated in or referred to in this Chapter.
   B.   Violation a misdemeanor. Any violations of this Chapter or any
ordinance of the City incorporated in or referred to in this Chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor; provided, however, that any violation may be
prosecuted as an infraction in the discretion of the City Attorney to serve the
interests of justice.
   C.   Each day a separate violation. Each and every day a violation of this
Chapter or any ordinance incorporated in or referred to in this Chapter shall
constitute a separate offense. The person committing or permitting such
offenses may be charged with a separate offense for each such violation and
punished accordingly.
('65 Code, § 19-68) (Ord. No. 96- 027 § 1)
   D.   Punishments. Unless otherwise specified by this Code, a misdemeanor is
punishable by a fine not exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00),
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
('65 Code, § 19-68.1) (Ord. No. 96-027 § 2)
   E.   Administrative fines. Upon a finding by the City's Tax Collector,
Treasury Division Manager, or any Business Tax Inspector, that a violation of
Chapter 11.01 of this Code exists; an administrative fine may be imposed under
the provisions of §§
11.01.600 et seq.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
BUSINESS TAX REGULATIONS
§ 11.01.200 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX; TIME AND MANNER OF PAYMENT.
   The annual business license tax for each business is due and payable on
January 1st of each year, according to the renewal period established pursuant
to §
11.01.005. A new business shall have a thirty (30) day grace period in the
payment of the business license tax due.
('65 Code, § 19-21) (Ord. No. CS-655 § 6; Ord. No. CS-852 § 1 (part); Ord. No.
90-018 § 4; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.205 NONPAYMENT OF BUSINESS TAX; PENALTY ESTABLISHED BY RESOLUTION.
   Penalty for nonpayment of a business license tax shall be established by
resolution of the City Council. This penalty provision shall not be construed
to preclude or limit the enforcement of the penal provisions of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 19-22) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.07; Ord. No. 86-019 § 1; Ord. No. 90-
018 § 5; Ord. No. 91-025 § 1; Ord. No. 2000-021, § 1; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1
(part))
§ 11.01.210 STATEMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS FILED WITH TAX COLLECTOR.
   In all cases where the amount of business license tax to be paid by any
person, firm or corporation is not specifically stated in this Chapter but the
determination thereof is based upon the amount of gross receipts, sales, or
business transactions, or is determined by any other method set forth in this
Subchapter, a verified statement of the total amount of gross receipts for the
year immediately preceding or other facts upon which the Tax Collector may
determine the business license tax under the provisions of this Chapter as
applied to the particular business involved, shall be filed with the Tax
Collector.
('65 Code, § 19-28) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.12; Ord. No. CS-909 § 1; Ord. No. 88-
009 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.215 STATEMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS CONFIDENTIAL.
   All statements of gross receipts filed pursuant to the provisions of this
Subchapter shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject
to public inspection. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to so preserve
and keep such statements strictly confidential except with respect to persons
charged by the law with administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 19-29) (Ord. No. CS-668 § 7; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-
012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.220 COMPUTATION OF TAXES AND FEES.
   A business whose tax is based on gross receipts shall compute and pay its
business tax and fees as follows:
   A.   Application. At the time an application is made for a business tax
certificate, the applicant shall pay an application fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council.
   B.   Renewal. At the termination of the initial period, the business tax
certificate holder shall file with the City Treasurer, on a form provided by
the Treasurer's Office, a verified statement of gross receipts, or a verified
statement of the cost of operations should the taxable gross receipts be less
than the cost of operations, for the initial period, and based on the
statement, shall pay the tax due for the initial period. At the same time, for
the first renewal period, the tax certificate holder shall pay a renewal fee in
an amount set by resolution of the City Council and the tax based on the
verified statement of gross receipts, or the verified statement of the cost of
operations should the taxable gross receipts be less than the projected cost of
operations used to estimate gross receipts for the first renewal period. Any
such projection shall be reasonable satisfactory to the Tax Collector, who may
substitute another projection as necessary to achieve the purposes of this
chapter.
      1.   For each succeeding renewal period, the business tax certificate
holder shall pay a renewal fee in an amount set by resolution of the City
Council, and shall file a verified statement of gross receipts, or a verified
statement of the cost of operations should the taxable gross receipts be less
than the cost of operations, for the preceding twelve (12) month period, and
shall pay a business license tax computed on such statement at the rate
specified for the applicable business category.
      2.   At the time an application is made for a business tax certificate,
or at the time of a renewal of a business tax certificate, where the tax is
determined by a flat rate, the applicant or business tax certificate holder
shall pay an application fee or renewal fee, in an amount set by resolution of
the City Council, in addition to the flat rate tax.
      3.   The first two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) in annual gross
receipts are exempt from calculation of the tax for businesses whose tax rate
is based on the gross receipts as listed under §
11.01.245(A).
      4.   An additional tax of 0.01% will be assessed on gross receipts when
reported gross receipts are more than one hundred million dollars
($100,000,000.00) annually.
   C.   Business planning review fee. At the time an application is made for a
business tax certificate, or upon renewal if the business has changed location,
the applicant shall pay a business planning review fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 19-30) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.13; Ord. No. CS-900 § 2; Ord. No. CS-
909 § 2; Ord. No. 89-016 § 5; Ord. No. 90-018 § 6; Ord. No. 2006-006 § 1; Ord.
No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.225 STATEMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS VERIFICATION.
   The correctness of all statements of gross receipts shall be subject to
audit and verification by the Tax Collector of the City, the City Attorney, or
by their properly authorized deputies or assistants, who are authorized and
empowered to inspect and audit the books and records of any and all persons,
firms or corporations licensed to carry on any business specified in this
Subchapter. No statement filed by the licensee shall be conclusive upon the
City on any matters contained therein.
('65 Code, § 19-31) (Ord. No. CS-668 § 8; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-
012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.230 EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   Exemption from business license tax. The following businesses and
organizations shall be required to obtain a business tax certificate and any
necessary permits, but shall not be required to pay a business license tax:
      1.   Charitable organizations. Any organization conducting a business or
activity for charitable purposes; which presents proof of its designation as a
tax-exempt organization for charitable purposes, in a form which is
satisfactory to the City Treasurer.
      2.   Parks, recreation and community services contractors. Any persons
contracting with the City to perform recreation-related services for the Parks,
Recreation and Community Services Department, including, but not limited to,
teaching classes and other similar activities.
   B.   Employees. Any person engaged in any profession, business, calling,
trade or occupation covered by this Subchapter, as an employee, whether on
salary, commission, or other compensation basis, shall not be required to
obtain a business tax certificate, nor to pay any business tax.
   C.   Homeowners' association. Any bona fide homeowner's association is
neither required to maintain a business tax certificate, nor to pay any
business license tax.
('65 Code, § 19-34) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.17; Ord. No. CS-700 § 4; Ord. No. 91-
027 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-017 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-005 §§ 1 (part) and 4; Ord. No.
2022-012 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.01.235 REFUNDS; FILING CLAIMS.
   Any business license tax or portion thereof, or any penalty hereafter paid
more than once or illegally, erroneously or wrongfully paid, may be refunded;
provided that a claim therefor, duly signed by the person paying such fee or
penalty, or the authorized representative, agent or attorney, shall have been
filed with the Tax Collector within the applicable time limits set forth in
Cal. Gov't Code § 911.2. Such claims shall be deemed to accrue at the end of
the initial or renewal period and shall be processed in the same manner as
other claims and demands against the City.
('65 Code, § 19-38) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 11.23; Ord. No. CS-900 § 3; Ord. No. 88-
009 § 1; Ord. No. 89-016 § 6; Ord. No. 90-018 § 6; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1
(part))
§ 11.01.240 ASSESSMENTS; ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS.
   A.   Assessment of taxes.
      1.   Whenever the City Treasurer determines that any tax is due or may be
due to the City under the provisions of this Chapter, the City Treasurer may
make and give notice of an assessment of such tax.
      2.   The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of
any tax due or estimated to be due by the City Treasurer under this Chapter,
after full consideration of all information within his or her knowledge
concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, and shall
include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the
date of the notice of assessment.
   B.   Service of assessment; right to hearing. The notice of assessment shall
be served upon the person either by handing it to him or her personally, or by
a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon,
addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business
appearing on the face of the registration certificate issued to the business or
to such other address as he or she shall register with the City Treasurer for
the purpose of receiving notices provided under this Chapter; should the person
have no registration certificate issued to him or her and should he or she have
no address registered with the City Treasurer for such purpose, then to such
person's last known address. For the purpose of this Section, a service by mail
is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. Within fifteen
(15) days after the date of service, the person assessed may either apply in
writing to the City Treasurer for a hearing on the assessment or may file a
written request that such hearing be waived. If the person neither requests a
hearing upon the assessment nor requests a waiver of hearing within the
prescribed time, the amount of the assessment shall be final and the amount
thereof shall be immediately due, but penalties and interest as provided by
this Chapter shall continue to accrue until paid.
   C.   Waiver of hearing. If the person requests that the hearing be waived,
the City Treasurer may either grant such request and notify the person thereof
in writing or may, in his or her discretion, deny the request and set the
assessment for hearing at the time and in the manner prescribed in Subsection
D. hereof. If the City Treasurer grants the request for waiver of hearing, the
administrative proceedings prescribed by this Section shall be deemed exhausted
and the City shall have the right to bring an action in any court of competent
jurisdiction to collect the amount of the assessment, plus such penalties and
interest as may have accrued thereon as provided by this Chapter.
   D.   Time of hearing; notice. If the person requests a hearing upon the
assessment or if the City Treasurer denies a request for waiver of hearing, the
City Treasurer shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before a Hearing
Officer appointed by the City Manager not later than ninety (90) days after the
date of the application, or as the case may be, the date of the City
Treasurer's denial of the request for waiver of hearing. Notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be mailed to the person assessed in the same form
and in the same manner as the notice of assessment, not later than fifteen (15)
days before the date set for hearing and, if the City Treasurer desires said
person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate
the records required to be produced.
   E.   Administrative hearing. At the hearing the person assessed and the City
Treasurer may submit such evidence as they believe to be relevant to their
respective positions. The Hearing Officer may require the presentation of
additional evidence from either the person assessed or from the City Treasurer,
or from both, and may continue the hearing from time to time for the purpose of
allowing the presentation of additional evidence.
   F.   Decision of the Hearing Officer. Upon completion of the hearing, the
Hearing Officer may (1) affirm the assessment; (2) increase the assessment; or
(3) decrease the assessment, as the evidence may require; but the amount of the
assessment shall not be increased unless the claim for the increase is asserted
on behalf of the City either before or during the hearing. Written notice of
the decision of the Hearing Officer shall be given to the person assessed in
the same form and in the same manner as the notice of assessment.
   G.   Exceptions. Within fifteen (15) days from the date of service of the
notice of decision of the Hearing Officer, the person assessed may file written
exceptions to the decision of the Hearing Officer but shall not be required to
do so. If the person does not do so, the person shall nevertheless be deemed to
have exhausted the administrative proceedings provided by this Section. Upon
filing of written exceptions, the Hearing Officer may either deny the
exceptions or modify its decision, as it deems appropriate. If the Hearing
Officer modifies its decision, it shall cause a written notice of decision, as
required by Subsection F. hereof, to be given to the person assessed in the
manner provided therein. If the Hearing Officer does not modify its decision
within thirty (30) days from the service of said exceptions, the exceptions
shall be deemed denied.
   H.   Effect of delay in administrative proceedings. Failure of the City
Treasurer to set any hearing within the time prescribed in this Section shall
not affect the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder.
   I.   Effect of payment of an assessment. Acceptance of any payment upon an
assessment, the validity of which has not previously been passed upon by the
Hearing Officer, shall not preclude the City Treasurer from subsequently
levying another assessment in any case where the original assessment does not
truly reflect the correct tax liability.
('65 Code, § 19-39) (Ord. No. CS-1016 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part); Ord.
No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.245 BUSINESS TAX RATES ON GROSS RECEIPTS; FLAT TAX RATE MACHINES.
   A.   Tax rates based on gross receipts. The following tax rates based on
gross receipts are hereby established and are designated as follows:
      1.   GRT-A       $1.30 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of gross
receipts.
      2.   GRT-B       $1.50 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of gross
receipts.
      3.   GRT-C       $1.60 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of gross
receipts.
      4.   GRT-D       $2.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of gross
receipts.
      5.   GRT-E       $2.50 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of gross
receipts.
      6.   GRT-F       $3.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of gross
receipts.
      7.   GRT-G       $3.50 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of gross
receipts.
   Note 1: The first $200,000 in annual gross receipts will be exempted from
the tax for businesses whose tax rate is based on the gross receipts as listed
under the § 11.01.245(A).
   Note 2: An additional tax of 0.01% shall be assessed on gross receipts when
reported gross receipts is more than $100,000,000 annually.
('65 Code, § 19-42) (Ord. No. 87-001 § 1; Ord. No. 89-016 § 7)
   B.   Flat rate tax machines. The following lump sum tax rates are hereby
established and designated as set forth below:
      1.   FRTM-A       $36.00 per year for each device and machine.
      2.   FRTM-B       $6.00 per year for each device or machine.
('65 Code, § 19-43) (Ord. No. 87- 001 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.250 ANNUAL BUSINESS TAX IMPOSED; SCHEDULE OF RATES.
   A business license tax, annual unless otherwise noted, is imposed by this
Subchapter for the purpose of only raising revenue for the City and not for the
purpose of regulation. Such tax is imposed upon the businesses described below
at the rates designated below:
 
Business Classification                                  Rate Category
Advertising, public relations, and marketing             GRT-F
Ambulance service                                        $120.00 per year per
                                                         vehicle.
Amusement machines                                       $100.00 per year per
                                                         device and machine.
Animal hospitals, kennels and boarding stables           GRT-G
                                                         $240.00 for the first
                                                         day of the event plus
Animal shows when performance involved and or admission  $120.00 for each
charged                                                  additional day and
                                                         $24.00 per day for
                                                         each food concession.
                                                         $40.00 for the first
Art antique show promoter                                two (2) days of the
                                                         event plus $20.00 for
                                                         each additional day.
                                                         $4.00 for the first
Art antique show vendors                                 two (2) days of the
                                                         event plus $2.00 for
                                                         each additional day.
                                                         $200.00 per year plus
Arcade, amusement                                        applicable per device
                                                         and machine tax.
Artist/art gallery                                       GRT-E
                                                         $1,000.00 per year, or
Auctioneers                                              at the option of the
                                                         auctioneer, $100.00
                                                         per day.
Auction house                                            GRT-G
                                                         $240.00 for thirty
Bankruptcy sales or closing out sales                    (30) days, $480.00 for
                                                         sixty (60) days.
Bars
When no entertainment supplied                           $250.00 per year.
When minimum entertainment supplied                      $375.00 per year.
When regular entertainment supplied                      $500.00 per year.
Business & administrative office services                GRT-F
Bus service, charter or otherwise                        $150.00 per vehicle
                                                         per year.
                                                         $288.00 per day plus
                                                         $28.00 per day for
Carnivals                                                each side show, game
                                                         booth and food
                                                         concession.
Car wash                                                 GRT-E
Cemeteries, mausoleums, and mortuaries and funeral       GRT-G
parlors
Charitable organization                                  Tax exempt
Check cashing service                                    $200.00 per year.
Child care/schools for profit (incl. trade & vocational) GRT-D
Children's mechanical riding equipment and devices       FRTM-A
Christmas trees, decorations and miscellaneous
merchandise sales other than in connection with a        $50.00 per year.
business already paying a tax hereunder
Contractors                                              GRT-D
Computer software development                            GRT-F
Computer software consulting                             GRT-G
Detective agencies, private police agencies, watchmen,   GRT-G
and security guard agencies
Employment/staffing agency                               GRT-F
Fortune-telling                                          $550.00 per year.
Gardeners                                                $75.00 per year.
Graphic arts/design                                      GRT-F
Health clubs, spas or other similar types of             GRT-G
establishments including massage establishments
Hospitals                                                GRT-G
Insurance agent/broker                                   GRT-F
Junk/secondhand dealers and collectors                   GRT-G
                                                         $200.00 per year, or
Klieg light operators                                    $20.00 per day for
                                                         each location the
                                                         light is operated.
Laboratories (medical, dental and orthopedic)            GRT-G
Laminating machines                                      FRTM-A
Laundromats, when operated as a business located in a
hotel, motel, apartment house and multiple unit          GRT-A
structures
Laundry services/dry cleaning                            GRT-D
                                                         $50.00 for first day
Lectures, limited time performances, or shows            and $10.00 for each
                                                         day thereafter.
Locksmiths                                               GRT-E
Maintenance service or janitorial service                GRT-E
Manufacturing establishments not otherwise listed        GRT-B
Massage technician                                       $350.00 per year per
                                                         technician.
Miscellaneous business not otherwise referred to herein  GRT-E
Multimedia business                                      GRT-D
Oil storage tank stations                                $500.00 per year.
                                                         $40.00 per $1,000.00
                                                         of gross receipts
                                                         resulting from the
Oil well operations                                      production of oil,
                                                         gas, or other
                                                         hydrocarbon
                                                         substances.
Pawnbrokers                                              GRT-G
Personal services                                        GRT-D
Photocopy machines                                       FRTM-A
Postage stamp machines                                   FRTM-B
Printing, publishing, and distribution of materials by   GRT-E
home delivery or by news racks
Production businesses, television and motion picture:
                                                         $1,500.00 per year or
Itinerant motion picture/television producers            $250.00 per day, at
                                                         the producer's option.
Motion picture/television production on City streets or
other public places or on locations other than a motion  $330.00 per day.
picture/television studio
Professional services                                    GRT-G
Property management services                             GRT-F
                                                         $70.00 per year plus
Public parking in lots or garages where a fee or rental  $7.00 per one thousand
is charged directly or indirectly                        (1,000) square feet of
                                                         lot space.
Recreation and entertainment                             GRT-G
Rentals: Motor vehicles, residential, commercial and     GRT-A
personal property
Repair/machine shops                                     GRT-D
Research/development                                     GRT-F
Restaurants and other food and drink establishments      GRT-B
Residential care/resthomes                               GRT-D
Retail                                                   GRT-B
Scales, weighing devices                                 FRTM-B
Service stations, gasoline, diesel                       GRT-B
Soliciting or distributing handbills and promotional     $120.00 per person per
materials and other canvassing                           year.
Street vending from a non-motorized vehicle              $120.00 per vendor per
                                                         year.
Studios, motion picture/television/radio                 GRT-C
Talent/modeling agency                                   GRT-F
                                                         $250.00 per year, plus
                                                         $250.00 for taxicab
Taxicabs                                                 renewal fees, $400.00
                                                         for each licensed
                                                         vehicle and $30.00 for
                                                         each driver.
Telecommunications/utility provider                      GRT-D
                                                         $50.00 per year per
                                                         person if licensee has
                                                         another current in-
                                                         city license with
Telephone solicitors                                     City.
                                                         $100.00 per year per
                                                         person if this is the
                                                         only in-city license
                                                         with City.
                                                         $200.00 per day to
                                                         hold the event plus
Theatres and temporary entertainment provided under a    $20.00 per day for
tent or temporary structure                              each sideshow, game
                                                         booth and food
                                                         concession.
Theatres for plays and motion pictures                   GRT-D
Towing service                                           GRT-D
                                                         $40.00 for first two
Trade shows, commercial promoters                        (2) days, plus $20.00
                                                         each additional day.
Travel agencies                                          GRT-E
Trucking and transportation                              GRT-D
Used cars, trailers, or mobile homes, wholesale or       GRT-B
retail sales
Van and storage, including personal property movers      GRT-E
Vehicle:
Operating from a business outside the City               $120.00 per vehicle
                                                         per year.
Used by persons maintaining a fixed place of business
outside the City serving residents of the City           $200.00 per year.
irrespective of the number of vehicles used
Used as a mobile lunch-wagon for selling or delivering
box lunches, confections, refreshments, cigarettes,      $400.00 per year.
tobaccos and like merchandise within the City.
                                                         $200.00 per year for
Used for laundry collection, drycleaning, pressing or    no more than two (2)
diaper service, linen or towel service                   vehicles, plus $50.00
                                                         for each additional
                                                         vehicle.
Vending machines:
Dispensing any food, drink or other edibles or           FRTM-A
merchandise (except bulk)
Dispensing in bulk unsorted confections, nuts, or        GRT-D
merchandise at random without selection by the customer
Dispensing cigarettes                                    FRTM-B
                                                         $7.00 for the first
Vendors                                                  two (2) days, plus
                                                         $3.50 for each
                                                         additional day.
Warehouses not used in connection with established
businesses in the City
Less than five thousand (5,000) square feet              $150.00 per year
Five thousand (5,000) square feet                        $300.00 per year
Ten thousand (10,000) —twenty thousand (20,000) square $600.00 per year
feet
Over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet                $1,000.00 per year
Wholesale establishments                                 GRT-B
Wrecking yards, scrapyards, junkyards, and salvage yards $1,000.00 per year
 
('65 Code, § 19-44) (Ord. No. 87-001 § 1; Ord. No. 88-016 § 1; Ord. No. 91-017
§ 1; Ord. No. 92-017 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.255 DETERMINATION OF BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS.
   A.   The determination of the class of business in which an applicant for a
tax certificate is deemed to be engaged under §
11.01.250 shall be a ministerial task of the Tax Collector.
   B.   If an applicant disagrees with the determination of the Tax Collector
as to the class of business in which the applicant is engaged, the applicant
may apply to the Tax Collector for reclassification. This application shall set
forth with specificity the facts upon which it is based. Upon receipt of a
reclassification application, the Tax Collector shall investigate and review
the matter and shall either affirm the original classification or assign a new
classification and shall notify the applicant of the decision in writing.
   C.   The Tax Collector may refuse to accept an application for
reclassification from an applicant who has applied for reclassification within
the previous twelve (12) months if the application fails to state material and
relevant facts which were not and could not have been presented in the previous
reclassification application.
   D.   The decision of the Tax Collector on an application for
reclassification shall be final as to the City, but subject to judicial review
pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5.
('65 Code, § 19-50) (Ord. No. 96- 035 § 1; Ord. No. 97-022 § 1; Ord. No. 99-010
§ 1; Ord. No. 2001-008 § 1; Ord. No. 2022-012 § 1 (part))
CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 11.01.300 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE AND PERMITS.
   A.   The following abbreviations for categories of certificates of
compliance and permits are hereby established and designated as follows:
      1.   LAHD   Certificate of compliance from the Los Angeles County Health
Department.
      2.   CCFD   Certificate of compliance from Fire Prevention/ Building and
Safety Division.
      3.   CCPD   Certificate of compliance from Police Department.
('65 Code, § 19-45)
   B.   No person shall engage in any business which is designated in this
Subchapter as requiring a certificate of compliance or a permit without first
obtaining such certificate or permit.
('65 Code, § 19-46)
(Ord. No. 87-002 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.01.305 SCHEDULE OF BUSINESSES REQUIRING ADDITIONAL CERTIFICATION.
Business Additional Certification Requirements
Business                                  Additional Certification Requirements
Animal shows when performance involved    Special Event Permit (see §
and/or admission charged                  17.520.025)
Art/antique show                          Special Event Permit (see §
                                          17.520.025)
Automobile repair                         CCFD
Carnivals                                 Special Event Permit (see §
                                          17.520.025)
Christmas trees, decorations and
miscellaneous merchandise sales other     CCFD
than in connection with a business
already paying a tax hereunder
Detective agencies, private police
agencies, watchmen, and security guard    CCPD
agencies
Drycleaning plant, cleaning and pressing  CCFD
shop
Klieg light operators                     Special Event Permit (see §
                                          17.520.025)
Laundries                                 CCFD
Laundromats, when operated as a business
located in a hotel, motel, apartment      CCFD
house and multiple unit structures
Laundromats and all other forms of self-  CCFD
service clothes washing and drying
Lectures, limited time performances, or   Special Event Permit (see §
shows                                     17.520.025)
Locksmiths                                CCPD
Manufacturing establishments not          CCFD
otherwise listed
Massage establishments (including health
clubs, spas or other similar types of     See
establishments that offer massage         Chapter 11.07
services)
                                          See sections
Newsracks                                 9.08.600 -
                                          9.08.675
Oil storage tank station                  CCFD
Oil well operations                       See
                                          Chapter 11.12
Pawnbrokers                               CCPD
Production businesses, television and
motion picture:
Itinerant motion picture/television       CCFD
producers
Motion picture/television production on
City streets or other public places or on CCFD & CCPD
locations other than a motion picture/
television studio
Apartments, rooming houses, hotels,
motels, trailer park spaces and           CCFD
commercial property
Repair shops                              CCFD
Restaurants, all types                    LAHD, CCFD
Service stations, gasoline, diesel        CCFD
                                          See sections
Street vending                            11.09.200 -
                                          11.09.215
Studios, motion picture/television/radio  CCFD
Taxicabs                                  See
                                          Chapter 11.10
Theatres and temporary entertainment      Special Event Permit (see §
provided under a tent or temporary        17.520.025)
structure
Towing service                            CCPD
Trade shows, commercial promoters         Special Event Permit (see §
                                          17.520.025)
Warehouses not used in connection with    CCFD
established businesses in the City
Woodworking shops                         CCFD
 
('65 Code, § 19-47) (Ord. No. 87-002 § 1; Ord. No. 91-004 § 9; Ord. No. 98-006,
§§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 2016-009 § 3; Ord. No. 2025- 001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.01.310 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TRADE SHOWS.
   No permit issued for a trade show shall allow an event to continue for more
than the thirty (30) consecutive days unless the event is to take place wholly
within a building not used to provide access to various retail establishments.
A permit issued to the same permittee, trade show or promoter subject to the
thirty (30) day limitation shall not be renewed, nor shall another permit be
issued for the same building used to provide public access to various retail
establishments unless not less than thirty (30) calendar days have elapsed
since the expiration of the prior permit. The complete application for the
permit must be submitted to the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
show unless the City determines otherwise.
('65 Code, § 19-48) (Ord. No. 87-002 § 1; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.01.315 ENCLOSED BUILDING REQUIREMENT.
   A tax certificate shall not be issued to conduct any business which is not
carried on entirely within a completely enclosed building until a permit
therefor has been issued by the City or the City Council has authorized such
permit to be issued. This section shall not be applicable to the outdoor
display of goods as permitted in §
9.08.040 and the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code.
('65 Code, § 19-49) (Ord. No. 87-035 § 1; Ord. No. 96-018 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-
001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.01.320 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN BUSINESSES.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any business which is designated
in this Chapter as requiring a permit without first obtaining a permit in
accordance with the provisions of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 19-52) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.01; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.01.325 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Application for permit shall be filed with the Tax Collector, in triplicate,
on forms provided by him, the original of which shall be duly acknowledged
before the Tax Collector or Deputy Tax Collector or some other person lawfully
authorized to administer oaths, and shall supply the following information:
   A.   A full identification of the applicant and all persons to be directly
or indirectly interested in the proposed business;
   B.   The residence and business address and the citizenship of applicant,
including all directors and officers of any corporation;
   C.   The location of the proposed business or place for which the permit is
requested and the name of the owner and the present use of such premises;
   D.   The exact nature of the proposed business for which the permit is
requested and the name under which it is to be operated;
   E.   The past experience of the applicant in the business to which the
requested permit appertains and the name, address, and past experience in such
business of the person to be in charge thereof;
   F.   Whether or not any permit has been revoked and, if so, the
circumstances causing such revocation;
   G.   Such further information as required by the Chief Financial Officer or
the City Council.
('65 Code, § 19-53) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.02; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No.
2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.01.330 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION AND DECISION.
   Immediately upon filing a properly executed application for a permit, the
Chief Financial Officer shall refer one copy to the City Manager and one copy
to the Department Head, whose duty it is to inspect the type of business
involved. Such Department Head shall make such investigation of the applicant
and of the statements set forth in the application, as they shall deem
sufficient, and make a written report thereof to the Chief Financial Officer,
not more than 30 days from the date of filing the application. The Chief
Financial Officer shall approve the application and issue a permit unless the
Chief Financial Officer finds that the application or activity does not comply
with the requirements of any applicable laws.
('65 Code, § 19-54) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.03; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No.
2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.01.335 NOTICE OF HEARING ON APPLICATION.
   The Tax Collector shall notify the applicant in writing of the time and
place of the hearing before the Committee on Permits and Licenses or the City
Council, which shall be given at least three days prior thereto, unless the
applicant waives such notice in writing. Whenever the Committee on Permits and
Licenses or the City Council deems that a public notice should be given of a
special hearing with respect to the application, the applicant shall pay to the
City Clerk a fee, as established by resolution, before such notice is given,
which payment shall not be in lieu of any license fee or other tax otherwise
imposed by law.
('65 Code, § 19-55) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.04; Ord. No. 88-009 § 1; Ord. No.
2007-02 § 13)
§ 11.01.340 BASIS OF DETERMINATION AND CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING APPLICATION.
   A.   Determination. The Committee on Permits and Licenses or the City
Council shall deny the application for any permit if it shall appear to its
satisfaction that the applicant is not a fit and proper person, morally or
otherwise, to conduct or maintain the proposed business applied for or that he
has not complied with this or any other regulation of the City appertaining to
his application, or that the activity for which permit is sought is itself
objectionable or detrimental to the public health, morals, safety or general
welfare; or that it conflicts with any City, State or Federal law.
('65 Code, § 19-56) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.05)
   B.   Conditions. The Committee on Permits and Licenses or the City Council
may grant a permit subject to such conditions as in its judgment the public
interest may require.
('65 Code, § 19-57)
§ 11.01.345 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   In the event the Committee on Permits and Licenses or the City Council
approve the application, a written permit in a form approved by the City
Attorney shall be delivered to the applicant.
('65 Code, § 19-58)
§ 11.01.350 ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT.
   No permit required under this Chapter shall be assigned or transferred
without the express permission of the Committee on Permits and Licenses or the
City Council.
('65 Code, § 19-59) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.06)
§ 11.01.355 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief Financial Officer may revoke any permit for any reason for which
the granting of such permit might lawfully be denied.
('65 Code, § 19-60) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.07; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.01.360 HEARING ON REVOCATION.
   Every permittee shall be given at least five days' notice of a hearing on
the proposed revocation of his permit, together with written notification of
the grounds of complaint against his business or himself personally. The
hearing, when convened, may be continued over from time to time, and the
findings of the Committee on Permits and Licenses or the City Council shall be
final and conclusive on the matter involved.
('65 Code, § 19-61) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.07)
§ 11.01.365 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   The right to operate any business or other activity for which a permit is
required under this Chapter may be suspended forthwith without notice and
without hearing, in the event such suspension is necessary for the preservation
and protection of the public health, morals, safety or general welfare, if so
determined by the Fire Chief, Police Chief, Health Officer, Building Inspector,
Superintendent of Streets, City Manager, Committee on Permits and Licenses or
the City Council; provided that no such suspension shall continue for more than
15 days unless an order to show cause why such permit should not be revoked
shall be issued, as provided in §
11.01.360.
('65 Code, § 19-62) (Ord. No. CS-49 § 21.08; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.01.370 AUTHORITY OF COMMITTEE TO PURSUE WITHDRAWALS, SURRENDERS,
SUSPENSIONS, EXPIRATIONS AND THE LIKE.
   A.   The withdrawal of an application for a permit or license after it has
been filed with the Committee on Permits and Licenses shall not, unless the
Committee on Permits and Licenses has expressly consented in writing to the
withdrawal, deprive the Committee on Permits and Licenses of its authority to
institute or continue a proceeding against the applicant for the denial of the
permit or license upon any ground provided by the Code, or for violation of any
law or rule which relates to the suitability of the permittee or licensee to
have such permit or license.
   B.   The suspension, expiration, cancellation or forfeiture by operation of
the Code of a permit or license, or its surrender without the express written
consent of the Committee on Permits and Licenses, shall not deprive the
Committee on Permits and Licenses of its authority to institute or continue a
suspension or revocation proceeding against the permittee or licensee upon any
ground provided by the Code, or for violation of any law or rule which relates
to the suitability of the permittee or licensee to have such permit or license.
('65 Code, § 19-63) (Ord. No. 96-011, § 1; Ord. No. 96-021, § 1)
ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
§ 11.01.600 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   A.   1.   The City Council hereby finds that there is a need for an
alternative method of enforcement for violations of
Chapter 11.01 of the Culver City Municipal Code.
      2.   The City Council further finds that an appropriate method of
enforcement for such violations is through the imposition of an administrative
fine, as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4.
   B.   The procedures established in this Subchapter shall be in addition to
criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law, which may be
pursued to address violations of
Chapter 11.01 of the Municipal Code.
   C.   The City Council hereby finds and determines that enforcement of
Chapter 11.01 of the Culver City Municipal Code is a matter of local concern
and serves an important public purpose. Consistent with its powers as a charter
City, the City adopts this Subchapter in order to achieve the following goals:
      1.   To protect the public health safety and welfare of the citizens of
the City of Culver City;
      2.   To gain compliance with
Chapter 11.01, General Licensing, of the Culver City Municipal Code in a timely
and efficient manner;
      3.   To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of
an administrative fine;
      4.    To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or
refuse to comply with the provisions of
Chapter 11.01, General Licensing, of the Culver City Municipal Code;
      5.   To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to pursue
responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system.
   D.   1.   The imposition of an administrative fine shall be at the City's
sole discretion, and is one option the City has to address violations of
Chapter 11.01.
      2.   By adopting this Subchapter, the City does not intend to limit its
discretion to utilize any other remedy, civil or criminal, for such violations
that the City may select in a particular case.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.605 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The City's Tax Collector, Treasury Division Manager or
any Business Tax Inspector.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Any individual who is the owner or authorized agent of
any business, company, domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association,
syndicate, joint stock corporation, partnership of every kind, club, common law
trust, society or individual engaged in business in the City, as defined in
Chapter 11.01, who causes or maintains a violation of
Chapter 11.01 of the Culver City Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.610 AUTHORITY.
   A.   Any enforcement officer, upon determining that a provision of this
Chapter has been violated, has the authority to impose an administrative fine
on any responsible person.
   B.   1.   Each day a violation of this Chapter exists shall be a separate
violation and subject to a separate fine.
      2.   An administrative fine may be imposed for one (1) or more days on
which a violation exists, and for a violation of one (1) or more provisions of
this Chapter.
   C.   An administrative fine shall be imposed by means of an order to comply,
on a form approved by the Tax Collector, issued by an enforcement officer, and
shall be payable directly to the City of Culver City.
   D.   Fines shall be established by resolution of the City Council, or where
no amount is specified:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation;
      2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation of the same offense within one (1) year from the date of the first
violation; or
      3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
additional violation of the same offense within one (1) year from the date of
the first violation.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.615 CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
   To comply, each order shall contain the following information:
   A.   Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the
location where the violation(s) was observed;
   B.   Name and address of the responsible person for the violation.
   C.   The Code section(s) or condition(s) violated, and a description of the
violation(s);
   D.   An order to the responsible person to correct the violation(s) within
the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to
correct the violation(s);
   E.   The amount of the fine for the violation(s);
   F.   An explanation of how the fine shall be paid, and the time period by
which it shall be paid;
   G.   Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the
order to comply may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing
form to contest the order to comply; and
   H.   The name and signature of the enforcement officer issuing the order to
comply.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.620 SERVICE PROCEDURES.
   An order to comply may be issued to any responsible person by an enforcement
officer for violations of
Chapter 11.01 of the Municipal Code in the following manner:
   A.   Personal service. In any case where an order to comply is issued:
      1.   The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve
the responsible person, and obtain the signature of the responsible person on
the order to comply.
      2.   If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the order
to comply, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the
order to comply or subsequent proceedings.
   B.   Service by mail.  
      1.   If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible
person, the order to comply shall be mailed to the responsible person's last
known address by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return
receipt.
      2.   Simultaneously, the order to comply may be sent by first class mail
to the responsible person's last known address.
      3.   If the order to comply is sent by certified mail and returned
unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail,
provided the order to comply sent by first class mail is not returned.
   C.   Service by posting notice. If personal service or service by mail is
unsuccessful, the enforcement officer shall post the order to comply on any
real property within the City in which the City has knowledge that the
responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed
effective service.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.625 SATISFACTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   Upon receipt of an order to comply, the responsible person must do the
following:
   A.   Pay the fine.  
      1.   Payment of the fine must be submitted to the City within fifteen
(15) days from the correction date set forth in the order to comply.
      2.   All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Culver City.
      3.   If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s) by the
correction date, a subsequent order(s) to comply may be issued for the same
violation(s).
      4.   The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation(s) shall
increase at the rate specified in
§ 11.01.610 (D).
      5.   Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to
correct the violation(s), nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the
City.
   B.   Remedy the violation(s). If the violation(s) is corrected on or before
the date of correction, as provided in the order to comply, no fine shall be
imposed.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.630 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   A.   Any recipient of an order to comply may appeal the order to comply on
the grounds that there was no violation of
Chapter 11.01 of the Culver City Municipal Code, or that he or she is not the
responsible person for the violation, by completing a request for hearing form
and returning it to the Tax Collector within fifteen (15) days from the
correction date of the order to comply, together with an advanced deposit of
the fine.
   B.   Any fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is
determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the order to comply was
not responsible for the violation(s), or that there was no violation(s) as
charged in the order to comply.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.635 HEARING OFFICER.
   A.   The Culver City City Manager shall designate the hearing officer for
the appeal hearings.
   B.   The hearing officer shall not be a Culver City employee, elected
official or appointed official.
   C.   The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of
the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned
upon the amount of fines upheld by the hearing officer.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.01.640 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   A.   No appeal hearing before a hearing officer shall be held unless and
until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted, and the fine
has been deposited in advance.
   B.   1.   An appeal hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a
date that is not less than fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) days from
the date that the request for hearing is filed, in accordance with the
provisions of
§ 11.01.630.
      2.   The person requesting the hearing shall be served by mail a written
notice of the time and place set for the hearing, at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the date of the hearing..
   C.   The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to
whether the violation(s) occurred, and whether the responsible person has
caused or maintained the violations(s) on the date(s) specified in the order to
comply.
   D.   The recipient of the order to comply shall be given the opportunity to
testify and to present witnesses and evidence concerning the order to comply.
   E.   The failure of the recipient of the order to comply to appear at the
appeal hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine deposit and a failure
to exhaust administrative remedies concerning the violation(s).
   F.   The order to comply and any additional documents submitted by the
enforcement officer concerning the Code violation(s) shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the Code violations(s) and the facts stated in such
documents.
   G.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an
order to comply shall be served by mail with copies of the order to comply,
reports and other documents relied upon or submitted to the hearing officer by
the enforcement officer.
      1.   No other discovery is permitted.
      2.   Legal rules of evidence shall not apply.
   H.   Prior to issuing a written decision, the hearing officer may continue
the appeal hearing and request additional information from the enforcement
officer or the recipient of the order to comply.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.645 HEARING OFFICER'S DECISION.
   A.   1.   Within ten (10) days after the hearing, after considering all of
the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall
issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the order to comply and shall list
in the decision the reasons for that decision.
      2.   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.
   B.   If the hearing officer determines that the order to comply should be
upheld, the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City.
   C.   If the hearing officer determines that the order to comply should be
canceled and the fine was deposited with the City, then the City shall refund
the amount of the deposited fine within fifteen (15) days.
   D.   The recipient of the order to comply shall be served by mail with a
copy of hearing officer's written decision within fifteen (15) days of the date
of issuance of the decision.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.650 FAILURE TO PAY FINES.
   A.   The failure of any person to pay the administrative fines imposed by an
order to comply within the time period set forth in the order to comply may
result in the matter being referred to the Tax Collector to file a claim with
the small claims court.
   B.   Alternatively, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to collect
the civil fines.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.655 RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer on an order to
comply may obtain review of the hearing officer's decision, by filing a
petition for review with the Los Angeles County Superior Court, in accordance
with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code
Section 53069.4.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.01.660 NOTICES.
   A.   The order to comply and all notices required by this Subchapter shall
be served on the responsible person, in accordance with the provisions of this
Subchapter.
   B.   Failure to receive notice specified in this Subchapter does not affect
the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder.
(Ord. No. 2003-010 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 11.02: HOTELS AND MOTELS
Section
General Provisions
   
11.02.005   Register required; regulations
   
11.02.010   Falsifying register prohibited
   
11.02.015   Schedule of rates to be posted
   
11.02.020   Refusing accommodations prohibited
   
11.02.025   Police may inspect premises
Transient Occupancy Tax
   
11.02.100   Definitions
   
11.02.105   Tax imposed
   
11.02.110   Exemptions
   
11.02.115   Operator to collect tax; procedures
   
11.02.120   Registration requirements; certificate required
   
11.02.125   Reporting and remitting
   
11.02.130   Penalties and interest
   
11.02.135   Operator's failure to collect and report tax; administrative
procedures
   
11.02.140   Appeal
   
11.02.145   Duty to keeps records
   
11.02.150   Refunds
   
11.02.155   Actions to collect
   
11.02.160   Violations; misdemeanors
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11.02.005 REGISTER REQUIRED; REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall be applicable to hotels, and similar
accommodations:
   A.   Register required. Every person conducting any lodging house, rooming
house, hotel, motel, auto court, trailer court or park, or other similar place,
shall at all times keep and maintain therein a register wherein all guests,
roomers, or lodgers shall inscribe their names and legal residence address.
Guests arriving by motor vehicle at any motel, auto court or trailer court
shall also enter the license number of such vehicle on said register.
   B.   Entries in register. The proprietor shall enter in register the time of
day, day of month and year when each guest registered, as well as the room
number assigned to or occupied by such guest.
   C.   Register to be kept where guests first received. Register shall be kept
in the office, lobby or other room or place where guests are ordinarily first
received.
   D.   Register inspection. Register shall be at all times open to the
inspection of any lodgers, roomers or guests, and of the Chief of Police or
Police Officer of the City.
('65 Code, § 18-1 A. - D.)
§ 11.02.010 FALSIFYING REGISTER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall register at any hotel, motel, auto court, trailer court,
rooming house, lodging house or other similar places in the City offering
lodging accommodations to the public, under an assumed name or any other name
than that by which he is commonly known.
('65 Code, § 23-28) (Ord. No. CS-2 § 11)
§ 11.02.015 SCHEDULE OF RATES TO BE POSTED.
   A schedule of rates charged for accommodations shall be posted in the office
or lobby of every motel, hotel, inn, auto court, lodging house, or rooming
house, as well as in every room of said motel, inn, or other place wherein
lodging or accommodations are offered for rent to the public. Such schedule
shall set forth the rate per day, week, and month and every person paying said
rate shall be entitled to accommodations for the full length of time covered by
said payment, unless he voluntarily relinquishes the same, or forfeits his
rights thereto by improper conduct. It shall be unlawful to charge a higher or
different rate than is shown on the posted schedule.
('65 Code, § 18-1 E.)
§ 11.02.020 REFUSING ACCOMMODATIONS PROHIBITED.
   Accommodations, when available, may not be refused to any persons who tender
the posted rate therefor, unless it is reasonable to believe that their
presence would be detrimental to the peace, comfort, health, or safety of other
tenants or lodgers.
('65 Code, § 18-2)
§ 11.02.025 POLICE MAY INSPECT PREMISES.
   A copy of this Chapter of the Code shall be posted in the office or lobby of
every hotel, motel, or other similar place, and in every room therein offered
for rent, for the information of the guests, and the Chief of Police or Police
Officers shall be permitted at all reasonable times to inspect said premises
for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 18-3) (Ord. No. CS-2, Chapter IV)
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 11.02.100 DEFINITIONS.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
Section shall govern the construction of this ordinance:
   HOTEL. Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or
intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel,
studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house,
dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed
location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of
any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
   OPERATOR. The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity
of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other
capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of
any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be
deemed an operator for the purposes of this Subchapter and shall have the same
duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this
Subchapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be
considered to be compliance by both.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
   RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy
of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods,
labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and
services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The City Treasurer, who is to be charged with the
administration of the tax.
   TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a
period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of
calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall
be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired
unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant
providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is
a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent
to the effective date of this ordinance may be considered.
('65 Code, § 18-4) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 2)
Cross-reference:
   Taxation, see
Ch. 3.08
§ 11.02.105 TAX IMPOSED.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to
and shall pay a tax in the amount of fourteen percent (14%) of the rent charged
by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City
which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The
transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent
is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, or if any amount paid is less
than the full amount of the rent and tax accrued to the time of payment, a
proportionate share of the tax shall be deemed to have been paid with each such
payment or installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's
ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax is not paid to
the operator of the hotel, the City Treasurer may require that such tax shall
be paid directly to the City.
('65 Code, § 18-5) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 3; Ord. No. CS-591 § 1; Ord. No. CS-695 §
1; Ord. No. CS-828 § 1; Ord. No. CS-928 § 1; Ord. No. 83-022 § 1; Ord. No. 87-
018 § 1; Ord. No. 88-015, § 1; Ord. No. 89-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-003 § 1)
§ 11.02.110 EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   No tax shall be imposed upon:
      1.   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided;
      2.   Any federal or State of California officer or employee when on
official business;
      3.   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provisions of federal law or international treaty.
   B.   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the
time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by
the Tax Administrator.
('65 Code, § 18-6) (Ord. No. CS-489 § 4)
§ 11.02.115 OPERATOR TO COLLECT TAX; PROCEDURES.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Subchapter to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged,
and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No
operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or
indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part
will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.
('65 Code, § 18-7) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 5)
§ 11.02.120 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS; CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   Within thirty (30) days after commencing business, each operator of any
hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the Tax
Administrator and obtain from said Administrator a “Transient Occupancy
Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
   A.   The name of the operator;
   B.   The address of the hotel;
   C.   The date upon which the certificate was issued;
   D.   “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform
Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for
the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and
remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not
authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful
business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly
complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those
requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this
City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.”
('65 Code, § 18-8) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 6)
§ 11.02.125 REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the Tax Administrator, make a return to the Tax
Administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time
the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to
the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator may establish shorter reporting
periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure
collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return.
Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any
reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this ordinance shall be
held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the
Tax Administrator.
('65 Code, § 18-9) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 7)
§ 11.02.130 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   A.   Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this Subchapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   B.   Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent
remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax in addition to the amount of the tax and
the 10% penalty first imposed.
   C.   Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the non-payment of any
remittance due under this ordinance is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the
amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in
Subsections A. and B. of this section.
   D.   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails
to remit any tax imposed by this Subchapter shall pay interest at the rate of
one-half of 1% per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent until paid.
   E.   Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as
accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax
herein required to be paid.
('65 Code, § 18-10) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 8)
§ 11.02.135 OPERATOR'S FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEDURES.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within
the time provided in this Subchapter, any report and remittance of said tax or
any portion thereof required by this Subchapter, the Tax Administrator shall
proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on
which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator
shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to
base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Subchapter and payable by any
operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report
and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator
the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this Subchapter. In case such
determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice of the amount
so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known
place of address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or
mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Tax Administrator for
a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing
is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if
any, determined by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive and
immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Tax Administrator
shall give not less than five (5) days written notice in the manner prescribed
herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice
why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest
and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why
such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such
hearing the Tax Administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and
shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed
herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and
penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15)
days unless an appeal is taken as provided in § 18-12.
('65 Code, § 18-11) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 9)
§ 11.02.140 APPEAL.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect
to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15)
days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council
shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall
give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The
findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing.
Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the
service of notice.
('65 Code, § 18-12) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 10)
§ 11.02.145 DUTY TO KEEP RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the City of any tax imposed by this Subchapter to keep and preserve, for a
period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment
to the City, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to
inspect at all reasonable times.
('65 Code, § 18-13) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 11)
§ 11.02.150 REFUNDS.
   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously or is illegally collected or
received by the City under this Subchapter it may be refunded as provided in
Subsections B. and C. of this Section provided a claim in writing therefor,
stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is
founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three years of the date of
payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator.
   B.   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the
transient to the operator.
   C.   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than
once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a
claim in the manner provided in Subsection A. of this Section, but only when
the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when
the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the
satisfaction of the Tax Administrator, that the transient has been unable to
obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
   D.   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the
claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto.
('65 Code, § 18-14) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 12)
§ 11.02.155 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this
Subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such
tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be
deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the
City under the provisions of this Subchapter shall be liable to an action
brought in the name of the City of Culver City for the recovery of such amount.
('65 Code, § 18-15) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 13)
§ 11.02.160 VIOLATIONS; MISDEMEANORS.
   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required
herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses
to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax
Administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty
of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any
report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent
to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this
Subchapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable as
provided in §
1.01.040 of this Code.
('65 Code, § 18-16) (Ord. No. CS-498 § 14)
CHAPTER 11.03: RESERVED
[Reserved]
CHAPTER 11.04: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
11.04.005   Purpose
   
11.04.010   Definitions
   
11.04.015   Alarm permits
   
11.04.020   Duties of the alarm user
   
11.04.025   Duties of the alarm company
   
11.04.030   Suspension or revocation of an alarm permit
   
11.04.035   Appeal of the suspension or revocation of an alarm permit
   
11.04.040   Prohibited acts
   
11.04.045   Excessive false alarms
   
11.04.050   Alarm user awareness class
   
11.04.055   Appealing a false alarm response charge
   
11.04.060   Confidentiality
   
11.04.065   Police Chief discretion
   
11.04.070   Violations unlawful; remedies
   
11.04.075   No duty or obligation
§ 11.04.005 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to encourage alarm system users and alarm
companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm
systems, and to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of false alarms, which may
unnecessarily divert law enforcement from responding to criminal activity and
burden the City's limited law enforcement resources. This Chapter is to
establish reasonable expectations of alarm users and to ensure that alarm users
are held responsible for their use of alarm systems.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.010 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. The person or persons who administer, control and
review false alarm reduction efforts for the City and administer the provisions
of this Chapter.
   ALARM COMPANY. A person and/or a company engaged in selling, leasing,
installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems.
   ALARM PERMIT. A permit issued by the City allowing the operation of an alarm
system within the City.
   ALARM SIGNAL. A detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm
system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal
the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other illegal activity,
including local alarms and alarms requiring immediate attention and to which
law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or
boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to
elicit a medical response.
   ALARM USER. Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship,
governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing or
operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
for the protection of such premises.
   ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS. A class conducted for the purpose of educating
alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm
systems and the problems created by false alarms.
   AUTOMATIC DIAL PROTECTION DEVICE. An automatic dialing device or an
automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which,
upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Police Department a
recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response.
   CANCELLATION. The process where response is terminated when the alarm
company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the Police Department that
there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response
after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police
arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of a false
alarm response charge, and no charge will be assessed.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of the Culver City Police Department, or his or
her designee.
   CITY. The City of Culver City, California or its agent.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or
electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of
the alarm user, his or her employees or agents, and any signals activated to
summon law enforcement personnel, unless law enforcement response was cancelled
by the user's alarm company before law enforcement personnel arrive at the
alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this chapter when, upon
inspection by the Police Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized
entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the
premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which
can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually
violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user.
   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is
audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a
remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user.
   PERMIT YEAR. A twelve (12)-month period beginning on the day and month on
which an alarm permit is issued.
   PERSON. Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, trust, incorporated or unincorporated entity or
group of persons.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT or POLICE. The Culver City Police Department, and includes
other law enforcement agencies assisting the Culver City Police Department.
   RUNAWAY ALARM. An alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do
not appear to be caused by separate human action.
   SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01. The American National Standard Institute
(ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel
Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design
features for security system control panels and their associated arming and
disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to
this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked
to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard
Features for False Alarm Reduction".
   VERIFY. An attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to
contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic
means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, to
avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-005 § 1)
§ 11.04.015 ALARM PERMITS.
   A.   Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system, including a local
alarm, unless a person who owns, controls or is responsible for the real
property upon which the system is installed hold a valid alarm user permit
issued pursuant to this Chapter. A fee established by resolution of the City
Council may be required for the initial application, annual renewals, and late
renewals. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the
user shall provide the permit number to facilitate law enforcement dispatch.
   B.   Application. The permit shall be requested on an application form
provided by the City. An alarm user has the duty to obtain the application from
the City, to apply for a permit and to renew a permit.
   C.   Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an
alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining
possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within
thirty (30) days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not
transferable.
   D.   Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the
alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct
information to the City within thirty (30) days of the change. In addition,
each year after the issuance of the permit, permit holders must update all
information when renewing their permit. The permit holder shall complete and
return the renewal application to the City whether or not any of the requested
information has changed; failure to comply will constitute a violation of this
Chapter.
   E.   Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems
protecting two (2) or more separate structures having different addresses and/
or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or
tenant.
   F.   Waiver. At the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, the alarm permit
application fee or renewal fee may be waived for municipal, county, state and/
or federal governmental agencies, or non-profit organizations, if the Chief of
Police determines that the public interest would be served by such waiver.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-005 § 2)
§ 11.04.020 DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER.
   Alarm users in the City shall comply with the following:
   A.   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will reduce
or eliminate false alarms.
   B.   Instruct all persons who are authorized to place the alarm system into
operation in the appropriate method of operation, and to lock and secure all
doors and windows and other points of entry.
   C.   Inform all persons who are authorized to place the alarm system into
operation of the provisions of this Chapter, emphasizing the importance of
avoiding false alarms.
   D.   Provide to the alarm company the permit number.
   E.   Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's
location within a reasonable amount of time when notified by the Police
Department. Failure to do so may result in a civil penalty established by
resolution of the City Council.
   F.   Shall not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   G.   Annually renew alarm permits.
   H.   Obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in
address or ownership of a business or residence.
   I.   Have a licensed alarm business annually service and test any alarm
system that does not have a self-test or a backup battery and wireless sensors.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.025 DUTIES OF THE ALARM COMPANY.
   A.   Any person engaged in the alarm business in the City shall comply with
the following:
      1.   Obtain and maintain all required state and City permits and
licenses, including but not limited to a City business tax certificate.
      2.   Provide the name, address, and telephone number of the user or a
designee, who may be reached in an emergency, twenty-four (24) hours a day, and
contact a key holder or other emergency contact who will respond immediately.
      3.   Provide the most current contact information for the alarm user.
   B.   Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this chapter, the
alarm installation companies shall, on all new and upgraded installations, use
only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01.
   C.   Prior to activation of an alarm system, the alarm company must provide
instructions, explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm
user.
   D.   Provide written information of how to obtain service from the alarm
company for the alarm system.
   E.   An alarm company performing monitoring services shall:
      1.   Verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to
determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. To
attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, telephone verification
shall require, as a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number,
if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who is able to properly
identify themselves, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress
alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or
audible means.
      2.   Provide the alarm user registration number, when available, to the
communications center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations.
      3.   Communicate any available information about the location of the
alarm.
      4.   Communicate a cancellation to the law enforcement communications
center as soon as possible, following a determination that response by law
enforcement is not necessary.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.030 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF AN ALARM PERMIT.
   A.   The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke, in his or her reasonable
discretion, an alarm permit based upon one or more of the following grounds, as
applicable:
      1.   The alarm system is installed, maintained or used in violation of
any applicable federal, state or local law, ordinance or regulation, including
the requirements of this Chapter.
      2.   The alarm user has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for an alarm user
permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with City pursuant to
the provisions of this Chapter.
      3.   The alarm user fails to provide current information as required in §
11.04.015(D).
      4.   The alarm user has failed to remit payment of fees, charges, or
penalties owed under this Chapter.
      5.   Programming an automatic dial protection device to select any
telephone line in the Police Department.
   B.   The Chief of Police's decision to either suspend or revoke an alarm
permit on the grounds set forth in Subsection A. shall be based upon the
severity of the violation, including, but not limited to, consideration of the
following factors:
      1.   The materiality and nature of any false or incomplete statement made
on the permit application.
      2.   The number and severity of any prior instances of failure to comply
with federal, state or local laws, ordinances or regulations, including the
provisions of this Chapter.
      3.   The amount of fees, administrative charges or penalties owed and
unpaid by the alarm user.
      4.   The alarm user cannot provide documentation to the Chief of Police's
satisfaction that a material change in circumstances has occurred indicating
the alarm user's ability to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   If the Chief of Police determines there is cause for the suspension or
revocation of a permit, then he or she shall cause a notice of suspension or
revocation to be mailed to the alarm user, at the address provided on the alarm
permit application, stating the suspension or revocation will be effective
thirty (30) days after the date of mailing. The notice of suspension or
revocation shall provide the grounds for the suspension or revocation. If a
notice of appeal is filed in accordance with this Chapter, the suspension or
revocation of the alarm permit shall be stayed during the pendency of any
appeal.
   D.   Operating or using an alarm system after the alarm permit has been
suspended or revoked shall be a violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.035 APPEAL OF THE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF AN ALARM PERMIT.
   A.   Any appeal provided for under §
11.04.030 of this Chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
   B.   An alarm user may appeal the suspension or revocation of an alarm
permit, by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk, within
fifteen (15) days from date of the notice of suspension or revocation of the
permit. A notice of appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee established by
resolution of the City Council.
   C.   Failure of any person to file a timely appeal or to pay the appeal fee
shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an administrative
hearing, a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and a final adjudication
of the notice suspending or revoking an alarm permit.
   D.   The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds of the appeal and shall
provide the appellant's address and telephone number, with a statement that the
appellant agrees to accept service at such address of the written notice of the
time and place of the appeal hearing and the determination of the hearing
officer, who shall be the City Manager or his or her designee, or an appointed
hearing officer.
   E.   Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the hearing officer shall set the
matter for an informal hearing at the earliest practical date, not less than
fifteen (15) or more than sixty (60) days from the date of the notice of
appeal. Not less than seven (7) days prior to the date of hearing, the hearing
officer shall send written notice of the hearing by first-class mail to the
appellant.
   F.   The hearing shall be conducted informally and the rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply. The hearing officer shall hear any relevant information
presented by the appellant or the Police Department, and using the
preponderance of evidence standard, may uphold, modify or rescind the notice of
suspension or
revocation. The hearing officer may conduct the hearing by telephone if agreed
to by appellant. The hearing officer shall provide the appellant a written
decision, stating the grounds for the decision, within ten (10) days from the
date of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer is the final decision
of the City, and shall be sent by first-class mail to the appellant.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.040 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   A.   It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of
summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous
to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or
otherwise to cause a false alarm, except to test an alarm system with prior
notice to the Police Department.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm
system which can sound continually for more than fifteen (15) minutes, or to
maintain or use a runaway alarm. The Police Department may in its discretion
discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway
alarm.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial
protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message
to the Police Department.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.045 EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS.
   A.   An alarm user who holds a valid City alarm permit is allowed one false
alarm response without charge per each permit year. Upon a second false alarm
in a permit year, a false alarm charge will be assessed as per the fee schedule
established by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   The Alarm Administrator may waive the false alarm charge for a
chargeable false alarm if the City-approved online Alarm User Awareness Class
is successfully completed within thirty (30) days of the notice of the false
alarm charge. Alarm users without online access may request the online school
and test to be mailed to them. An additional time of five (5) days to complete
the Alarm User Awareness Class shall be allowed for mail delivery.
   C.   When the police respond to a false alarm, and the alarm user does not
hold a valid alarm permit issued by the City, the first and any additional
false alarm responses are charged to the alarm user, according to the fee
schedule established by resolution of City Council. If the responsible party
applies for and obtains an alarm permit within thirty (30) days of receiving
the first notice of a false alarm charge, the false alarm response fee may be
waived by the City. The false alarm will be counted toward any additional false
alarms in that permit year. After the permit fee is paid, the user will be
assessed a charge for any second false alarm, which may then be waived upon
completion of the Alarm User Awareness Class, as set forth in this Chapter.
   D.   The third and any subsequent false alarms within a permit year will be
assessed without eligibility for waiver of the false alarm response charge.
   E.   In determining the number of false alarms within a permit year,
multiple alarms occurring within any twenty-four (24) hour period may be
counted as one (1) false alarm, to allow the alarm user time to take corrective
action, except where the alarm user has a history of chronic false alarms, as
determined by the Police Department.
   F.   All charges assessed for false alarms, as set forth in this section,
shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice.
A late fee in an amount set by City Council resolution will be assessed after
thirty (30) days if payment is not received by the City, unless the alarm user
files a timely request for appeal of the false alarm charge under §
11.04.055.
   G.   The charges imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be a debt owed to
the City and may be collected by any method permitted by law, including but not
limited to civil action.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.050 ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS.
   A.   Alarm User Awareness Class. The purpose of the Alarm User Awareness
Class is to inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and
instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. The City may grant the
option of completing the Alarm User Awareness Class in lieu of the alarm user
paying one (1) assessed charge for a false alarm response.
   B.   Each alarm user who attends an Alarm User Awareness Class shall be
responsible for paying all provider fees associated with the program.
   C.   If the alarm user successfully completes the Alarm User Awareness
Class, a certificate will be issued to that person. After presentation of the
certificate to the Alarm Administrator, one (1) false alarm response charge may
be waived by the City per permit year.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.055 APPEALING A FALSE ALARM RESPONSE CHARGE.
   A.   An alarm user may appeal the imposition of a false alarm response
charge under this Chapter by submitting a written request for an administrative
appeal to the Chief of Police, along with a deposit in the amount of the false
alarm response charge, or provide proof of a financial inability to deposit the
false alarm response charge, within fifteen (15) calendar days of the notice
imposing the charge.
   B.   Failure of any person to file a timely appeal with the required deposit
shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to appeal and a final
adjudication of the notice imposing the false alarm service charge.
   C.   Upon receipt of a timely request for appeal, the Chief of Police shall
review the written grounds for appeal and the City's own records of the
circumstances of the false alarm response charge. The Chief of Police may
cancel the false alarm response charge, if he or she determines that the false
alarm response charge is not warranted due to legally supportable or mitigating
circumstances. Such determination shall be made within thirty (30) days from
the date of the filing of the appeal. A written notice of the decision shall be
sent by first class mail to the appellant within ten (10) days of the date of
the decision. The action of the Chief of Police under this section shall be
final and conclusive.
   D.   If the Chief of Police cancels the false alarm response charge, the
Alarm Administrator shall refund the charge within thirty (30) days from the
date of the decision. If the charge is upheld, all unpaid charges and fees
shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the
decision.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.060 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Alarm business proprietary information furnished and secured pursuant to
this Chapter shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public
inspection. It is hereby declared that this information is critical to the
safety and security of the user and law enforcement personnel and that the
public interest served by not disclosing said information to the public clearly
outweighs the public interest served by disclosing said information.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.065 POLICE CHIEF DISCRETION.
   The Chief of Police shall have broad discretion to promulgate, execute and
enforce rules, regulations, policies, procedures and directives as may, in his
or her discretion, be necessary to implement the provisions of this Chapter.
Such powers shall include, but are not limited to, the power to promulgate,
execute and enforce a policy regarding dispatch of police to alarm signals, as
well as the discretion to discontinue police response to alarm signals due to
the user's failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, or to
properly repair alarm systems deemed to constitute runaway alarms.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.070 VIOLATIONS UNLAWFUL; REMEDIES.
   A violation of any provision of this Chapter is unlawful and may be enforced
by any remedies available in law or equity, including those provided in
Chapters 1.01 and
1.02 of this Code. A violation of any provision of this Chapter shall also
constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
§ 11.04.075 NO DUTY OR OBLIGATION.
   Nothing in this Chapter imposes or creates any express or implied duties or
obligations on the part of the City, its Police Department or any other
governmental agency to respond to an alarm activation of any sort, whether
verified or not. Any and all liability of consequential damage resulting from
the failure to respond to an alarm activation of any sort is hereby disclaimed
and governmental immunity, as provided by law, is retained by the City. By
applying for an alarm permit, the alarm user acknowledges that the police
response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police
units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency
conditions, staffing levels and prior response history.
(Ord. No. 2016-008 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 11.05: CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
Section
   
11.05.005   Definitions
   
11.05.010   Powers of Chief Financial Officer
   
11.05.015   Notice of intention to solicit
   
11.05.020   Filing solicitor's agreement; request for additional information
   
11.05.025   Use of fictitious name or alias prohibited
   
11.05.030   Charitable associations to maintain accounting systems
   
11.05.035   Solicitation on public and private property
   
11.05.040   Written permission required to use charitable association's name
   
11.05.045   Presentation of information card and notice of intention
   
11.05.050   Report of expenses and uses
   
11.05.055   Receipt for contributions
   
11.05.060   Exemptions from certain provisions
   
11.05.065   Limitation on time and place of solicitation
   
11.05.070   Restrictions on manner of conducting charitable solicitations
   
11.05.075   Violations
Cross-reference:
   Bingo games, see §
11.06.005
   Prohibition against abusive solicitation, see §§
13.03.300 -
13.03.315
§ 11.05.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words are defined and shall
be construed as hereafter set forth unless it is apparent from the context that
they have a different meaning:
   CHARITABLE. Includes the words philanthropic, social service, benevolent,
patriotic, welfare, civic, educational, or fraternal, either actual or
proposed.
   CONTRIBUTION. Includes the words alms, food, clothing, money, property or
donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.
   SOLICIT or SOLICITATION. To request, directly or indirectly, money,
property, including discarded household furnishings, newspapers, magazines,
cast-off material, or financial assistance of any kind including donations; or
to sell, to offer for sale, or to exhibit any thing or object whatever to raise
money, including any article, toy, service, emblem, publication, ticket,
advertisement or subscription; or to secure or attempt to secure money or
donations or other property by promoting any bazaar, sale, dance, card party,
supper or entertainment.
('65 Code, § 11-1) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 1; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.05.010 POWERS OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
   The Chief Financial Officer shall have the following powers:
   A.   To investigate the statements in any Notice of Intention to Solicit or
any statement or report;
   B.   To investigate, at any time, the methods of making or conducting any
solicitation;
   C.   To issue, upon the filing of a Notice of Intention to Solicit,
solicitor's information cards, which card shall show that such card is issued
as information for the public and is not an endorsement, unless the Chief
Financial Officer expressly endorses such charitable association;
   D.   To charge a fee, for supplying information cards. Such fee shall not
exceed five cents ($.05) per card;
   E.   After a Notice of Intention to Solicit is filed, and upon the request
of the person filing such Notice, to waive all the conditions set out in §§
11.05.020,
11.05.045,
11.05.050, and
11.05.055 and the requirement for filing of written authorization, as set out
in §
11.05.040, when a campaign or drive for raising funds for any charitable
purpose is given general publicity through the press or otherwise, when more
than twenty-five (25) persons serve as solicitors without compensation, and
when the publicity concerning such solicitation fully informs the general
public and the persons to be solicited as to the facts required to be set forth
in a Notice of Intention to Solicit.
('65 Code, § 11-2) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 2; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.05.015 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO SOLICIT.
   No person shall solicit, nor shall any officer or member of any association
authorize any person to solicit, any contribution for any charitable purpose
unless at least ten (10) days prior to the beginning of such solicitation,
there shall have been filed with the Chief Financial Officer by such person or
association upon whose behalf such solicitation is made, a written Notice of
Intention to Solicit. The Notice shall be on forms furnished by the City and
shall contain the following information:
   A.   The purpose of such solicitation and use of the contribution to be
solicited;
   B.   A specific statement, supported by reasons and, if available, figures,
showing the need for the contribution proposed to be solicited;
   C.   The character of such solicitation and how it will be made or
conducted;
   D.   The expenses of such solicitation, including salaries and other items,
if any, regardless of which funds are used to pay such expenses;
   E.   What portion of the contributions collected as a result of such
solicitation will remain available for application to the specific purposes
declared in the Notice of Intention as the object to the solicitation;
   F.   A specific statement of the total of all contributions collected or
received by such person or association within the calendar year immediately
preceding the filing of such Notice of Intention. The expenditures or use made
of such contributions, together with the names and addresses of all persons or
associations receiving salaries, wages, compensation, commissions, or
emoluments from such contributions, and the respective amounts thereof;
   G.   The names and addresses of the officers and directors of any such
association for which the solicitation is proposed to be made;
   H.   A copy of the resolution, if any, of any such association authorizing
such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original of
such resolution by the officer of such association having charge of the records
thereof;
   I.   A statement that the signers of such Notice of Intention have read and
are familiar with the provisions of this Chapter and will require all
solicitors engaged in such solicitation to read and be familiar with all
Sections of this Chapter prior to making any such solicitation.
('65 Code, § 11-3) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 3; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.05.020 FILING SOLICITOR'S AGREEMENT; REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.
   There shall be filed with the Chief Financial Officer with such Notice of
Intention to Solicit, a statement of any agreement made with any agent,
solicitor, promoter, manager or conductor of such solicitation, together with a
copy of each agreement which may be in writing. Within twenty-four (24) hours
after any change in any such agreement or the making of any new or further
agreement, a true copy of such change or agreement, if in writing, or if not,
written details thereof shall be filed with the City. Whenever, in the opinion
of the Chief Financial Officer, the Notice of Intention to Solicit filed with
the City does not disclose sufficient information for the public concerning the
facts hereinabove required to be stated in such Notice of Intention to Solicit
or concerning the person or association making such solicitation or on whose
behalf such solicitation is made, then, upon the request of the City, there
shall be filed, in writing, within forty-eight (48) hours after such request,
such additional information as may be required by the City upon the foregoing
subjects. Provided, however, that the Chief Financial Officer, for good cause,
may extend the time for filing such additional information. The Notice of
Intention to Solicit and such additional information, if requested, shall be
signed by such person intending to make such solicitation, or if by or on
behalf of any association, by at least two officers of such association and
shall be open to the inspection of the public.
('65 Code, § 11-4) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 11; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.05.025 USE OF FICTITIOUS NAME OR ALIAS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use in soliciting or give to any person whomsoever, either a
fictitious name or an alias or any other than his full, true and correct name,
or make any such solicitation without at the time of giving to the person
solicited his own full, true and correct name, nor shall he impersonate any
other person in making such solicitation.
('65 Code, § 11-5)
§ 11.05.030 CHARITABLE ASSOCIATIONS TO MAINTAIN ACCOUNTING SYSTEMS.
   No person shall solicit any contributions for or on behalf of any charitable
association unless such association is maintaining a system of accounting
whereby all donations to it and all disbursements made by it are entered upon
the books or records of its treasurer or other financial officer.
('65 Code, § 11-6)
§ 11.05.035 SOLICITATION ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   A.   Solicitation on public property.
      1.   No person shall solicit any charitable contribution by means of any
receptacle, upon, over or in any public street, sidewalk or way, or in any
public park or in any publicly-owned or controlled place without:
         a.   First having complied with the provisions of this Chapter;
         b.   First having received written permission from the City for the
location of such receptacle; and
         c.   First having provided on the receptacle in legible and clearly
visible writing the solicitors name and address, a statement that information
regarding the purpose of the receptacle is on file in the City Treasurer's
Office of Culver City and the address of City Hall.
      2.   In granting or denying such permission the City shall be concerned
only with the time, place and manner such receptacle will be used.
   B.   Solicitation on private property. No person shall solicit any
charitable contribution, or any contribution for any real or purported
charitable purpose, by means of any receptacle, on any private property
immediately abutting upon any public sidewalk or way, in any place of business
open to the public, in any room, hallway, corridor, lobby or entranceway, or
other place open to or accessible to the public, or in any place of public
resort, without complying with the provisions of this Chapter except that the
City approval of the location is not required, provided however, a list of each
location shall be provided to the City.
('65 Code, § 11-7) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 4; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.05.040 WRITTEN PERMISSION REQUIRED TO USE CHARITABLE ASSOCIATION'S NAME.
   No person shall use the name of any association in charge or control of any
charitable activity in any solicitation without having written permission from
two (2) of the officers of such association, to use its name or the name of or
reference to such charitable activity, which written permission must be for a
specific event or a specified period of time and a copy of such permission must
be filed with the City prior to any such use.
('65 Code, § 11-8) (Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.05.045 PRESENTATION OF INFORMATION CARD AND NOTICE OF INTENTION.
   No person shall accept any charitable contribution unless both the
information card, as provided for in §
11.05.010 C. and the Notice of Intention, as provided for in §
11.05.015, are presented to the person solicited for perusal, allowing
sufficient opportunity for such person to read such documents.
('65 Code, § 11-9) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 5)
§ 11.05.050 REPORT OF EXPENSES AND USES.
   Every person soliciting any contribution for any charitable purpose must
file with the City within thirty (30) days after the close of any such
solicitation or within thirty (30) days after a demand therefor by the City, a
report to the Chief Financial Officer Committee City Treasurer stating the
contributions secured from or as a result of any such solicitation, and in
detail all expenses of or connected with such solicitation, and showing exactly
for what uses and in what manner all such contributions were or are to be
disbursed or distributed. Every such report shall be made on forms to be
furnished by the City, and signed by the persons or association filing or
obligated to file the Notice of Intention to Solicit, and such report, if made
by any such association, shall be signed by at least two (2) officers thereof,
provided, that when any such solicitation is made by any such association such
report need be filed only by such association and not by an individual
solicitor engaged in any such solicitation.
('65 Code, § 11-11) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 12; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.05.055 RECEIPT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS.
   A.   Except as provided in Subsections B. and C., a person soliciting a
charitable contribution shall tender, to each person making such contribution,
a written receipt signed by the solicitor which contains, in addition to a
description of the amount and kind of the contribution, substantially the
following information:
      1.   The name of the association, if any, in whose name or upon whose
behalf the solicitation is made;
      2.   A statement as to whether the contribution solicited is to be
applied for the general purposes of such association, if any, or for specific
purposes, and if for specific purposes the nature thereof shall be clearly
stated.
      3.   A statement that the information card and Notice of Intention was
presented to the person making such contribution for perusal prior to receipt
by the solicitor of the contribution.
   B.   No receipt need be given or tendered, if donation of money is made by
placing the same in a locked receptacle, of a kind previously approved by the
City pursuant to §
11.05.035, in such manner that it is impracticable to ascertain either the
amount donated or the name of the donor.
   C.   No receipt need be given for any contribution in an amount of Five
Dollars ($5.00) or less or for any contribution, of any kind, if the donor
states that a receipt is not requested.
('65 Code, § 11-12) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 6; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.05.060 EXEMPTIONS FROM CERTAIN PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this Chapter, except §§
11.05.005,
11.05.035, and
11.05.040, shall not be applicable to any charitable solicitation made upon
premises owned or occupied by the association upon whose behalf such
solicitation is made; nor to any association soliciting contributions solely
from persons who are members thereof at the time of such solicitation.
('65 Code, § 11-14) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 7)
§ 11.05.065 LIMITATION ON TIME AND PLACE OF SOLICITATION.
   No person shall make a solicitation for charitable purposes in violation of
§
11.05.070 of the Culver City Municipal Code.
('65 Code, § 11-17) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 8)
§ 11.05.070 RESTRICTIONS ON MANNER OF CONDUCTING CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS.
   The manner of conducting commercial, political, religious and charitable
solicitation and advertising shall be governed by the following provisions:
   A.   Except as provided in Subsection B., no person shall enter upon the
premises of, or ring the doorbell of, or knock upon the door of, any private
residence, apartment or multiple dwelling, for the purpose of any commercial
solicitation, political, religious or charitable solicitation or informational
canvassing when a sign, of not less than six (6) square inches, is
conspicuously displayed near the front door or door bell of such private
residence or near the entrance of such apartment of multiple dwelling and such
sign contains the statement, with letters at least one-half (½) inch in height,
“No Soliciting” or a substantially similar statement.
   B.   The provisions of Subsection A. shall not apply if prior to the
entering, ringing or knocking, such person has been requested or invited by an
adult occupant of the premises to be thereupon for the purposes regulated by
Subsection A.
   C.   Persons or organizations who desire to conduct commercial door-to-door
solicitation shall obtain a Culver City business tax certificate. Those
individuals or organizations which qualify as nonprofit, tax exempt political,
religious or charitable associations shall file a notice of intent to solicit
which shall be obtained from the Business Tax Division of the City Treasurer's
office.
   D.   No person shall deposit, place, throw or scatter any commercial,
political, religious or charitable advertising material upon the premises of
any private residence, apartment or multiple dwelling, when a sign, of not less
than six (6) square inches, is conspicuously displayed, near the front door or
doorbell of such residence, or near the entrance of such apartment or multiple
dwelling, and such sign contains the statement, with letters at least one-half
(½) inch in height, “No Advertising” or a substantially similar statement.
   E.   No person shall deposit, place, throw or scatter, any commercial
advertising material upon any automobile or other vehicle.
   F.   Any commercial, political, religious or charitable advertising
material, consisting of more than one page, shall be wrapped in a cover, boxed,
or tied in a compact bundle with tape, string, rope, wire or rubber band, if it
is deposited, placed, thrown or scattered upon any private residence, apartment
or multiple dwelling or place of business.
   G.   This Section shall not be applicable to any commercial, political,
religious or charitable advertising material received through the U.S. Mail.
('65 Code, § 23-49) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 13; Ord. No. CS-733 § 1; Ord. No. 95-002
§ 1)
§ 11.05.075 VIOLATIONS.
   Each act of solicitation which violates any provision of this Chapter shall
constitute a separate misdemeanor offense, which is punishable as provided in §
1.01.040 of this Code.
('65 Code, § 11-18) (Ord. No. 84-018 § 9)
CHAPTER 11.06: GAMES, AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
11.06.005   Bingo games
   
11.06.010   Musical entertainment and dancing
Card Rooms
   
11.06.100   Definitions
   
11.06.105   Permit required
   
11.06.110   Non-profit organizations exempt
   
11.06.115   Application
   
11.06.120   Fees and deposits
   
11.06.125   Permit nontransferable
   
11.06.130   Card playing on unlicensed premises a misdemeanor
   
11.06.135   Permit applies to one location only; scope
   
11.06.140   Revocation of permit
   
11.06.145   Rules and regulations for operation
Cross-reference:
   Gambling, see §§
13.01.100 -
13.01.135
   Minors, see §§
13.03.100 -
13.03.150
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11.06.005 BINGO GAMES.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a no-fee license
permitting bingo games shall be issued by the City Treasurer pursuant to §
11.01.230 and shall remain in effect subject to the following conditions:
   A.   The organization or association being issued the permit is of the type
designated in Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(a).
   B.   The organization or association shall comply with Cal. Penal Code §
326.5 and shall furnish information showing that the bingo games will be
conducted in compliance with Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 and all applicable zoning,
building and fire regulations.
   C.   The license shall be renewable annually and shall be valid only during
such time as the organization or association is in compliance with the
provisions of this Section and Cal. Penal Code § 326.5.
('65 Code, § 23-20.A) (Ord. No. CS-870 § 1; Ord. No. CS-1020 § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Charitable solicitations, see
Ch. 11.05
§ 11.06.010 MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT AND DANCING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, required to be
licensed or otherwise regulated under the provisions of
Chapter 11.01 of this Code, to conduct or in any manner participate in dancing
or musical type entertainment of any kind between the hours of 2:00 a.m. of one
day and 6:00 a.m. of the same day, except by a special permit for one day only,
issued by the City.
('65 Code, § 23-40) (Ord. No. CS-548; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
CARD ROOMS
§ 11.06.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CARD ROOM. Includes card club, social card club or any other place
maintained, operated or conducted for the principal purpose of furnishing a
place where members or guests or other persons play card games of any nature,
and where;
      1.   A fee is charged either as membership dues for admission to such
place or for the privilege of playing at cards; or
      2.   Any collection or donation of money is made or received.
   CARD SCHOOL. Any place maintained, operated or conducted for the purpose of
giving instructions in the playing of card games of any type.
   PERSON. Person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, and
corporation, whether acting as principal or agent, manager, clerk, employee or
servant, either for or on behalf of himself or for any other person, firm,
association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other entity
owning, operating, or proposing to operate a card room or card school in the
City.
('65 Code, § 10-1)
§ 11.06.105 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate, conduct or carry
on, directly or indirectly, any card room or card school without a permit
therefor having been issued in accordance with the provisions of this
Subchapter. No permit issued shall authorize the conduct of any card game which
is prohibited by the Cal. Penal Code or any provision of §§
13.01.100 et seq. of this Code prohibiting gambling or any other law of this
City, and any permit issued in violation of such state code or ordinance or law
shall be void.
('65 Code, § 10-2)
§ 11.06.110 NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS EXEMPT.
   No permit shall be required for any non-profit organization operating within
the City at the time of the adoption of this Subchapter and which has been in
operation for two (2) years prior thereto, nor to any card school or club
operated by any governmental agency.
('65 Code, § 10-3)
§ 11.06.115 APPLICATION.
   A.   In addition to the requirements for an application as set forth in §§
11.01.300 through
11.01.370 of this Code, the application shall comply with the following:
      1.   If the applicant is a corporation, the names of any person owning
more than twenty (20%) percent of the stock;
      2.   If a partnership, the names of all partners;
      3.   If an association, the names of all members;
      4.   Such application shall be signed by those required to be named in
the application;
      5.   The application shall state the location of any other card room or
card school operated by the applicant or in which the applicant or any person
signing the application has an interest;
      6.   The number of tables or other units to be placed, employed, or used;
      7.   The description of any other business conducted or proposed to be
conducted at the same location;
      8.   A description of the building in which the business proposed to be
permitted and licensed is to be housed, giving the dimensions and type of
construction;
      9.   A statement that the applicant understands that the application
shall be considered by the City and the City Council only after a full
investigation and report have been made by the Chief of Police, Building
Official, Fire Department, and all other affected departments of City
Government; and
      10.   A statement that the applicant has read the provisions of this
Section, and the other Sections of
Chapter 11.01 referred to herein, and understands the same.
   B.   The procedure for processing applications, including appeals, shall be
as designated in §§
11.01.300 through
11.01.370 of this Code.
('65 Code, § 10-4) (Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.06.120 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   A.   For purposes of clarification, the license fees as defined in this
Subchapter are for both regulation and revenue purposes. Each application for a
permit hereunder shall be accompanied by fees and deposits, as established by
City Council resolution, payable to the City.
      1.   An application fee shall be non-refundable and retained by the City
for payment of the costs of investigating the applicants;
      2.   The permit fee shall be the property of, and retained by, the City
in the event the permit and license applied for are issued, but which shall be
returned to the applicant if such permit and license are not issued; and
   B.   In the event a license and permit are granted, additional fees, as
established by City Council resolution, shall be payable to the City by the
permittee quarterly in advance.
('65 Code, § 10-5) (Ord. No. 2007-002 § 14)
Cross-reference:
   General licensing, see
Chapter 11.01
§ 11.06.125 PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE.
   No permit shall be transferred. When a business for which a permit has been
issued is sold or transferred, any permit for a card room or card school shall
be deemed revoked and the successor or transferee shall make application for a
permit in the same manner as the original application.
('65 Code, § 10-6)
§ 11.06.130 CARD PLAYING ON UNLICENSED PREMISES A MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person who knowingly plays cards for money in a premises which does not
have a valid license and permit issued by the City of Culver City in accordance
with the provisions hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six
(6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
('65 Code, § 10-7)
§ 11.06.135 PERMIT APPLIES TO ONE LOCATION ONLY; SCOPE.
   A permit issued for a particular location shall authorize the permittee to
conduct the permitted business at such location only, and such permit shall not
be used for conducting such business at any other location without the written
consent of the City Manager or their designee or the City Council, and without
the payment of a fee as established by City Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 10-8) (Ord. No. 2007-002 § 15; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.06.140 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   In addition to grounds for revocation otherwise specified in this Subchapter
and §
11.01.355 of this Code, any permit issued under this Subchapter may be revoked
for the violation of any of the provisions hereof.
('65 Code, § 10-9)
§ 11.06.145 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION.
   A.   Premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or
maintain within the City any house, room, apartment, office or place used for a
card room or card school as defined herein unless a permit therefor has been
issued, and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit any house, room,
apartment, office or place owned by him or under his charge or control to be
used in the whole or in part for such purpose unless a permit therefor has been
issued.
('65 Code, § 10-10)
   B.   Hours of operation. No card club shall be opened for the playing of
cards therein and no cards shall be played therein except between the hours of
4:00 p.m. and 12:00 o'clock midnight.
('65 Code, § 10-11)
   C.   Music, dancing, alcoholic liquor prohibited.
      1.   No music or dancing shall be permitted in any card room.
      2.   No alcoholic liquor shall be possessed, sold, or consumed on the
premises.
('65 Code, § 10-12)
   D.   Minors prohibited. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
shall be present in or play in any card room.
('65 Code, § 10-13)
   E.   Permitted equipment. No device or equipment, other than card tables,
cards, and scoring devices, which can be or are used for gambling or amusement
purposes, shall be kept or operated in any card room or card school.
('65 Code, § 10-14)
   F.   Membership fees and other charges to be conspicuously posted. All
membership fees, playing fees or charges, as well as prices of refreshments and
food offered shall be posted conspicuously in all rooms of the card room or
card school.
('65 Code, § 10-15) (Ord. No. CS-49; Ord. No. CS-488)
   G.   Duplicate bridge club card rooms. Nothing in this Subchapter shall be
applicable to duplicate bridge club card rooms.
('65 Code, § 10-16) (Ord. No. CS-788 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 11.07: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
11.07.005   Findings and purpose
   
11.07.010   Definitions
   
11.07.015   Massage establishment permit required
   
11.07.020   CAMTC massage certificate required
   
11.07.025   Exemptions
   
11.07.030   Massage establishment permit - application
   
11.07.035   Review of application and investigation
   
11.07.040   Massage establishment permit - grounds for issuance or denial;
notice of denial; right to appeal
   
11.07.045   Service of any City notice, and date of service
   
11.07.050   Term of massage establishment permit
   
11.07.055   Issuance of permit
   
11.07.060   Massage establishment permit - nonassignable and nontransferable
   
11.07.065   Operating requirements - general conditions, facilities and massage
establishments
   
11.07.070   Massage technicians and practice - general conditions
   
11.07.075   Inspections of massage establishments and its records
   
11.07.080   Massage establishment permit - change in ownership when the
permittee is a partnership or corporation
   
11.07.085   Massage establishment permit - change of name, or alterations to
approved facility
   
11.07.090   Renewal of massage establishment permit
   
11.07.095   Grounds for suspension, revocation, nonrenewal, or denial; notice
of City decision; and appeal rights
   
11.07.100   Appeal
   
11.07.105   Prohibition from reapplying for a massage establishment permit
   
11.07.110   Surrender of massage establishment permit
   
11.07.115   Applicability to existing massage establishments
   
11.07.120   Fees
   
11.07.125   Violations and penalty
   
11.07.130   Effect on other ordinances
§ 11.07.005 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds and declares as follows:
   A.   The City is authorized, by virtue of the Constitution of the State of
California, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 51030 et seq., and Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 4600 et
seq., to regulate massage establishments by imposing reasonable standards for,
and conditions on, the lawful operation of massage establishments.
   B.   The regulations imposed by this Chapter are reasonably necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Culver
City, as well as to safeguard against illicit activities.
   C.   The regulations and restrictions contained in this Chapter are intended
to discourage massage establishments from becoming fronts for illicit
activities, and the means utilized in this Chapter bear a reasonable and
rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved.
   D.   There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly
trained massage therapists, and this Chapter provides reasonable safeguards
against injury and economic loss.
   E.   The regulations contained in this Chapter provide comprehensive
regulations for the establishment, use and operation of businesses offering
massage services in the City of Culver City, so that the public health, safety
and welfare remain protected, while simultaneously being consistent with
California law.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   APPLICANT. Applicant shall include any individual or entity applying for a
permit under this Chapter, including any officer, director, partner, or other
duly authorized representative applying on behalf of an entity.
   BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE. The certificate issued by the City's Tax Collector
after payment of the business tax fee as set forth in Chapter 11.01 of the City
of Culver City Municipal Code. The term LICENSE is synonymous and
interchangeable with the term BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE.
   CITY. City of Culver City, California.
   CITY MANAGER. City Manager of the City of Culver City, or his or her
designee.
   CODE. The City of Culver City Municipal Code, and any other ordinances,
resolutions, and regulations adopted therein.
   COUNTY. County of Los Angeles, California.
   EMPLOYEE. Each person who renders any service, with or without compensation,
for the owner, permittee, or agent of either an owner or permittee of a massage
establishment. For purposes of this Chapter, the term EMPLOYEE shall include
part-time, full-time, temporary, or permanent employees.
   LOBBY. One room or designated area, adjacent to a public entry, which is
used for an entry or waiting room for customers or other persons authorized to
enter the premises.
   MANAGER. Any person(s) designated by the massage establishment to act as the
representative or agent of the massage establishment in managing day-today
operations with corresponding liabilities and responsibilities, and/or the
person in apparent charge of the premises where the massage establishment is
located. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that
the individual has the power to direct, supervise, or hire and dismiss
employees, controls hours of operations, creates policy rules, or purchases
supplies.
   MASSAGE. Any method of manipulating the soft tissues of the human body for
remedial, health, hygienic, relaxation or any other reason or purposes, whether
by means of pressure, acupressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating, or any other
manner of touching the external parts of the human body with the hands, or with
or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or
with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice, type of business or trade. MASSAGE
TREATMENT, MASSAGE SERVICE, and MASSAGE ACTIVITY are included within this
definition for purposes of this Chapter.
   MASSAGE CERTIFICATE. A certificate to practice massage, issued by the
California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§§ 4600 et seq. (or successor provision or provisions).
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any business or enterprise having a fixed place,
facility or location of business conducted within the City of Culver City,
where any person, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or
permits to be conducted or carried on, for money or any other consideration,
the administration to another person of a massage, bath, or health treatment
involving massages or baths including, but not limited to, fomentation,
electric or magnetic treatments, alcohol rubs, or any other type of system for
treatment or manipulation of the human body with or without any character of
bath, such as Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub,
sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT. The permit issued pursuant to the provisions
of this Chapter required to operate or manage a massage establishment.
   MASSAGE ROOM. A cubicle, booth, room, or enclosed or semi-enclosed area
within a massage establishment where massage services are performed on patrons.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN. Any person who administers to another person a massage
as defined herein, within a massage establishment or off-premises, for any form
of consideration or in exchange for anything of value whatsoever. The terms
MASSAGE THERAPIST, MASSAGE PRACTITIONER, MASSAGE TRAINEE, MASSEUR, or MASSEUSE
are included within this definition for purposes of this Chapter.
   OFF PREMISES. A massage performed or administered for money or other
consideration by a massage technician with a massage certificate at a location
other than a massage establishment with a permit.
   OWNER. All persons who have any ownership interest in a massage
establishment. An owner shall also mean the individual(s) or entity whose name
appears on the City Business Tax Certificate or massage establishment permit.
   PERMIT ADMINISTRATOR. The Chief Financial Officer of the City of Culver
City, or his or her designee, or other person designated by the City Manager.
   PERMITTEE. Any person or entity to whom a current and valid City-issued
massage establishment permit has been issued.
   PERSON. Any natural person, individual, or corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, association or other group, or combination of individuals
and/or groups, acting as an entity.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. All owners of the massage establishment, including all
officers, directors, managers, partners and all other persons with authority,
including apparent authority, over the premises of the massage establishment.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following human anatomical areas:
genitals, pubic regions, anuses, and female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.015 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in, conduct or carry on, or to cause, allow, or permit, the engagement
in, conduct of or carrying on the business or operation of a massage
establishment within the City without first obtaining a current and valid
massage establishment permit pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and
complying with all other applicable provisions of this Code, including but not
limited to, securing the necessary Business Tax Certificate as required by
Chapter 11.01 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.020 CAMTC MASSAGE CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   A.   No person shall perform, administer or practice massage, or advertise
to provide massage services in the City, without first obtaining a current and
valid massage certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council
(CAMTC) pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 4600 et seq. (or successor
provision or provisions).
   B.   All persons who have been issued a current and valid massage
certificate and who provide a massage to the public in the City for any form of
compensation, and who are not employed by, or affiliated with, a massage
establishment but provide off-premises massage services, as defined in this
Chapter, shall also apply for and obtain a current and valid Business Tax
Certificate as required by Chapter 11.01 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.025 EXEMPTIONS.
   The requirement to have a current and valid massage establishment permit or
a massage certificate shall not apply to the following classes of individuals,
and no massage establishment permit or massage certificate shall be required of
such persons, while engaged in the performance of the duties of their
respective professions:
   A.   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists
who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of
California. This exemption only applies if the massage is performed by the
licensed professional or by a staff member of said licensed professionals in
the course of treatment prescribed by said professional and only when the
prescribing professional is present on the premises.
   B.   Nurses who are registered or licensed as such under the laws of the
State of California, and who are under the direct supervision of a state
licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath.
   C.   Barbers, beauticians, and manicurists who are duly licensed under the
laws of the State of California while engaging in the practice within the scope
of their respective licenses, except that this exemption applies solely for the
massaging of the neck, face or scalp of the customer or client of said barber
or beautician or in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the
forearm, hands, calves or feet.
   D.   Coaches and trainers while acting within the scope of their employment
at an accredited high school, junior college, college or university.
   E.   Trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or
athletic teams while acting within the scope of their role as trainer.
   F.   Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in
the State of California. This exemption herein only applies if the massage
therapy is performed by the licensed acupuncturist professional to the treated
portion of the patient's body. If a duly licensed acupuncturist wishes to
provide massage therapy by another individual(s), said individual(s) must
obtain and possess a current and valid massage certificate and the
acupuncturist office must obtain a massage establishment permit form the City
of Culver City in compliance with all codes and the California Acupuncture
Board.
   G.   Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities
duly licensed by the State of California.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.030 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT - APPLICATION.
   A.   Any person seeking to obtain a permit to operate a massage
establishment shall submit a written application, signed under penalty of
perjury to the City using a form adopted by the City for that purpose. The
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by
resolution of the City Council to defray the cost of the investigation required
by this Chapter. The filing fee due under this section shall be paid in full
regardless of the duration for which the permit may be valid.
   B.   The application shall be completed and signed by the applicant(s). If
the applicant is not a natural person, it shall be signed by a representative
authorized to act on behalf of the entity in accordance with Subsection E.1.b.
of this section.
   C.   The application and fee required pursuant to this section shall be in
addition to any other license, permit, or fee required by any other section or
chapter of this Code or ordinance hereafter adopted.
   D.   The submittal of an application for a permit does not authorize the
operation of a massage establishment unless and until such permit has been
properly granted by the City, nor does the possession of a current and valid
permit authorize the possessor of the permit to perform work for which a
massage certificate is required.
   E.   The application for a massage establishment Permit shall contain or be
accompanied by the following information for the applicant and for each
responsible person whenever required of the applicant:
      1.   The type of ownership of the business (i.e., individual,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company or otherwise):
         a.   If the applicant is not a natural person, the name of the entity
shall be set forth exactly as shown in its operative governing documents,
including any partnership agreement, limited partnership agreements, articles
of incorporation, limited liability company statement, and as reflected in any
filing or recording with a public agency, including the California Secretary of
State and the county recorder's office, including any fictitious business
statement, together with the state and the date of formation or registration,
and the legal names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors,
members, partners, principals, and each shareholder or interest holder holding
more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the applicant. A copy of the
certificate, registration or other official form issued by the governing agency
shall be provided with the application.
         b.   An applicant shall designate one of its owners, officers,
directors, managers or general partners to act as its designated authorized
officer. Such person shall complete and sign all application forms required for
an applicant under this Code, but only one application fee shall be charged. No
change of a designated authorized officer shall be effective until and unless a
change application is filed with the City to change the authorized officer and
is approved by the Permit Administrator, but no additional inspection shall be
necessary. The designated authorized officer must at all times meet all of the
requirements established by this Chapter. A permit may be suspended by the
Permit Administrator immediately in the event that the designated authorized
officer is not in compliance with all requirements of this Chapter. The
suspension shall continue until the authorized officer is in compliance, as
confirmed in writing by the Permit Administrator, or a new authorized officer
is designated and approved by the City. If no such approval is issued within
ninety (90) days of the suspension, the permit is deemed canceled, unless
extended by the Permit Administrator in writing, at the Permit Administrator's
discretion. A new initial application for permit must be filed, together with
the payment of fees applicable thereto, and a permit issued before the massage
establishment may commence operating.
      2.   The true, full, and precise name under which the massage
establishment is to be conducted.
      3.   The proposed address where the massage establishment is to be
located, along with all telephone numbers for the massage establishment.
      4.   The proposed hours of operation.
      5.   A complete current list of the names and residence addresses of all
proposed massage technicians, aides, trainees, independent contractors, and
other employees who are or will be employed in the massage establishment, if
known. If not known at the time of submission of the application, the applicant
shall provide the required information no later than ten (10) calendar days
prior to opening for business. True and correct copies of massage certificates
for each proposed massage technician shall be submitted with the application.
      6.   The name, residence addresses, and telephone numbers of all managers
as defined in this chapter.
      7.   A description of any other businesses to be operated on the same
premises as the proposed massage establishment, or within the city or the
state, which is owned or operated by the applicant.
      8.   The name and address of the owners and lessors of the real property
where the proposed massage establishment is to be conducted. In the event the
applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be
accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized affidavit from the owner of
the property acknowledging that a massage establishment may be located at the
designated premises.
      9.   The complete business, occupation and employment history for eight
(8) years preceding the date of the submittal of application for the applicant,
responsible persons and managers, including, but not limited to, a massage
establishment or similar type of business history and experience of the
applicant, responsible persons and managers to operate such a business.
      10.   The complete massage permit history for the applicant, responsible
persons and managers; whether such person(s) have ever had any similar type of
permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or
state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or
license has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if a vocational or
professional license or permit has been or was ever denied, revoked or
suspended; if the applicant, responsible persons or managers has ever been
required to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal
charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked and the
reason thereof.
      11.   All criminal convictions of the applicant, responsible persons or
managers, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last ten (10) years
including those convictions dismissed or expunged pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §
1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each
such conviction.
      12.   A complete set of fingerprints (Live Scan) taken by the City's
Police Department for each applicant, responsible person and manager. The
applicant shall be responsible for payment of any fingerprinting fee.
      13.   Two (2) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2)
inches in size taken within the last month for each applicant, responsible
person and manager.
      14.   Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
verification of the information contained in the application.
      15.   Such other identification and information as the City may
reasonably require in order to verify the truth of the matters herein specified
and as required to be set forth in the application.
      16.   A statement in writing and dated and signed by the person providing
the information that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all
information contained in the application is true and correct.
      17.   A written approval, or certificate of occupancy, from any division,
department or agency with authority or jurisdiction over the real property, and
building(s) or structure(s) thereon, in which the massage establishment is to
be located, including but not limited to, from the City's Planning and Building
Safety Divisions, as well as the City's Fire Department. The approval, or
certificate of occupancy, must be submitted to the City prior to the
application for permit final approval. Any required inspection fees shall be
the sole responsibility of the applicant. If the approvals or certificate of
occupancy are not received by the City, within ninety (90) calendar days of
filing the application, said application shall be deemed void.
   F.   The applicant, responsible person and manager shall also provide the
following personal information:
      1.   Full, true name, and all aliases used.
      2.   Date and place of birth.
      3.   California driver's license, California identification card, or any
other government issued identification card verifying the name and date of
birth, as well as physical identifying information that includes information
such as height, weight, gender, and color of hair and eyes.
      4.   The current residence address residence telephone number, and all
previous residential addresses for a minimum of eight (8) years immediately
preceding the present address of the applicant, responsible person and managers
and the dates of residence for each address.
      5.   A mobile phone number and an e-mail address, if available.
   G.   If, during the term of a permit, the permittee proposes any change in
information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permittee
shall notify the City in writing of any such proposed change, and same must be
approved by the Permit Administrator before the change takes place.
   H.   If an applicant, responsible person or manager also desires to act as a
massage technician or off premises massage technician, he or she shall also
satisfy the requirements for same as set forth in this Chapter.
   I.   At the discretion of the City, an applicant may be required to notify
any residences within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed massage
establishment by first class mail, at applicant's expense, so that residents
may submit comments to the City. The form and format of the notice will be
provided to the applicant by the City.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.035 REVIEW OF APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of a complete and signed written application for a massage
establishment permit, the City shall conduct an investigation of facts with the
appropriate City and County agencies. This review process shall ensure that the
contents and information on each massage establishment permit application are
consistent with the intent and purpose of this Chapter. Within ninety (90)
calendar days of receipt of a completed application and all required
documentation and approvals, the City shall approve, conditionally approve, or
deny the application. The ninety (90) days period may be extended for up to
thirty (30) additional days, if necessary, to complete the investigation.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.040 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT - GROUNDS FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL;
NOTICE OF DENIAL; RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   A.   After the completion of the City's investigation, the Permit
Administrator shall not issue a massage establishment permit if any of the
following findings are made:
      1.   The applicant has failed to submit a complete application or pay the
prescribed application fee as required by § 11.07.030 of this Chapter, or all
other requirements of this Chapter have not been satisfied.
      2.   The applicant, responsible person, manager or any of their officers,
directors, managers, members, partners or any person directly engaged or
retained by or employed in the massage establishment, within eight (8) years
preceding the date of the application:
         a.   Has been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud,
deceit, or moral turpitude, or any crime committed while engaged in the
ownership or management of a massage establishment or the practice of massage.
         b.   Has been convicted of a violation of any criminal law relating to
the pandering, prostitution, or human trafficking, including without limitation
Cal. Penal Code §§ 266(h), 266(i), 315, 316, 318, 647, or any similar law.
         c.   Has been convicted of any felony offense involving the illegal
sale, distribution, or possession of a controlled substance.
         d.   Has had a massage permit or massage certificate or other similar
license or permit denied, suspended, or revoked for cause by the City, any
state, local agency or other licensing authority, or has had to surrender a
permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said
permit or license being suspended or revoked.
      3.   The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement
or omission of fact to the City in the application, or in the permit
application process.
      4.   The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
      5.   The massage establishment does not comply with all applicable laws
and regulations, including, but not limited to, health, building and safety,
zoning, and fire requirements and standards.
   B.   If the Permit Administrator, upon completion of the investigation
determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in
this Chapter, the City shall deny said application and not issue a permit by
dated written notice to the applicant. The City shall serve the applicant,
either personally or by first class mail addressed to the address listed on the
application, with a written notice of denial. Said notice shall state the
reasons for the denial and the right of the applicant to appeal the decision to
the City Manager, and that the permit administrator's decision will be final if
no written appeal is timely submitted to and received by the City, pursuant to
the provisions in § 11.07.100 of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.045 SERVICE OF ANY CITY NOTICE, AND DATE OF SERVICE.
   A.   Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this Chapter,
any notice required by this Chapter may be served by personal delivery to any
applicant or permittee, or by first class mail. The date of service shall be
the date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service
receptacle.
   B.   Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this Chapter,
any notice issued to any applicant or permittee shall be sent to the mailing
address as listed on the application submitted to the City. Failure of any
applicant or permittee to receive a properly addressed notice by mail shall not
invalidate any action, decision, determination, or proceeding pursuant to this
Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.050 TERM OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   A.   An initial massage establishment permit is valid upon issuance and
shall continue in effect until it expires as set forth in this Section, unless
sooner suspended, revoked, or abandoned as set forth in this Chapter.
   B.   Every massage establishment permit first issued on or before September
30 of each year shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which it
was issued, unless sooner suspended, revoked, or abandoned as set forth in this
Chapter.
   C.   Every massage establishment permit first issued on or before October 1
of each year shall expire on December 31 of the following calendar year, unless
sooner suspended, revoked, or abandoned as set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.055 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   No permit issued under this Chapter shall confer any right to operate or
conduct any business in the City to any person for a period exceeding the term
of the permit.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.060 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT - NONASSIGNABLE AND NONTRANSFERABLE.
   A.   A massage establishment permit issued under this Chapter is valid only
as to the permittee and approved site, and is therefore nontransferable to
other persons, projects or locations.
   B.   No massage establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by
a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or entities.
Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or
assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit
and such permit shall thereafter be null and void, except as hereinafter set
forth.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.065 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS - GENERAL CONDITIONS, FACILITIES AND MASSAGE
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   A.   General conditions. All massage establishments shall comply with the
following general conditions, and any other conditions specified by the City,
which are consistent with applicable state law.
      1.   Name specified in permit. No person granted a permit pursuant to
this Chapter shall use any name or conduct business under any name or
designation not specified in his or her permit. This prohibition includes
advertising under any name or designation not specified in his or her permit.
      2.   Employ only massage technicians with current and valid massage
certificate. No permittee shall employ any person as a massage technician in
that capacity who does not have a current and valid certificate issued by
CAMTC, pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 4600 et seq. (or successor
provision or provisions), or whose certificate is not in good standing.
      3.   Manager on the premises at all times. All massage establishments
required to have a permit under this Chapter shall have a manager on the
premises at all times when the massage establishment is open for business. The
permittee as represented in the approved application for a massage
establishment permit shall be deemed a manager for the purposes of this
Section. Any additional managers must submit to the City all required
information under § 11.07.030 of this Chapter, and must be approved by the
Permit Administrator, before serving as a manager. Said amended or supplemental
information to the approved application shall be accompanied by a fee to cover
the reasonable costs associated with this investigation.
      4.   Permit and massage certificates displayed. The massage establishment
permit and the massage certificate for each massage technician shall be
displayed in an open and conspicuous place readily visible, such as in the
lobby of the massage establishment.
      5.   Hours of operation. The hours of operation must be posted in the
front window or facade of the building where the massage establishment is
located, and clearly visible from the outside.
      6.   At least one (1) certified massage technician on the premises at all
times. No massage establishment required to be permitted under this Chapter
shall open for business without having at least one massage technician who
holds a current and valid massage certificate for that specific massage
establishment. There shall be at least one (1) massage technician who holds a
current and valid massage certificate on the premises at all times when the
establishment is open.
      7.   Permittee responsibility. All permittees and all of their
responsible persons and managers shall be responsible for the conduct of all
employees or independent contractors while they are on the massage
establishment premises. Any act or omission of any employee or independent
contractor constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed the act or omission of the permittee for purposes of determining whether
the permit shall be revoked, suspended, or not renewed.
      8.   Attire. All employees, including massage technicians, shall at all
times while on the business premises, wear clean clothing that is not
transparent, see-through or which substantially exposes undergarments, breasts,
buttocks or genitals.
      9.   Prohibited conduct and activities. It is unlawful for permittees,
their responsible persons, managers, employees, independent contractors, off-
premises massage services, or massage technicians, to conduct, engage in,
cause, allow, or permit any of the following conduct or activities:
         a.   Any sexual activity upon the premises of the massage
establishment or the off-premises massage location.
         b.   Expose specified anatomical areas in the presence of any client,
patron, customer, or guest.
         c.   Make intentional physical contact with the specified anatomical
areas of any client, patron, customer, or guest.
      10.   Register of personnel. The permittee shall maintain a register
listing all massage technicians, including employees and independent
contractors. Said register shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum
period of two (2) years after massage technicians cease their employment. The
permittee shall make the personnel register immediately available for
inspection upon demand of a representative of the City at all reasonable times.
The personnel register shall include, but not limited to, the following
information:
         a.   The proper name of the massage technician, including his or her
first, middle, and last name(s).
         b.   Any nicknames, pseudonyms, or aliases used by the massage
technician.
         c.   The massage technician's current residence address and relevant
phone numbers (including, but not limited to, home and cellular numbers).
         d.   The age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and
eyes of each massage technician.
         e.   The Social Security number of each massage technician.
         f.   The date of hire, and if applicable, termination.
         g.   All information contained in a massage technician's massage
certificate, including certificate number, date of issuance, and expiration
date.
         h.   The duties of each massage technician.
      11.   Compliance with applicable laws. At all times, all permittees,
responsible persons, managers and all employees and massage technicians shall
comply with all provisions of this Chapter, and any applicable provisions of
this Code, local laws, of State of California laws.
   B.   Facilities. All massage establishments shall comply with the following
operating requirements for facilities and any other conditions specified by the
City.
      1.   Real property, and structures thereon. The premises, and structures,
alterations, or improvements thereon, in which a massage establishment is
proposed to be located on, or is located, shall comply with all applicable
laws, including, but not limited to zoning, fire, and building standards,
Codes, and regulations.
      2.   Treatment or services list. The permittee shall post and maintain a
list of treatments or services available and the cost of such treatments or
services in an open and conspicuous place of the massage establishment and in
any other location on the premises as the permittee deems appropriate. No
permittee shall allow, cause, or permit, and no massage technician shall offer
or perform, any treatment or service other than those posted.
      3.   Ventilation and lighting. Minimum ventilation and lighting shall be
provided in accordance with the City's Building Code and other adopted
California codes pertaining to structures or construction. Minimum lighting
must be provided in accordance with the City's Building Code, and, in addition,
at least one (1) unobstructed artificial light of not less than nine hundred
(900) lumens must be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage
services are being performed on a patron.
      4.   Requirements for toilet facilities. A minimum of one (1) toilet and
one (1) separate washbasin shall be provided for the patrons in every massage
establishment. Each washbasin shall provide soap or detergent, hot and cold
running water at all times, and shall be located within close proximity to the
massage rooms. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a
single service towel dispenser shall be provided at the restroom washbasin. Bar
soaps shall not be used. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet
room.
      5.   Bathing, dressing, and locker facilities. If a massage establishment
requires patrons to be separated from their possessions or valuables during
their massage or while at the massage establishment, then patrons must be
provided a location or means to secure those items. If a shower is included in
the premises, the shower facility shall be equipped with soap or detergent and
hot and cold running water at all times, and shall be located within close
proximity to the massage rooms. Bar soap may not be used.
      6.   Separate rooms. If male and female patrons are to be treated
simultaneously at the same massage establishment, separate massage rooms,
dressing, bathing and toilet facilities shall be available for male and female
patrons upon request. Any separate facility or room shall be clearly marked as
such.
      7.   Maintaining and cleaning rooms and facilities. All walls, ceilings,
floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms,
tables and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms
or cabinets, showers, compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned
and disinfected at least once each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs
shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.
      8.   Massage table coverings. Pads used on massage tables shall be
covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable
to the City or the County Health Department.
      9.   Front door. One front door that enters into the lobby or other
waiting room shall be provided for customer, client or patron use. All
customers, clients, and patrons, and any other persons other than employees
shall be required to enter and exit through the front door of the
establishment.
   C.   Operations of massage establishments.  Permittees, their responsible
persons, managers and all those performing services at the massage
establishment who have a massage certificate, shall comply with the following
massage establishment operating requirements, and any other conditions
specified by the City.
      1.   Clean and sanitary towels and linens. Clean and sanitary towels,
sheets and linens shall be provided for each patron of the massage
establishment or each patron receiving massage services. No common use of
towels or linens shall be permitted. Towels, sheets and linens shall be
provided in sufficient quantity and shall not be used by more than one (1)
person unless they have been first laundered. Heavy white paper may be
substituted for sheets; if such paper is used once for each person then
discarded into a sanitary receptacle. Separate closed cabinets or containers
shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen and shall be
plainly marked clean and soiled.
      2.   Sterilized equipment. Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment
approved by the County Health Department shall be provided for any instruments
used in performing any massage.
      3.   Living quarters prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to
reside, dwell, occupy or live inside the massage establishment at any time.
      4.   Alcohol or drugs prohibited. No person shall enter, be in, or remain
in or on, any part of a massage establishment while in the possession of,
consuming, or using or under the influence of, any alcoholic beverage or
controlled substance. permittees, responsible persons and managers shall each
be responsible to ensure that no such person shall enter or remain upon the
premises of the massage establishment. Service of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited on the premises.
      5.   Adult oriented merchandise prohibited. The use or possession of
adult oriented merchandise in or on any part of a massage establishment is
prohibited.
      6.   Recordings. No electrical, mechanical, or artificial device shall be
used by any persons employed by or contracted with the permittee, or any of its
employees, agents or representatives, including without limitation the massage
technician, for audio or video recording, or for monitoring the performance of
a massage, or the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms, without
the knowledge and written consent of the patron.
      7.   Client draping. Massage clients, patrons and customers must wear
some form of clothing or draping, which ensures coverage of the genital area,
anus and female breasts. No common use of such coverings shall be permitted and
reuse is specifically prohibited, unless adequately laundered prior to its re-
use.
      8.   Maintaining treatment and service records. The permittee shall cause
a record to be maintained of the dates and hours of each treatment or service,
the name and address or other contact information for the patron, the name of
the massage technician administering such treatment or service, and a
description, or the type, of treatment or service administered. These records
shall be prepared prior to administering any massage, service or treatment, and
shall be retained for a period of one (1) year after such treatment or service.
There records shall be open to inspection upon demand only by officials charged
with enforcement of this Chapter or emergency personnel for emergency purposes,
and for no other purpose. City and County officials as designated in this
Chapter may routinely and periodically inspect the records to ensure compliance
with this section. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such
records shall be used only to ensure and enforce compliance with this Chapter,
or any other applicable local, state or federal laws, and shall remain
confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by the
permittee, responsible person, manager, employee, or independent contractor of
the massage establishment shall constitute a misdemeanor.
      9.   Hours of operation. Massage operations shall be carried on or
conducted, and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of eight (8:
00) a.m. and ten (10:00) p.m. The applicant must advise the City, in writing,
at the time of submission of the application for a massage establishment
permit, of the hours of operation within the times set forth above. The
permittee shall notify the City, in writing, at least thirty (30) calendar days
before the date of the effective change, of any changes in the hours of
operation. No person shall operate a massage establishment or administer a
massage in any massage establishment or administer an off-premises massage
between the hours often (10:00) p.m. and eight (8) a.m. All customers, clients,
patrons, and visitors shall be excluded from the massage establishment during
these hours and be advised of these hours. Any massage beginning at any time
before ten (10:00) p.m. must terminate at ten (10:00) p.m.
      10.   Areas designated for persons with disabilities. Nothing in this
Chapter exempts a massage establishment from complying with all applicable
local, state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to persons with
disabilities.
      11.   Doors. All exterior doors (except back or rear exterior doors used
only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall
remain unlocked during business hours, unless the massage establishment is a
sole proprietor with no employees (including independent contractors). All
interior doors (other than bathroom doors), including, but not limited to, all
doors leading to customer areas, the front reception, hallway or front exterior
doors, shall not have any locking mechanisms. A door leading from the lobby
areas to customer areas, if any, shall not have any locking mechanism or be
capable of being locked or blocked to prevent entry, in any manner.
      12.   Access. No person(s) other than a permittee, permittee's authorized
personnel or customers shall be allowed beyond the front lobby, which shall be
located directly inside the front door entrance, during the hours of operation.
Each other person found beyond the first interior door leading to the inside of
the business including, but not limited to, hallways, massage rooms, reception,
or business offices, or lounge area will be in violation of this Section. Entry
doors to all rooms shall not be obstructed by any means. This subsection shall
not apply to City and County officials responsible for enforcing the provisions
of this Chapter, or any applicable law, or who are conducting administrative
periodic and routine inspections as discussed herein.
      13.   Discrimination. No massage establishment may discriminate or
exclude patrons on in violation of local, state and federal laws and
regulations.
      14.   Notices. The following notice shall be posted in every massage
establishment in a conspicuous place in that is easily visible to all persons
entering the premises and in each massage room:
   NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS
   THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS ARE NOT LOCKED FOR YOUR
SAFETY AND PROTECTION. THIS ESTABLISHMENT IS SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY CITY OF
CULVER CITY OFFICIALS, INCLUDING THE CULVER CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT, AS WELL AS
COUNTY HEALTH OFFICIALS, WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE.
The language for said notice set forth above may be amended by Permit
Administrator. Every massage establishment required to post this notice shall
be required to pay for the cost of all notices required by this section.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.070 MASSAGE TECHNICIANS AND PRACTICE - GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   All massage technicians shall comply with the following conditions:
   A.   No massage technician shall massage or cause, allow, or permit an
employee to massage any specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Chapter,
of any patron. Nor shall any massage technician or employee solicit or cause,
allow, or permit a patron to touch or massage in any manner the specified
anatomical area of a massage technician or employee. No massage shall be given
and no patron shall be in the presence of any other person unless the patron's
specified anatomical areas are fully covered by a nontransparent covering or
draping.
   B.   Massage technicians shall display, and allow the permittee to display,
his or her current and valid massage certificate in an open and conspicuous
place readily visible, such as in the lobby of the massage establishment.
   C.   The massage technician shall at all times when present in the massage
establishment have a California driver's license or California identification
card, or any other government-issued identification card that has a photograph
and physical identifying information of the massage technician. Such
identification shall be provided to the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, upon demand, or to any City or County official conducting an
investigation and/or who are participating in periodic and routine inspections
as regulated herein.
   D.   Any massage technician using a nickname, pseudonym, or alias other than
the name specified on their massage certificate and California driver's
license, California identification card, or any other government-issued
identification card, while conducting business or performing massages, must
include said name in the personnel register as required by § 11.07.065A.10. of
this Chapter.
   E.   A massage technician shall consent to, and shall not prevent, delay or
interfere with a lawful inspection of the massage establishment, or occupied
massage rooms, by the City's Divisions of Enforcement Services, Planning,
Building Safety, as well as the Fire Department, Police Department, Finance
Department, and the Los Angeles County Health Department, and any other City or
County division or department that has regulatory jurisdiction over the massage
establishment, or its massage technicians, employees, or practices and
activities thereon, for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this
Chapter or other applicable laws, regulations, or standards are complied with
and met.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.075 INSPECTIONS OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND ITS RECORDS.
   A.   The City's Divisions of Enforcement Services, Planning, Building
Safety, as well as the Fire Department, Police Department, Finance Department,
and the Los Angeles County Health Department, and any other City or County
division or department that has regulatory jurisdiction over the massage
establishment, or its massage technicians, employees or practices and
activities thereon, shall have the right to enter the massage establishment,
and all rooms, building and structures thereon, or portions thereof, at any
time during business hours for the purpose of making reasonable unscheduled
inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable regulations,
laws, and provisions of this Chapter. During an inspection, City and County
personnel may also verify the identity of all permittees, responsible persons,
managers, massage technicians and employees.
   B.   Records maintained in the ordinary course of business as required from
the massage establishment to keep pursuant to provisions of this Chapter,
including, but not limited to, personnel registers and records of services and
treatments rendered, may also be inspected by the aforementioned City and
County
officials.
   C.   Inspections of the massage establishment shall be conducted during
business hours.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.080 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT - CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP WHEN THE
PERMITTEE IS A PARTNERSHIP OR CORPORATION.
   A.   One (1) or more proposed partners in a partnership granted a massage
establishment permit may make application to the Permit Administrator, together
with the fee established by the City Council, to amend the original
application, providing all information as required for partners in the first
instance and, upon approval thereof, the transfer of the interests of one or
more partners to the proposed partner or partners may occur. If the permittee
is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the
surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the
deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of
such permit, and in such case, the massage establishment permit, upon
notification to the Permit Administrator, shall be placed in the name of the
surviving partners.
   B.   If the massage establishment permit is issued to a corporation, stock
may be sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to stockholders who have been
named on the application. If any stock is sold, transferred, issued, or
assigned to a person not listed on the application as a stockholder, the permit
shall be deemed terminated and void; provided, however, the proposed transferee
may submit to the Permit Administrator, together with the fee established by
the City Council, an application to amend the original application providing
all information as required for stockholders in the first instance, and, upon
approval thereof, the transfer may then occur.
   C.   All changes in ownership as described in this section must be submitted
to the City within thirty (30) calendar days, along with any organizational
documents reflecting said changes.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.085 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT - CHANGE OF NAME, OR ALTERATIONS TO
APPROVED FACILITY.
   A.   The permittee must advise the Permit Administrator within thirty (30)
calendar days of all changes of name or designation under which the business is
to be conducted. The change of name or designation shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the City Council to defray the
costs of reissuance of the massage establishment permit.
   B.   No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on the
business of a massage establishment under any name other than the name of the
massage establishment specified in the permit.
   C.   All required City approvals, plan approvals, and permits must be
obtained before causing, allowing, or permitting alterations to, and/or
extensions or expansions of, the existing building(s), structure(s), or
portions thereof, approved as a location for a massage establishment. Said
alterations, extensions, or expansions shall comply with all applicable laws,
regulations and standards, including those concerning building safety and
occupancy.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.090 RENEWAL OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   A.   Applications for the renewal of a massage establishment permit shall be
filed with the Permit Administrator at least sixty (60) calendar days before
the expiration of the permit to be renewed. Temporary permits will not be
issued. Any permittee allowing his or her permit to lapse or expire shall be
required to submit a new application and pay the corresponding original
application fees.
   B.   Any permittee desiring to obtain a renewal of his or her permit shall
file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required City form
with the Permit Administrator, who shall conduct an investigation. The renewal
application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee established by
resolution of the City Council to defray the costs of the investigation
required by this Chapter. A permittee submitting a renewal application shall be
required to update the information contained in his or her original permit
application and provide any new or additional information as may be reasonably
required by the Permit Administrator in order to determine whether the permit
should be renewed.
   C.   The Permit Administrator shall have sixty (60) calendar days to
investigate the renewal application and shall render a decision within that
time, but no later than the date of expiration of the permit.
   D.   The Permit Administrator shall renew a permit if he or she confirms the
permittee has been and remains in current compliance with all terms and
conditions of his or her City-issued permit, with all provisions of this
Chapter, and with all state and local laws applicable to massage
establishments.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.095 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, NONRENEWAL, OR DENIAL; NOTICE
OF CITY DECISION; AND APPEAL RIGHTS.
   A.   Failure of a permittee to comply with any requirement imposed by the
provisions of this Chapter (or successor provision or provisions) or pursuant
to any term or condition imposed on the massage establishment permit, shall be
grounds for non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of the permit.
   B.   The Permit Administrator may also suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a
massage establishment permit if any of the following conditions exist:
      1.   A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
      2.   A permittee, responsible person, manager or any massage technician
employed or contracted by the permittee has been convicted of any law specified
in §§ 11.07.030 and/or 11.07.040 of this Chapter.
      3.   The Permit Administrator makes any findings necessary to deny a
permit pursuant to § 11.07.040 of this Chapter.
      4.   Employing or retaining any person to perform massage services who
does not hold a current and valid massage certificate issued by CAMTC, pursuant
to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 4600 et seq. (or successor provision or
provisions), or whose certificate is not in good standing.
      5.   If there have been repeated alleged violations of the terms and
conditions of a massage establishment permit or the provisions of this Chapter
(or successor provision or provisions), which require ongoing supervision,
action, or response by City and County officials, including but not limited to
the City's Police Department, which demonstrate that permittee is unable to
operate or manage the massage establishment in a law-abiding manner.
   C.   If the Permit Administrator determines and concludes that a holder of a
City-issued massage establishment permit has violated any conditions of its
permit, failed to adhere to or fulfill any requirement of this Chapter, failed
to meet any of the original grounds for approval, or violated any provision of
this Chapter or condition of permit to provide grounds to not renew a permit,
or to suspend or revoke a permit, the Permit Administrator shall revoke,
suspend or not renew said permit by dated written notice to the permittee.
   D.   The Permit Administrator shall serve the permittee, either personally
or by first class mail addressed to the address listed on the application, with
a written notice of nonrenewal, or a notice to suspend or revoke a permit. This
notice shall state the reasons for the action, the effective date of the
decision, the right of the permittee to appeal the decision to the City
Manager, and that the Permit Administrator's decision will be final if no
written appeal is timely submitted to, and received by, the City, pursuant to
the provisions in § 11.07.100 of this Chapter. This notice will be effective
within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of service of the notice. If an
appeal is timely and properly filed in accordance with § 11.07.100, then the
effective date of the notice is stayed.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.100 APPEAL.
   A.   Notice of, and time to, appeal, and effect of timely appeal.
      1.   An applicant or permittee of a massage establishment may appeal the
decision of the Permit Administrator to the City Manager, by filing with the
City Clerk a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15) calendar days from
the date of service of the notice issued by the Permit Administrator of his or
her decision.
      2.   The notice of appeal shall be in writing and signed by the person
making the appeal ("appellant"), or his or her legal representative, and shall
contain the following:
         a.   Name, address, and telephone number of the appellant, as well as
indication of whether the appellant is the applicant or permittee of a massage
establishment with a City-issued massage establishment permit.
         b.   Specify that the person is appealing from a specified decision,
action, or a particular part thereof, made by the Permit Administrator.
         c.   Include a true and correct copy of the notice of decision issued
by the Permit Administrator for which the appellant is appealing.
         d.   State with specificity the reasons and grounds for making the
appeal, including, but not limited to, a statement of facts upon which the
appeal is based in sufficient detail to enable the City Manager, or any
appointed hearing officer, to understand the nature of the controversy, the
basis of the appeal, and the relief requested.
         e.   All documents or other evidence pertinent to the appeal that the
appellant requests the City Manager to consider at the hearing.
      3.   Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a
waiver of the right to appeal the notice issued by the Permit Administrator. In
this event, the Permit Administrator's notice of decision, determination and/or
action is final and binding.
      4.   In the event a written notice of appeal is timely filed, the
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation shall not become effective until a Final
Order has been rendered and issued by the City Manager, or appointed hearing
officer. If no appeal is timely filed in the event of a decision of nonrenewal,
the massage establishment permit shall expire at the conclusion of the term of
the permit. If no appeal is timely filed in the event of a decision of
suspension or revocation, the suspension or revocation shall become effective
upon the expiration of the period for filing a written notice of appeal.
   B.   Review by City Manager; appeal hearing and proceedings.
      1.   All appellants shall, subject to filing a timely written notice of
appeal, obtain review thereof before the City Manager or appointed hearing
officer. The administrative appeal shall be scheduled no later than sixty (60)
calendar days, and no sooner than ten (10) calendar days, after receipt of a
timely filed notice of appeal. The appellant(s) listed on the written notice of
appeal shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and location of the
hearing at least ten (10) calendar days before the date of the hearing ("notice
of appeal hearing").
      2.   All requests by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted
to the City Clerk in writing no later than three (3) business days before the
date scheduled for the hearing. The City Manager may continue a hearing for
good cause or on his or her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be
continued for more than thirty (30) calendar days without stipulation by all
parties.
      3.   The City Manager shall preside over the hearing on appeal, or in the
alternative, the City Manager may appoint a hearing officer to conduct the
hearing.
      4.   At the date, time and location set forth in the notice of appeal
hearing, the City Manager or an appointed hearing officer, shall hear and
consider the testimony of the appellant(s), the Permit Administrator, and/or
their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence properly submitted by
these persons.
      5.   The following rules shall apply at the appeal hearing:
         a.   Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply. However, rules of privilege shall be applicable to the
extent they are permitted by law, and irrelevant, collateral, undue, and
repetitious testimony may be excluded.
         b.   The City bears the burden of proof to establish the grounds for
denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation by a preponderance of evidence.
         c.   The issuance of the Permit Administrator's notice of decision
constitutes prima facie evidence of grounds for the denial, nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation, and City or County personnel who significantly took
part in the investigation, which contributed to the Permit Administrator
issuing a notice of decision, may be required to participate in the appeal
hearing.
         d.   Each party shall have the right to introduce evidence, to present
and examine witnesses, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who have
testified under direct examination. The City Manager, or the appointed hearing
officer, may also call witnesses, and examine any person who introduces
evidence or testifies at any hearing.
         e.   The City Manager, or the appointed hearing officer, may accept
and consider late evidence not submitted initially with the notice of appeal
upon a showing by the appellant of good cause. The hearing officer shall
determine in his or her discretion whether a particular fact or facts amount to
a good cause on a case-by-case basis.
         f.   The appellant and the Permit Administrator issuing the notice,
may represent himself, herself or themselves, or be represented by a legal
representative of his, her, or their choice.
         g.   The appellant may bring a language interpreter to the hearing at
his or her sole expense.
         h.   The City may, at its discretion, record the hearing by
stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording.
      6.   If the appellant, or his or her legal representative, fails to
appear at the appeal hearing, the City Manager, or the appointed hearing
officer, shall cancel the appeal hearing and send a notice thereof to the
appellant by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the notice of
appeal. A cancellation of a hearing due to nonappearance of the appellant shall
constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal and a failure to
exhaust all administrative remedies. In such instances, the Permit
Administrator's notice of decision is final and binding.
   C.   Decision of City Manager, or his or her designee, or appointed hearing
officer; final order.
      1.   Not later than fifteen (15) calendar days following conclusion of
the appeal hearing, the City Manager, or appointed hearing officer, shall
determine if any ground exists for the denial, nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation of a massage establishment permit. If the City Manager, or appointed
hearing officer, determines that no grounds for denial, nonrenewal, suspension
or revocation exist, the Permit Administrator's notice of decision shall be
deemed cancelled. If the City Manager, or appointed hearing officer, determines
that one (1) or more of the reasons or grounds enumerated in the Permit
Administrator's notice of decision exists, he or she shall issue a written
Final Order, which shall at minimum contain the following:
         a.   A finding and description of each reason or grounds for denial,
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation that exist.
         b.   Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant
or related to the subject matter of the appeal.
      2.   The decision of the City Manager, or appointed hearing officer, is
final and conclusive. The decision shall also contain the following statement:
"The decision of the City Manager, or appointed hearing officer, is final and
binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to the time limits set
forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6."
      3.   A copy of the Final Order shall be served by first class mail on the
appellant. If the appellant is not the owner of the real property in which the
massage establishment is located, or proposed to be located, a copy of the
Final Order may also be served on the property owner by first class mail to the
address shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Failure of a person to
receive a properly addressed Final Order shall not invalidate any action or
proceeding by the City pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.105 PROHIBITION FROM REAPPLYING FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   If the issuance of a permit is denied, or a current and valid City issued
massage establishment permit is suspended, revoked, or not renewed for failure
to comply with the conditions of a permit or the provisions of this Chapter,
the applicant or former permittee may not reapply for a period of twenty-four
(24) months from the date the application was denied, or the date the City
issued massage establishment permit was suspended, revoked, or not renewed, or
from the date of the Final Order that was issued after an appeal hearing.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.110 SURRENDER OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   Any permittee to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this Chapter
shall immediately surrender his or her permit to the Permit Administrator upon
its nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation. A permit is not valid beyond the
effective date of the suspension or revocation, whether surrendered or not.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.115 APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   A.   Commencing on the effective date of the chapter as codified in this
Chapter, all operating permits for a massage establishment shall be issued in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein whether the described persons, businesses or
activities were established before or after the effective date of this Chapter,
except that massage establishments lawfully in business before the effective
date hereof shall have ninety (90) calendar days to submit the necessary
application(s) to secure an massage establishment permit as described herein
and comply with the terms of this Chapter.
   C.   Upon request in writing submitted concurrently with an initial
application under § 11.07.030, and for good cause shown, the Permit
Administrator is authorized to waive the architectural, structural, or building
requirements of § 11.07.065B.3. through B.5. for an establishment operating at
the time of the effective date of this Chapter. Any such waiver shall be
attached to or upon each massage establishment permit. Nothing in this Section
waives any Planning, Fire Code or Building Safety requirements that are
generally applicable under the Culver City Municipal Code.
   D.   Provided any existing massage establishment undergoes a change in
ownership, or causes, allows, or permits alterations to, and/or extensions or
expansions of, the existing building(s), structure(s), or portions thereof,
then the massage establishment must comply with all applicable laws,
regulations and standards, including those required by this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.120 FEES.
   The City Council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may
amend, the fees for the administration of this Chapter, including but not
limited to, original application, renewal application, and inspection fees.
Fees required by this Chapter shall be in addition to any other fees that may
be required under any other section, provision, or chapter of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.125 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   B.   It is unlawful for any permittee of a massage establishment, or its
responsible person, manager or any other responsible person employed by or
working in concert with them or on their behalf, whether directly or
indirectly, to continue to operate, conduct, or maintain a massage
establishment after the City-issued massage establishment permit has been
suspended or revoked, or not renewed, pursuant to a non-contested notice of
decision issued by the Permit Administrator, or after the issuance of a Final
Order after an appeal hearing.
   C.   Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary
to the provisions of this Chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be,
unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City may, in addition to or in lieu of
prosecuting a criminal action, commence an administrative or civil action(s) or
proceeding(s), for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner
provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court
or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief to abate or remove such
massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating,
conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of
this Chapter.
   D.   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this Chapter, or of any law
or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained
or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.
   E.   Whenever in this Chapter any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall
include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the
fact of such act or omission.
   F.   The penalties set forth herein are cumulative and in addition to all
other remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in this Chapter, the City's
Code, or in any other ordinance, laws, rules or regulations of the City,
County, or the State of California.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
§ 11.07.130 EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES.
   Except as designated in this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall
control for regulation of massage establishments as defined herein if other
provisions of the Code conflict therewith. This Chapter shall not, however,
relieve any person of his or her duty to comply with such laws if additional
obligations, duties, or prohibitions are imposed thereby.
(Ord. No. 2016-009 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 11.08: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 11.09: PAWNBROKERS; SALE OF GOODS
Section
Pawnbrokers
   
11.09.005   Definitions
   
11.09.010   Permit required
   
11.09.015   Application for permit
   
11.09.020   Investigation of applicant
   
11.09.025   Approval subject to conditions
   
11.09.030   Revocation of permit
   
11.09.035   Procedures for revocation
   
11.09.040   Daily report to Chief of Police
   
11.09.045   Records to be kept
   
11.09.050   Inspection of reports
   
11.09.055   Failure to comply with requirements
   
11.09.060   Goods to be held for required time
   
11.09.065   Secondhand purchases of motor vehicles, bicycles and the like
regulated
Street Vendors
   
11.09.200   Definitions
   
11.09.205   Permit required
   
11.09.210   Application and issuance of permit
   
11.09.215   Conditions of permit
Close-Out Sales
   
11.09.300   Definitions
   
11.09.305   Permit required
   
11.09.310   Filing of inventory
   
11.09.315   Original inventory limitation
   
11.09.320   Power to revoke permit
   
11.09.325   Removal of merchandise
   
11.09.330   Permit to be displayed
   
11.09.335   Records to be kept
   
11.09.340   Exemptions
   
11.09.345   Prohibition against reopening
Yard Sales
   
11.09.400   Definition
   
11.09.405   Permit required
   
11.09.410   Application
   
11.09.415   Frequency and duration of sale
   
11.09.420   Hours of operation
   
11.09.425   Locations
   
11.09.430   Advertising; sign requirements
   
11.09.435   Inspection
   
11.09.440   Penalty
PAWNBROKERS
§ 11.09.005 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever in this Subchapter the following terms are used, they shall have
the meaning ascribed to them, unless it is apparent from the context thereof
that some other meaning is intended:
   PAWNBROKER. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in carrying on,
managing, or employed in any one or more of the following businesses:
      1.   Pawnbroking.
      2.   Lending money for himself or any other person upon personal
property, pawns or pledges, in the possession of the lender.
      3.   Purchasing articles of personal property and re-selling or agreeing
to re-sell such articles to the vendors or assignees at prices agreed upon at
or before the time of such purchase.
   PAWNSHOP. Any room, store or place in which the business of pawnbroker is
engaged in, carried on or conducted.
('65 Code, § 26-1) (Ord. No. 259 § 1; Ord. No. 466)
§ 11.09.010 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in, carrying on or conducting the
business of pawnbroker shall have a permit, in writing, so to do.
('65 Code, § 26-2) (Ord. No. 259 § 2; Ord. No. 466)
§ 11.09.015 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Written application for permit shall be filed with the City, stating therein
the address and full name of the person, or the firm, and of each member
thereof, or of the corporation and the president, secretary and manager
thereof, making such application, and the location where applicant proposes to
conduct such business.
('65 Code, § 26-3) (Ord. No. 259 § 3; Ord. No. CS-458; Ord. No. 466; Ord. No.
2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.09.020 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   Upon receipt of such application, an investigation shall be made of the
applicant and the location proposed for said business. Thereafter the City
Manager or their designee may, in its discretion, issue a permit to the
applicant.
('65 Code, § 26-4) (Ord. No. 259 § 3; Ord. No. CS-458; Ord. No. 466; Ord. No.
2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.09.025 APPROVAL SUBJECT TO CONDITIONS.
   In exercising its discretion, the City Manager or their designee may take
into consideration all facts as it may deem pertinent and proper, and before
issuing any permit it must specifically be found that the following conditions
exist, namely:
   A.   That the granting of said permit will not be detrimental to the safety,
public morals or general welfare of the City;
   B.   That the granting of said permit will not be detrimental or injurious
to other businesses located adjacent to or in the general vicinity of said
proposed business;
   C.   That the granting of said permit will not be injurious to property or
land values in the vicinity of said proposed business.
('65 Code, § 26-5) (Ord. No. 259 § 3; Ord. No. 466; Ord. No. CS-458; Ord. No.
2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.09.030 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Permit to act as a pawnbroker may be revoked by the City Manager or their
designee or the City Council, following a hearing with respect thereto, upon a
showing of violation of the regulations of this Chapter or any other law.
('65 Code, § 26-6) (Ord. No. 259 § 4; Ord. No. 466; Ord. No. 2025- 001 § 2
(part))
§ 11.09.035 PROCEDURES FOR REVOCATION.
   Before a permit may be revoked, a copy of the charges and allegations
supporting revocation, together with notice of time and place for hearing,
shall be served, at least three (3) days prior to date of hearing upon the
person, firm or corporation involved, or their agent or employee. Upon a
hearing wherein the grounds of such complaint are sustained, the City Manager
or their designee or the City Council shall revoke permit and no further permit
shall be issued to the same person, firm or corporation for a period of six (6)
months.
('65 Code, § 26-7) (Ord. No. 259 § 5; Ord. No. 466; Ord. No. 2025- 001 § 2
(part))
§ 11.09.040 DAILY REPORT TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Forms shall be furnished by the Chief of Police to every pawnbroker for the
purpose of recording and reporting to the Chief of Police all required
information relative to purchases, pledges or consignments. Such forms shall be
delivered to the Chief of Police or Desk Sergeant before 10:00 a.m. each
morning and shall contain a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares,
merchandise or other things received on deposit, pledged or purchased during
the day preceding the filing of such report.
('65 Code, § 26-8) (Ord. No. 259 § 6; Ord. No. 466)
§ 11.09.045 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   Every pawnbroker shall keep a complete record, written or printed entirely
in the English language, of all goods, wares, merchandise or things pledged to,
or purchased or received, or sold or otherwise disposed of, which record shall
contain all of the information required in the form furnished by the Police
Department. Such record, as well as property pledged, purchased or received by
such pawnbroker shall be open at all times, during business hours, to the
inspection of the Chief of Police or other authorized personnel of the City.
('65 Code, § 26-9) (Ord. No. 259 § 7; Ord. No. 466)
§ 11.09.050 INSPECTION OF REPORTS.
   Reports received by the Chief of Police shall be on file in the Police
Department and shall be open to inspection only by members of that department
or upon a court order made for that purpose.
('65 Code, § 26-10) (Ord. No. 259 § 8; Ord. No. 466)
§ 11.09.055 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation engaged in
carrying on or conducting the business of a pawnbroker, or for any agent,
servant employee or manager thereof, to fail, refuse or neglect to observe the
requirements of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 26-11) (Ord. No. 259 § 9; Ord. No. 466)
§ 11.09.060 GOODS TO BE HELD FOR REQUIRED TIME.
   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to sell or otherwise dispose of any
article, goods, wares, merchandise or other thing within twenty-one (21) days
after the purchase or receipt thereof.
('65 Code, § 26-12) (Ord. No. 259 § 10; Ord. No. 466)
§ 11.09.065 SECONDHAND PURCHASES OF MOTOR VEHICLES, BICYCLES AND THE LIKE
REGULATED.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall purchase any automobile,
motorcycle, or bicycle, or any accessories or parts thereof, at secondhand in
the City from a person or persons not carrying on an established business of
selling such articles, shall, by 10:00 a.m. of the day following such purchase
or purchases, make out and deliver to the Chief of Police or Desk Sergeant a
form, supplied by the Police Department, containing a full, true and complete
report of what was purchased and all other pertinent information pertaining
thereto.
('65 Code, § 26-13) (Ord. No. 259 § 12; Ord. No. 466)
STREET VENDORS
§ 11.09.200 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STREET. Any highway, roadway, parkway, sidewalk and alley and any center
divider or median strip, therein.
   STREET VENDING. The commercial peddling, hawking, displaying, or offering
for sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, food or beverage of any kind on any
public street within the City.
('65 Code, § 3-20) (Ord. No. 84-004 § 1; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.09.205 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A.   No person shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, any street vending,
except as provided in Subsection B. and C. herein.
   B.   A person may conduct street vending only from a vehicle, wagon, or
cart, and only after having obtained a permit, therefor, pursuant to this
Subchapter.
   C.   The outdoor display of goods on a public sidewalk shall only be
permitted as provided in §
9.08.040 and the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code.
('65 Code, § 3-21) (Ord. No. 84-004 § 1; Ord. No. 96-018 § 1)
§ 11.09.210 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   A street vending permit shall be applied for and issued in accordance with
the provisions of §§
11.01.300 through
11.01.370.
('65 Code, § 3-22) (Ord. No. 84-004 § 1)
§ 11.09.215 CONDITIONS FOR PERMIT.
   In addition to any conditions imposed pursuant to §
11.01.340 B., a street vending permit shall be subject to the following
conditions.
   A.   No person shall stand, park or stop a vehicle, wagon, or cart, for the
purposes of street vending, except at the request of a bona fide purchaser and
for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any location.
   B.   The person conducting the street vending shall obey the directions of
any police officer, fireman or other City employee.
   C.   The street vending shall not occur within three hundred (300) feet of
any public school grounds or public park unless the permit otherwise provides.
   D.   The street vending permit shall automatically become null and void if
the person to whom the permit was issued is convicted of or pleads guilty or no
contest to any criminal charge alleging a violation of any of the provisions of
this Subchapter.
   E.   No street vending permit shall be granted to a person within six (6)
months of the date of a conviction or plea of guilty or no contest to any
criminal charge alleging a violation of the provisions of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 3-23) (Ord. No. 84-004 § 1; Ord. No. 85-017 §§ 1, 2)
CLOSE-OUT SALES
§ 11.09.300 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter certain terms used herein are defined as
follows.
   ADVERTISING. Any and all means, whether oral, written, lettered or printed,
for conveying to the public notice of the conduct of a sale or intention to
conduct a sale.
   PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this Subchapter.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this
Subchapter.
   SALE. Any offer to sell to the public, or any group thereof, goods, wares or
merchandise on order, in transit or in stock, in connection with a declared
purpose as set forth by advertising. Such advertising may convey the following.
      1.   The sale is anticipatory to or to avoid the termination,
liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, removal, dissolution or
abatement of business.
      2.   Upon the disposal of goods, business will cease, be interrupted,
discontinued or changed.
      3.   Goods, wares or merchandise, or any part thereof, have been involved
in business failure or have been derived from a business which has failed, been
closed, discontinued or liquidated.
      4.   Premises are available for purchase or lease or are otherwise to be
vacated.
('65 Code, § 6-13)
§ 11.09.305 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or in any manner purchase a
“closing out sale” without first filing an application therefor with the City
Council and receiving a permit so to do.
('65 Code, § 6-14)
§ 11.09.310 FILING OF INVENTORY.
   The application for permit shall be accompanied by a complete verified
inventory of stock to be offered to the public during closing out sale. No
additional merchandise shall be added thereafter.
('65 Code, § 6-15)
§ 11.09.315 ORIGINAL INVENTORY LIMITATION.
   The original inventory shall not be increased. Any unusual purchase or
additions to the stock of merchandise within 60 days prior to filing of
application for license to conduct a closing out sale shall be presumptive
evidence that such purchase or additions were made for the purpose of selling
them at such sale. Each sale of merchandise not inventoried and described in
original application shall constitute a separate offense under this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 6-16)
§ 11.09.320 POWER TO REVOKE PERMIT.
   The City Manager or their designee or City Council shall have the power to
revoke any permit whenever such sale is being conducted in violation of the
provisions of this Subchapter or in such manner as to deceive or defraud the
public.
('65 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.09.325 REMOVAL OF MERCHANDISE.
   Removal from the place of sale mentioned in original application of any
goods, wares or merchandise inventoried and described therein, shall cause such
goods to lose their identity therewith. No permits thereafter will be issued
for conducting a further sale of such goods in such manner as to identify them
with the original permittee.
('65 Code, § 6-18)
§ 11.09.330 PERMIT TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Upon the commencement and for the duration of any closing out sale, permit
shall be prominently displayed near the entrance of the premises. A duplicate
original of the application and stock list pursuant to which such permit was
issued shall at all times be available to the City Council or its
representatives who shall be permitted to examine all merchandise in the
premises for comparison with such stock list.
('65 Code, § 6-19)
§ 11.09.335 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   Suitable books and records shall be kept by the permittee. At the close of
business each day the stock list shall be revised and those items disposed of
during the day shall be so marked thereon.
('65 Code, § 6-20)
§ 11.09.340 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this Subchapter shall not apply to or affect the
following.
   A.   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   B.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officers, such as sheriffs and marshals.
   C.   Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.
   D.   Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who
publishes any such advertisement in good faith, without knowledge of its false,
deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of
this Subchapter have not been complied with.
('65 Code, § 6-21) (Ord. No. CS-210)
§ 11.09.345 PROHIBITION AGAINST REOPENING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to reopen a business of substantially
the same nature, with substantially the same parties in interest and at
substantially the same location within six (6) months after the completion of
the close-out sale.
('65 Code, § 6-22) (Ord. No. 86-027 § 1)
YARD SALES
§ 11.09.400 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   YARD SALE. A yard, garage, patio, or similar type sale held in any
residential zone for the purpose of disposing of personal property.
('65 Code, § 22-70) (Ord. No. CS-825 § 1 (part))
§ 11.09.405 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No yard sale shall be conducted without a no-fee permit issued by the City.
('65 Code, § 22-71 A.) (Ord. No. CS-825 § 1 (part))
§ 11.09.410 APPLICATION.
   An applicant for a permit shall furnish the following.
   A.   Full name.
   B.   Residence address (sale location).
   C.   The dates and hours of the sale.
   D.   A general description of the type of merchandise to be sold.
   E.   A declaration that the applicant is the owner of all of the property to
be offered for sale and that if requested by the Police Department, the
applicant will permit inspection by the Police Department of all goods,
products and merchandise offered or to be offered for sale.
('65 Code, § 22-71 B.) (Ord. No. CS-825 § 1 (part))
§ 11.09.415 FREQUENCY AND DURATION OF SALE.
   No permit shall be issued to any person or for any location more frequently
than once every six months nor shall any sale be conducted for a period in
excess of three consecutive days or four days consisting of Saturday and Sunday
of two consecutive weekends.
('65 Code, § 22-71 C.) (Ord. No. CS-825 § 1 (part))
§ 11.09.420 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No yard sale shall start before 9:00 a.m., nor continue after 6:00 p.m.
('65 Code, § 22-71 D.) (Ord. No. CS-825 § 1 (part))
§ 11.09.425 LOCATIONS.
   All display and related activity shall be conducted within an enclosed
structure, be it a house or garage, located anywhere on the lot, an enclosed
patio located within the side or rear yard, or in the rear yard itself. Front
and side yards and driveways shall not be used for a yard sale or for storage
or display of property or any related activity other than display of one sign
in accordance with §
11.09.430 of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 22-71 E.) (Ord. No. CS-825 § 1 (part))
§ 11.09.430 ADVERTISING; SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   No sign or other form of advertisement of a proposed yard sale shall be
placed upon any public property within the City (the Zoning Code, as set forth
in Title 17 of this Code) or upon any other property within the City, except
upon the premises where a sale is conducted. No sign or other form of
advertisement shall be exhibited for more than two days prior to the day each
sale period is to commence, and shall be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the
termination day of each period. One sign only, not exceeding 15 x 20 inches in
size, may be placed in the front or side yard of the premises where the sale is
conducted. The sign shall be placed at least five (5) feet from the front
property line which for purposes of this Section shall be considered the edge
of the sidewalk furthest from the street or the edge of the curb furthest from
the street if there is no sidewalk. No attention-getters or flags shall be
displayed.
('65 Code, § 22-71 F.) (Ord. No. CS-825 § 1 (part))
§ 11.09.435 INSPECTION.
   All property offered for sale shall be available for inspection by any
representative of the Police Department at the place where the sale is to be
conducted.
('65 Code, § 22-71 G.) (Ord. No. CS-825 § 1 (part))
§ 11.09.440 PENALTY.
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, a violation of any of the provisions of
this Subchapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000), six (6) months in jail, or both.
   B.   Nothing in this Subchapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
prosecuting a violation of this Subchapter as an infraction, at his/her
discretion, as set forth in §
1.01.035 B. of this code.
   C.   Nothing in this Subchapter shall prevent the City Attorney from
bringing a civil action, at his/her discretion, for violations of the
provisions of this Subchapter, as set forth in §
1.01.050 of this code.
('65 Code, § 22-1) (Ord. No. 96-034 § 2)
CHAPTER 11.10: TAXICABS
Section
General Provisions
   
11.10.005   Definitions
   
11.10.010   Permit required
   
11.10.015   Application for permit to conduct taxicab business
   
11.10.020   Investigation and report
   
11.10.025   Hearing on application
   
11.10.030   Findings
   
11.10.035   Issuance and duration of permit to conduct taxicab business
   
11.10.040   Controlled substance and alcohol testing program
   
11.10.045   Transfer of title to taxicabs
   
11.10.050   Destruction of taxicabs
   
11.10.055   Suspension or revocation of permit to conduct taxicab business,
taxi driver permits and taxicab decals
   
11.10.060   Suspension of permit or decal by Chief of Police
   
11.10.065   Insurance requirements
   
11.10.070   Permit fees and business taxes
Operating Requirements
   
11.10.300   Taximeters
   
11.10.305   Taxicab rates
   
11.10.310   Taxicab equipment and design
   
11.10.315   Inspection and sanitation
   
11.10.320   Taxi driver permit
   
11.10.325   Operating regulations
   
11.10.330   Taxicab stands
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11.10.005 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever in this Chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
following meaning unless it is apparent from the context thereof that some
other meaning is intended:
   DECAL. The official decal or seal issued by the City Treasurer for each
taxicab authorized by the City Council.
   DRIVER. Every person in charge of or operating any passenger-carrying or
motor-propelled vehicle, either as agent, employee, or otherwise of the owner,
as owner, or under the direction of the owner.
   INDEPENDENT TAXI ASSOCIATION.  Any partnership or corporation comprised of
independent taxicab owners who operate as a single entity for purposes of
shared liability with a single management group or board of directors.
   OWNER. The registered owner, lessor or lessee of any passenger-carrying
automobile or motor-propelled vehicle, operated as a taxicab.
   PERMIT TO CONDUCT A TAXICAB BUSINESS. The permit to conduct a taxicab
business issued by the City Treasurer.
   TAXICAB. Every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle other than motor buses,
ambulances, and vehicles operated by funeral directors used for the
transportation of passengers over the streets of the City, irrespective of
whether such operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the City, at rates
per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week, per month, per annum, or for a
tip or gratuity or any other form of compensation.
   TAXI DRIVER PERMIT. The permit issued by the Chief of Police to each driver
of a taxicab.
   TAXIMETER. Any mechanical or electronic instrument, appliance, device, or
machine by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically or
electronically calculated, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or
both, and upon which instrument, appliance, device, or machine such charge is
indicated by figures.
   STAND or TAXI STAND. A place designated by the City Manager of the City for
the use of any taxicab while awaiting employment.
('65 Code, § 34-1) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 92-017 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009
§ 22 (part))
§ 11.10.010 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A.   Taxi business permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, entity,
corporation or taxi association to operate or cause to be operated a taxi
business without a taxi business operating permit as provided in this Chapter.
   B.   Taxi driver permit.
      1.   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person driving a taxi
vehicle either as owner, agent, employee or otherwise to pick up a passenger
without possessing a valid taxi driver's permit as provided in this Chapter. A
taxi driver permit is nontransferrable and is valid only as long as the driver
works for a taxi business currently approved and permitted by the City as
provided in this Chapter.
      2.   Invalidity of permit. A taxi driver's permit valid at the time it
was issued shall become invalid if the taxi company or association for which
the taxi driver works, whether as an owner, agent, employee or otherwise:
         a.   Fails to renew its permit;
         b.   Is denied renewal by the City;
         c.   Has its permit revoked; and/or
         d.   Changes ownership by sale, transfer, bankruptcy or any other
method.
   C.   Taxi vehicle inspected and approved. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or cause to be operated a taxi vehicle, whether as an owner,
agent, employee or otherwise, which has not been inspected and approved by the
Culver City Police Department.
   D.   City decal required.
      1.   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person or taxi association
to operate or cause to be operated any taxi vehicle without a valid, official
City decal displayed on the vehicle as provided in this Chapter.
      2.   Invalidity of decal. A City decal, even if valid when issued,
becomes invalid if the taxi company or association to which the deal was
issued:
         a.   Fails to renew its permit;
         b.   Is denied renewal by the City;
         c.   Has its permit revoked; and/or
         d.   Changes ownership by sale, transfer, bankruptcy or any other
method.
   E.   Penalty. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor,
subject to a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
violation, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within a
twelve (12) month period, and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the
third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period.
('65 Code, § 34-2) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 92-017 § 2; Ord. No. 99-004,
§ 1)
§ 11.10.015 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO CONDUCT A TAXICAB BUSINESS.
   A.   Application for a permit to conduct a taxicab business shall be made on
forms furnished by the City Treasurer. The form shall be signed and verified by
the owner, and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name and business address of applicant;
      2.   Residence address of applicant;
      3.   Names and addresses of all directors and officers, if applicant is a
corporation, and the names and addresses of any persons owning more than twenty
percent (20%) of the voting stock of any applicant corporation together with a
certified copy of the applicant corporations Articles of Incorporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, names and addresses of all partners. If the
applicant is other than a corporation or partnership, the names and addresses
of all persons having an ownership interest in the business and the nature and
percentage of such interest;
      4.   Location of all taxi stands requested;
      5.   The number of vehicles owned or leased and the number of vehicles
operated by the applicant on the date of application;
      6.   The number of vehicles for which permission to operate in the City
is desired;
      7.   Principal place where vehicles will be garaged and serviced;
      8.   Location from which vehicles will be dispatched;
      9.   The make, type, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number,
and passenger seating capacity of each taxicab desired to be operated within
the City;
      10.   Schedule of rates proposed to be charged;
      11.   The make and type of taximeter installed on each taxicab;
      12.   Description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, and any other
distinguishing characteristics of the proposed taxicab identification scheme;
      13.   Applicant statement estimating the need for additional taxicab
service within the City, supported by factual data;
      14.   Other jurisdictions in which applicant is permitted to conduct a
taxicab business, and the number of taxicabs operated in each such
jurisdictions;
      15.   Whether the applicant has ever had a permit to operate a taxicab
business suspended or revoked by any jurisdiction, and if so when, where and
the reasons for such suspension or revocation;
      16.   Whether the applicant is the owner of or stockholder in any other
taxicab business and if so, the name and address of such business and the
nature of the applicants interest therein;
   B.   In addition to the above, an applicant or permittee shall, upon
request, furnish to the City any information requested regarding the business
operations of the permittee. Such information may include, but shall not be
limited to, information contained in the permittee's financial books and
records, log sheets, trip records or other records evidencing the level of
service provided.
   C.    Applicant shall provide his or her fingerprints in the manner
prescribed by the Culver City Police Department.
('65 Code, § 34-3) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1)
§ 11.10.020 INVESTIGATION AND REPORT.
   No permit to conduct a taxicab business shall be granted or application
acted upon until the City Manager causes an investigation to be made and his
report and findings submitted to the City Council. The report shall contain but
shall not be limited to the following information:
   A.   The adequacy of the existing taxicab service;
   B.   The financial responsibility and experience of the applicant;
   C.   The effect additional taxicab service may have upon traffic and parking
within the City;
   D.   Verification of the statements contained in the application.
   E.   Such other information as the Council may request or the City Manager
deem necessary or advisable.
('65 Code, § 34-4) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.10.025 HEARING ON APPLICATION.
   Upon the filing of an application for a permit to conduct a taxicab
business, the City Council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing
thereon. At least ten (10) days written notice of the time and place set for
public hearing shall be given to the applicant and to other permittees
operating taxicabs in the City. Notice shall also be given the general public
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. Any interested person may
file with the City Manager a memorandum in support of or in opposition to the
issuance of the permit.
('65 Code, § 34-5) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.10.030 FINDINGS.
   The City Council shall make findings as to whether the public convenience
and necessity requires or does not require additional taxicab service at the
conclusion of the public hearing or at a later date if it is determined that
the matter should be continued for further study. The City Council shall
consider the report from the City Manager, the factual matters as verified in
the application, the memorandums or other written materials on file, any
presentations made in the public hearing and its own investigation of the
subject matter which has been received by the Council.
('65 Code, § 34-6) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.10.035 ISSUANCE AND DURATION OF PERMIT TO CONDUCT A TAXICAB BUSINESS.
   A.   Upon approval of the application by the City Council, the payment of
fees and completion of inspection of all taxicabs as required by this Code, the
permit to conduct a taxicab business shall be issued by the City Treasurer.
Every permit to conduct a taxicab business issued hereunder shall be valid for
a period of one fiscal year, subject to revocation in the manner prescribed
herein. Provided, however, that an initial permit to conduct a taxicab business
may be issued for part of a fiscal year. A permit to conduct a taxicab business
shall be renewed upon payment of the annual license and permit fees in
accordance with the then prevailing schedule of such fees unless, after hearing
by the Council, it is determined by the Council that the permit should not be
renewed. A permit to conduct a taxicab business shall be issued annually for
the period from July 1st through June 30th. Permit fees shall be delinquent if
not received within thirty (30) days from the expiration date of the permit. A
penalty of ten percent (10%) per month shall be applied to all delinquent fees.
Upon each annual renewal, the permittee shall be issued a permit in the form
and manner required by this Chapter, without the necessity of establishing that
the public interest and necessity is served by such existing and continued
taxicab service, as would be required in the case of a new applicant. Any
applicant may be required to complete a new application form or supply
additional information regarding business operations or business structure. In
the event an initial permit to conduct a taxicab business is issued for part of
a year the applicable fees shall be prorated as provided in this Code. Other
than an initial permit, a permit to conduct a taxicab business shall not be
issued for parts of a year.
   B.   The City Treasurer, upon receipt of the required permit fees, shall
issue a receipt for said funds to the applicant. The receipt for fees paid
shall not constitute a permit to operate a taxicab or taxicab business. The
City Treasurer, upon issuance of the receipt for fees shall transmit to the
Police Department one decal for each taxicab authorized by the Council. The
applicant shall, within thirty (30) days from the date upon which permit fees
are paid to the City Treasurer present the authorized number of taxicabs to the
Police Department for inspection. Failure of an applicant to present the
authorized number of taxicabs to the Police Department for inspection within
thirty (30) days shall automatically void the authorization for the number of
taxicabs not inspected and shall reduce the total number of taxicabs previously
authorized to that number which have been inspected and to which decals have
been affixed by the Police Department. The Chief of Police may, upon good cause
shown by the applicant, extend the initial thirty (30) day period for
inspection for an additional period of time not to exceed a total of an
additional thirty (30) days.
   C.   Upon certification by the City Attorney that the applicant has provided
proof of insurance as required by this Chapter and upon certification by the
Police Department that the authorized number of taxicabs have been inspected
and the City decals affixed thereto, the City Treasurer shall issue the permit
to conduct a taxicab business to the applicant, provided that the applicant has
obtained a business tax certificate as required by this Code.
('65 Code, § 34-7) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1)
§ 11.10.040 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE AND ALCOHOL TESTING PROGRAM.
   A.   As used in this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
      1.    CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Those substances specified in 49 CAR 40.1 et
seq., as it exists on the effective date of this Section, or as it may be
amended.
      2.    NEGATIVE TEST FOR ALCOHOL.  An alcohol screening test showing a
breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent.
   B.   Drivers shall test negative for each of the controlled substances
specified in 49 CAR 40.1 et seq., as it exists on the effective date of this
Section, or as it may be amended, before employment. Drivers shall test
negative for these controlled substances and for alcohol as a condition of
granting a permit or permit renewal of their driver's permit issued by the
Police Department.
   C.   Testing procedures shall be substantially as in 49 CAR 40.1 et seq., as
it exists on the effective date of this Section, or as it may be amended,
except that the driver shall show a valid California driver's license at the
time and place of testing, and except as provided otherwise in this Section.
Requirements for rehabilitation and for return-to-duty and follow-up testing
and other requirements, except as provided otherwise in this Section, shall be
substantially as in 49 CAR 382.101 et seq., as it exists on the effective date
of this Section, or as it may be amended.
   D.   The holder of an operator's permit, or an applicant therefor, shall be
responsible for ensuring that all persons employed by them as drivers, all
applicants who have been offered positions of employment as drivers, and all
persons to whom vehicles are leased to be used as taxicabs, have provided the
City Treasurer with satisfactory proof of compliance with the drug and alcohol
testing requirements contained in this Section.
   E.   Taxicab companies approved to operate in Culver City shall be
responsible for the cost of drug and alcohol testing of drivers employed by
them.
   F.   Each applicant (taxicab company) shall submit satisfactory proof of a
negative test result for controlled substances and for alcohol to the City
Treasurer before a permit to conduct a taxicab business shall be issued. No
approval to conduct a taxicab business shall be granted unless such proof has
been submitted.
   G.   Persons holding a valid Business Tax Certificate shall, within thirty
(30) days of the expiration date thereof, submit satisfactory proof to the City
Treasurer of a negative test for controlled substances and for alcohol for each
driver indicated on their Annual Business Tax Renewal.
   H.   Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for compliance
with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves.
Employing transportation operators shall be responsible for compliance with,
and shall pay all costs of, this program with respect to their employees and
potential employees, except that an operator may require employees who test
positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow-up
testing.
   I.   Test results shall be reported directly to the employing transportation
operator, who shall, within five (5) days of receipt of negative results,
notify the Police Department. Self-employed independent drivers shall submit
all test results to the Police Department, who shall notify the taxicab leasing
company of record, if any of positive results.
   J.   The driver's permit of any person convicted of illegally using,
possessing, selling, or driving under the influence of any controlled substance
or alcohol, shall be subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to the
provisions of this code.
   K.   A test in any jurisdiction shall be accepted as meeting the
requirements of this Section. Any negative test result shall be accepted for
one year as meeting a requirement for periodic permit renewal testing or any
other periodic testing in any jurisdiction, if the driver has not tested
positive subsequent to a negative result. However, an alternative negative
result shall not be accepted as meeting the pre-employment testing requirement
for any subsequent employment, or any testing requirements under the program,
other than periodic testing.
   L.   Upon the request of a driver applying for a permit, the Police
Department shall provide the driver with a list of the consortia certified
pursuant to 49 CAR 382.101 et seq. that the City knows offer tests in or near
the jurisdiction.
   M.   All test results are confidential and shall not be released without the
consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law.
   N.   No evidence derived from a positive test result pursuant to the program
shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful possession,
sale or distribution of controlled substances.
('65 Code, § 34-7A) (Ord. No. 96-024 § 1)
§ 11.10.045 TRANSFER OF TITLE TO TAXICABS.
   Whenever a permittee sells or transfers title to a taxicab for which a decal
has been issued the permittee shall remove the City decal and identification
cards from the taxicab and shall return them to the City Treasurer within ten
(10) days of such sale or transfer. If the permittee purchases a replacement
taxicab for the one sold or transferred within thirty (30) days from the date
of such sale or transfer and makes application on the forms provided by the
City Treasurer, the City Treasurer shall issue a decal for the replacement
taxicab for the period remaining on the decal previously issued to the taxicab
which was sold or transferred. Replacement decals issued pursuant to this
Section shall not increase the total number of decals authorized for the
operator nor shall replacement decals issued exceed the number of decals
cancelled for taxicabs sold or transferred, inspection of replacement taxicabs
shall be in accordance with §
11.10.035 of this Code.
('65 Code, § 34-8) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1)
§ 11.10.050 DESTRUCTION OF TAXICABS.
   Any permittee whose taxicab has been destroyed may within thirty (30) days
from the date of such destruction request that a decal be issued for a
replacement taxicab for the one destroyed. Replacement decals shall be issued
in accordance with the provisions of §
11.10.045 of this Code.
('65 Code, § 34-9) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1)
§ 11.10.055 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT TO CONDUCT A TAXICAB BUSINESS,
TAXI DRIVER PERMITS AND TAXICAB DECALS.
   A permit to conduct a taxicab business, taxi driver permits and taxicab
decals may be suspended or revoked by the City Council upon notice and hearing
with respect thereto, on the following grounds:
   A.   That the permittee or driver has failed to operate in accordance with
the provisions of the Chapter;
   B.   That the permittee has failed to maintain or secure insurance on any
taxicab;
   C.   That the permittee has failed to service the residents of the City as
evidenced by complaints of refusal of service, including but not limited to a
refusal of the permittee or driver to take “short haul” customers, or evidence
that the permittee has not substantially operated within the City;
   D.   That the public safety or convenience and necessity would be best
served by such revocation or suspension of the permit for any taxicab.
   E.   That the permittee used the permit issued by the City of Culver City to
conduct unlawful taxicab operations in another jurisdiction. A conviction in or
the administrative finding of another jurisdiction that the permittee has
unlawfully operated a taxi business without a permit required by the
jurisdiction shall constitute prima facie evidence of improper or unlawful use
of the permit issued by the City of Culver City and may constitute grounds for
suspension and/or revocation of the permit.
('65 Code, § 34-10) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 § 1)
§ 11.10.060 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall suspend any taxi driver's permit and/or decal to
operate a taxicab for a period of not to exceed two (2) weeks in the event that
he determines that the public safety and welfare is endangered due to
mechanical or operational defects which cannot be immediately made to comply
with the provisions of this Chapter and the reasonable safety regulations
imposed by him, by the City Council or by State law. In the event the Chief of
Police suspends any permit or decal hereunder, he shall notify the City Manager
who shall set the matter on the next regular agenda of the City Council for
hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be sent to the permittee by certified
mail. The Chief of Police shall report to the Council in writing the reasons
for the suspension and the actions required to correct the mechanical or
operational defect endangering the public health or safety. The Council after
hearing on the suspension may affirm, reverse or modify the suspension or may,
in the event that the suspension is affirmed, set a revocation hearing in the
manner required by this Chapter for the revocation of the permit to conduct a
taxicab business, the taxi drivers permit and/or the decal for the vehicle or
any or all of them. Any suspension imposed shall remain in effect pending a
hearing on the revocation of the permit or decal. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or to permit to be operated any taxicab subject to the
suspension during the period of a suspension.
('65 Code, § 34-11) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.10.065 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Before any permit to conduct a taxicab business is issued, the permittee
shall be required to file with the City Attorney and thereafter keep in full
force and effect, a policy of insurance in such form as the City Attorney may
deem proper. Such policy of insurance shall insure the owner and the driver of
each of the vehicles operated, or to be operated under the permit, against
liability for damage to property and for injury to, or death of, any person as
a result of the ownership, operation or other use thereof. The minimum
liability limits on each such vehicle shall be not less than One Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) on account of personal injury to, or death of,
any one person in any one accident, and Three Hundred Thousand Dollars
($300,000.00) on account of personal injury to, or death of, two (2) or more
persons in any one accident, and the minimum liability limits on each such
vehicle shall be not less than Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) for
damage to, or destruction of, property in any one accident. All such policies
shall contain a provision for the continuing liability thereunder up to the
full amount of coverage thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, and
naming the City as an additional insured thereunder for all claims, demands and
actions of any type whatever occasioned by the operation of the permittees
taxicab business; and shall further contain a provision or endorsement
providing that such policy will not be cancelled until notice in writing shall
be given to the City addressed in care of the City Attorney, City Hall, Culver
City, California 90230, at least thirty (30) days immediately prior to the time
such cancellation shall become effective.
('65 Code, § 34-13) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1)
§ 11.10.070 PERMIT FEES AND BUSINESS TAXES.
   Fees and permits to conduct a taxicab business shall be set by City Council
resolution.
('65 Code, § 34-15) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 § 4; Ord. No. 92-017
§ 4; Ord. No 96-029 § 1; Ord. No. 2007-002 § 17)
OPERATING REQUIREMENTS
§ 11.10.300 TAXIMETERS.
   A.   Taximeters required.  It shall be unlawful for any permittee or driver
to operate any taxicab in the City unless such vehicle is equipped with a
taximeter of such type, style, and design as may be approved by the Chief of
Police. Taximeters which are capable of being programmed to carry multiple
rates are prohibited unless the customer in each instance is given a receipt
showing the “flag drop rate” or initial charge, the charge per mile, miles
traveled and the total charge. Where such receipts are given, the permittee
shall maintain a copy of each receipt which shall be maintained with a record
of the number of trips taken. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee
to audit such receipts and assure that a receipt was prepared for each trip. It
shall be the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to keep such taximeter in
good condition so that such taximeter will, at all times, accurately indicate
the correct charge for the distance traveled and the waiting time. Such
taximeter shall be at all times subject to inspection by an inspector appointed
by the City or by any police officer. Such inspector or police officer is
hereby authorized at his or her instance or upon complaint of any person to
investigate, or cause to be investigated, such taximeter, and upon the
discovery of any inaccuracy in such taximeter, to remove or cause to be removed
such vehicle from the streets of the City until such time as the taximeter
shall have been correctly adjusted and certified by the Los Angeles County
Department of Weights and Measures or other person or agency approved by the
Chief of Police.
   B.   Taximeter “For Hire” indicator.  Every taximeter shall be equipped with
a flag or other mechanical or electronic device which displays the words “For
Hire.” Such flag or device shall be so attached and connected to the mechanism
of the taximeter as to cause the mechanism not to operate when the flag or
device indicates that the taxicab is for hire. The flag or device shall, when
activated, start the operation of the taximeter so that the same will operate
in the manner set forth hereinabove.
   C.   Use of “For Hire” indicator.  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a
taxicab, while carrying passengers to display the flag or device controlled by
such taximeter which denotes that such vehicle is for hire or is not employed,
or to have such flag or device in such a position as to prevent the taximeter
from operating, or for any driver to operate such flag or device of a taximeter
in a manner which causes the taximeter to record when such vehicle is not
actually employed, or fail to operate such flag or device on a taximeter into a
non-recording position at the termination of each and every service.
   D.   Charges—amount recorded.  All charges for transportation of passengers
in taxicabs operated in the City shall be based on the charges indicated on the
taximeter. It shall be unlawful for any owner, driver, or operator of any
taxicab to charge any passenger any sum other than the sum indicated on the
taximeter, the charging or solicitation of a “flat rate fare” not recorded on
the taximeter is prohibited.
   E.   Placement of taximeter. The taximeter shall be placed in the taxicab so
the reading dial or display showing the amount to be charged shall be well
lighted in not less than one-half (½) inch block numbers and shall be readily
visible by the passenger unless such taximeter is equipped and operated as a
receipt printing taximeter.
('65 Code, § 34-12(a)) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 §§ 2-3; Ord. No.
84-003 § 1)
§ 11.10.305 TAXICAB RATES.
   The maximum rates or fares to be charged the public for taxicab service
within the City shall be fixed by the City Council by resolution. It shall be
unlawful for any taxicab within the City to charge, receive or collect any rate
or fare in excess of the maximum for such taxicab service. Upon the adoption of
any such resolution the City Clerk shall immediately forward a certified copy
thereof to the Police Department and to all permittees within the City.
('65 Code, § 34-12(b)) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 §§ 2-3; Ord. No.
84-003 § 1)
§ 11.10.310 TAXICAB EQUIPMENT AND DESIGN.
   A.   Conformance to requirements.  No vehicle shall be granted a permit
unless it conforms to the provisions of this Chapter. Failure to maintain a
taxicab in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be grounds for
revocation of a taxi permit issued to such vehicle.
   B.   Approval of taximeter.  No taxicab shall be operated until the
taximeter therein has been tested, approved and sealed by the Los Angeles
County Department of Weights and Measures or by an agency or person approved by
the Chief of Police.
   C.   Identification containers.  Each taxicab licensed to operate in the
City shall have located in a convenient place in the driver's compartment and
in view of the passengers therein, two (2) lighted containers of a type and
design approved by the Chief of Police. Such containers shall contain cards
provided by the Chief of Police bearing the following information:
      1.   One container shall have a card therein bearing:
         a.   The name of the company to which the card is issued;
         b.   The decal number issued to the taxicab;
         c.   The date of issuance and expiration of the permit to conduct a
taxicab business;
         d.   The state license plate number and vehicle identification number
of the taxicab displaying the same;
         e.   The taxicab number;
         f.   The maximum rates established by the Council.
      2.   One container shall have a card therein bearing:
         a.   The number of the taxicab drivers permit;
         b.   The driver's name and California operator's license number;
         c.   The name of the company employing the driver;
         d.   Date of issuance and expiration of the taxi driver's permit; and
         e.   A small photograph of the driver.
      3.   A container with a card therein or a decal of a size approved by the
Police Department shall be permanently affixed to the rear of the driver's seat
and shall face the passenger seated in the rear seat. The sign or decal shall
contain the following:
   “This taxicab is operated under a permit from the City of Culver City. Any
consumer complaints regarding charges, service or the cleanliness of this taxi
may be reported by mail to:
   Taxi
   P.O. Box 507
   City Hall, Culver City, CA 90230
   Maximum rates for Culver City must be displayed at all times. All charges
must be shown on the taximeter. FLAT FEE CHARGES ARE PROHIBITED.”
   D.   Color, insignia, and design.  All taxicabs shall conform to a color
scheme approved by the City Council as required to be described in §
11.10.015a.12. of this Code.
   E.   Safety equipment.  All taxicabs shall be equipped with:
      1.   A fully charged ABC Multi-purpose five (5) pound fire extinguisher;
      2.   Not less than twelve (12) emergency flares;
      3.   Complete and operable equipment necessary to change a flat tire;
      4.   A properly inflated spare tire that meets the requirements of Cal.
Veh. Code § 27465 (tread to be not less than 1/32 of an inch);
   F.   Display of license seal or decal.  Every taxicab shall display a seal
or identification decal in manner established by the Chief of Police or by the
Council.
('65 Code, § 34-12(c)) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 §§ 2-3; Ord. No.
84-003 § 1)
§ 11.10.315 INSPECTION AND SANITATION.
   A.   Inspection.
      1.   Before a decal is issued or reissued to any owner for any taxicab,
such owner shall deliver the taxicab to a place designated by the Chief of
Police for inspection. The Chief of Police shall designate officers to inspect
such taxicab, its equipment, and taximeter, to ascertain whether such taxicab
complies with the provisions of this Chapter. Taxicabs shall be inspected at
least annually and shall have been washed within twenty-four (24) hours
preceding the inspection.
      2.   The overall appearance of the taxicab shall be such as to indicate
that the taxicab is in good repair and maintenance. There shall be no broken or
cracked glass. All doors, hoods and trunk lids shall latch properly and there
shall be no gaps between doors and body in the closed position in excess of
manufacturer's standards. There shall be no sheet metal damage in excess of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the surface area on any of the following major
components of the taxicab:
         a.   Doors.
         b.   Trunk.
         c.   Hood.
         d.   Roof.
         e.   Quarter panels.
         f.   Grill work.
         g.   Front and rear bumpers.
         h.   Fenders.
      3.   There shall be no chipped or peeling paint on the sheet metal body
visible to the unaided eye in normal sunlight at a distance of twenty-five (25)
feet.
   B.   Right of entry.  Any police officer of the City shall have the right at
any time after displaying proper identification to enter into or upon any
taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of
this Chapter are being violated.
   C.   Unsafe or unsuitable vehicles.  Any taxicab which is found to be unsafe
or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service after inspection by a police
officer, it shall be immediately ordered out of service by the Chief of Police
and before again being placed in service shall be placed in a safe condition by
the permittee and reinspected by the Police Department.
   D.   Sanitation. The interior of every taxicab shall be maintained in a
clean condition at all times and shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in
every twenty-four (24) hours. There shall be no unrepaired rips in any of the
upholstery including seats, carpeting, paneling, and head liner. Any repairs
shall be finished in a workman-like manner. Door handles, arm rests, window
cranks and all other interior accessory items shall be maintained in good
repair. There shall be an operating interior light. The floor of the vehicle
shall be covered with a clean automobile floor covering.
('65 Code, § 34-12(d)) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 §§ 2-3; Ord. No.
84-003 § 1)
§ 11.10.320 TAXI DRIVER PERMIT.
   A.   Permit required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
operate a taxicab without first obtaining a taxi driver permit to do so from
the Chief of Police.
   B.   Application.  Persons applying for taxi driver permits shall file
applications with the Police Department on forms provided by the Police
Department.
   C.   Identification card.  Upon obtaining a taxi driver permit, the holder
of the permit shall be issued an identification card of such design and size as
will conspicuously show the information required in §
11.10.310 C.2. of this Subchapter. Such card shall be displayed within the
vehicle being operated by the permittee at all times. Taxi driver permits shall
be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
   D.   Qualifications.  No permit shall be issued to any of the following
persons:
      1.   Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years:
      2.   Any person who does not possess a valid California driver's license
of the proper classification;
      3.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony, or who has been
convicted of either driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquors or under the influence of narcotics or who has been convicted of
reckless driving, unless two (2) years have elapsed since such conviction and
during which time the person has maintained a good record.
   E.   Examination.  Each applicant for a taxi driver permit shall be examined
by a person designated by the Chief of Police as to the applicants knowledge of
the provisions of this Chapter, the traffic regulations, and the geography of
the City. If the result of the examination is unsatisfactory, the permit shall
be refused.
   F.   Driving test.  Each applicant may be required to demonstrate the skill
and ability to drive safely and to safely handle the taxi vehicle by driving it
through a crowded section of the City accompanied by an inspector designated by
the Chief of Police.
   G.   Revocation-refusal to renew permits. 
      1.   The Chief of Police shall revoke or refuse to renew a taxi driver
permit if the driver or applicant has, since the granting of the permit:
         a.   Been convicted of a felony;
         b.   Had his or her California driver's license revoked or suspended;
         c.   Been convicted of driving while under the influence of
intoxicating liquors or narcotics;
         d.   During any continuous six (6) month period, had three (3) or more
convictions for any offense involving driving;
         e.   Been convicted of any sexual offense.
      2.   The Chief of Police may revoke or refuse to renew a taxi driver
permit for any reason in addition to those set forth in this Section, which in
the opinion of the Chief of Police, has rendered the person unfit to drive a
taxicab.
   H.   Appeal from revocation or refusal to renew. Any person whose taxi
driver permit has been revoked or renewal refused by the Chief of Police may,
within ten (10) days after receipt of notice thereof, appeal to the City
Council for a hearing thereon. The Chief of Police shall set forth in writing
his reasons for the revocation or for the refusal to renew a taxi driver permit
and shall transmit a copy thereof to the City Council and to the permittee. If
a timely appeal is filed with the City the matter shall be set for hearing
within fourteen (14) days. At the hearing the permittee and the Police
Department may present evidence orally or in writing. The City Council shall
make findings on the evidence presented and shall determine that the action of
the Police Department should be sustained, reversed or modified. The action of
the City Council shall be final. If no appeal is filed within the time period
provided herein by the applicant the action of the Chief of Police shall be
final.
(‘65 Code, § 34-12(e)) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 §§ 2- 3; Ord. No.
84-003 § 1; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.10.325 OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   A.   Direct route.  Any driver employed to transport passengers to a
definite point shall take the most direct route possible which will carry the
passenger to the destination safely and expeditiously.
   B.   Receipts.  Every driver, upon request, shall give a correct receipt
upon payment of the correct fare. Receipts shall be given with or without
request where programmable or multirate taximeters are used as required in §
11.10.300 A.
   C.   Refusal to pay fare.  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to
pay the lawful fare of any of the vehicles regulated by this Chapter after
employing or hiring such vehicle, and any person who shall hire such vehicle
with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
   D.   Service.  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a taxi pursuant
to this Chapter to refuse service to any person seeking to employ such taxi for
the reason that the distance to be traveled is considered a “short haul.” No
permittee shall establish or impose upon any customer or prospective customer a
minimum number of miles of travel or a minimum fare unrelated to the number of
miles actually traveled nor shall service be refused to any person on the basis
of such minimums. Any permittee who refuses service to any person on the basis
of any “short haul” restrictions or the imposition of any minimums as set forth
herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any other penalties, a
refusal of service for the reasons set forth in this Subchapter shall be
grounds for the revocation of any permit obtained pursuant to this Chapter. All
drivers shall observe the following rules when rendering service:
      1.   Driver shall not refuse a request for service because of driver's
position in line at a taxicab zone. A passenger may select any cab in line.
      2.   Driver shall not refer or attempt to refer a potential patron to
another taxicab or alternate means of transportation except where such referral
is for an alternate fee transportation service available to the requested
destination and provided the passenger willingly accepts the referral.
      3.   Driver shall not dismiss or discharge any passenger at a point other
than the requested destination without adequate cause. If a passenger is
discharged for a cause, such shall be done at a safe well-lighted place
convenient to public transportation. Driver shall immediately notify dispatcher
of any such incident. The permittee shall conduct an investigation into the
circumstances and promptly provide a written report to the City Attorney.
      4.   Driver shall not attempt to influence the destination of a passenger
and shall not accept fees or gratuities from anyone other than passenger or
his/her agent.
      5.   Driver shall not refuse to transport in the taxicab any passenger's
personal luggage, possessions, wheelchairs which can be folded and placed in
either the passenger, driver or trunk compartments of the taxicab, groceries or
packages when accompanied by a passenger, small pets in carriers or a guide dog
for a blind passenger. The driver shall not be required to transport any
article which would cause the taxicab to become damaged, stained or foul
smelling.
      6.   Driver shall place passenger's luggage or packages in and out of the
taxicab when requested.
      7.   Driver shall assist a passenger in and out of a taxicab when
requested, provided the driver is not required to lift the passenger.
      8.   Driver shall not engage in unwanted conversation with passenger.
      9.   Driver shall not smoke while the taxicab is occupied, without the
consent of all passengers.
      10.   Driver shall not permit anyone who is not a passenger to sit in the
taxicab while driver is on duty except where driver is receiving training from
the permittee.
   E.   Number of passengers.  No driver of any taxicab shall accept, take into
his or her vehicle, or transport any larger number of passengers than the rated
seating capacity of the vehicle. The Police Department shall, at the time of
inspection, determine the seating capacity of the vehicle and the maximum
seating capacity shall be displayed on the permit issued by the Police
Department.
   F.   Unattended or standing taxicabs.  No taxi driver shall stand or park on
any public street while awaiting employment, at any place other than at a duly
designated taxi stand, nor shall the driver of any taxi leave the taxi
unattended in a taxi stand for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes.
   G.   Exclusive use by passenger.  Any person engaging a taxicab shall have
the exclusive right to the full use of the taxicab. While so engaged, the
driver shall not solicit or carry additional passengers without obtaining the
consent of the person first engaging the taxicab.
('65 Code, § 34-12(f)) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 §§ 2-3; Ord. No.
84-003 § 1)
§ 11.10.330 TAXICAB STANDS.
   Taxi stand permits may be issued to a permittee hereunder allowing taxicabs
operated by the permittee, while awaiting employment, to stand in certain
designated places on the public streets. No permit shall be granted except upon
the application of the permittee desiring such stand, filed with the City
Manager, stating the number and kind of vehicles for which the permit is sought
and the proposed location of such stand or stands. The City Manager may grant
permits upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police.
('65 Code, § 34-12(g)) (Ord. No. 83-020 § 1; Ord. No. 83-031 §§ 2-3; Ord. No.
84-003 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
CHAPTER 11.11: TOWING AND STORAGE OPERATIONS
Section
   
11.11.005   Definitions
   
11.11.010   Permit required to operate towing service
   
11.11.015   Towing unit operator requirements
   
11.11.020   Issuance of permit
   
11.11.025   Fees; duration of permit
   
11.11.030   Penalties
§ 11.11.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TOWING OPERATION. The activity of towing vehicles for compensation within
the City of Culver City. TOWING OPERATION includes the storing of vehicles and
all other services incidental to towing.
   TOW UNIT OPERATOR. The operator of a tow unit employed by an official police
garage to respond to police-initiated requests for tow service.
('65 Code, § 19-66 A., B.) (Ord. No. CS-869 § 1)
§ 11.11.010 PERMIT REQUIRED TO OPERATE TOWING SERVICE.
   No person shall engage in, manage or operate a towing operation without a
written permit to do so from the City and without complying with all
regulations adopted by resolution of the City Council relating to a towing
operation.
(‘65 Code, § 19-66 C.) (Ord. No. CS-869 § 1; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 11.11.015 TOWING UNIT OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS.
   No tow unit operator shall operate a tow unit without a written permit to do
so from the Chief of Police and without complying with all regulations adopted
by resolution of the City Council relating to a towing operation.
('65 Code, § 19-66 D.) (Ord. No. CS-869 § 1)
§ 11.11.020 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   At the time a permit is issued, a permittee shall receive and in writing
acknowledge receipt of a copy of this Chapter and all City Council resolutions
relating to a towing operation.
('65 Code, § 19-66 E.) (Ord. No. CS-869 § 1)
§ 11.11.025 FEES; DURATION OF PERMIT.
   The fees for and the duration of the permits referred to in this Chapter
shall be established by Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 19-66 F.) (Ord. No. CS-869 § 1)
§ 11.11.030 PENALTIES.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any regulation
established by resolution of the City Council relating to a towing operation
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500), or by
imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period not exceeding six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
('65 Code, § 19-66 G.) (Ord. No. CS-869 § 1)
CHAPTER 11.12: OIL, GAS AND HYDROCARBONS
Section
Permit Requirements
   
11.12.005   Oil drilling permit
   
11.12.010   Application for permit
   
11.12.015   Permit application fees
   
11.12.020   Penalty for late payment of annual renewal fee
   
11.12.025   Conditions on assignment of permit
   
11.12.030   Permittee subject to all applicable laws
   
11.12.035   Bond and insurance requirements
   
11.12.040   Written agreement requirement
   
11.12.045   Construction permits required
   
11.12.050   Termination or revocation of permit
Operational Requirements
   
11.12.100   One well per five acres of operating unit
   
11.12.105   Location of well
   
11.12.110   Operating standards in general
   
11.12.115   Steel derricks required
   
11.12.120   Fire equipment
   
11.12.125   Boilers and engines
   
11.12.130   Sumps or reservoirs
   
11.12.135   Refineries, tank farms and absorption plants prohibited
   
11.12.140   Tanks; construction requirements
   
11.12.145   Location of tanks
   
11.12.150   Piping and electrical equipment
   
11.12.155   Dikes and retaining wells
   
11.12.160   Maintenance of facilities
   
11.12.165   Toilet facilities
   
11.12.170   Discharging of gas prohibited
   
11.12.175   Blow out preventor and safety appliances required
Other Requirements
   
11.12.300   Directional surveys required on certain wells
   
11.12.305   Filing surveys requirement
   
11.12.310   Drilling into city property prohibited
   
11.12.315   Duplicate notices required
   
11.12.320   Change of ownership notice
   
11.12.325   Notice of accidents required
   
11.12.330   Inspection of premises
   
11.12.335   Premises to be kept clean
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 11.12.005 OIL DRILLING PERMIT.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any derrick, or similar or
related structure or equipment, or to drill, re-drill or deepen any well hole
(collectively hereinafter referred to as “drilling”), unless a permit shall
have first been obtained from the City Council and unless the area within which
such well is located is specifically zoned for oil extracting purposes, or a
variance has been obtained therefor, in the manner required for the obtaining
of variances.
   B.   Each original permit shall be designated “original oil well permit,”
and shall expire at midnight June 30th next following the date of issuance,
unless renewed by the Community Development Director or his/her designee
(hereinafter “the Director”) on payment of the annual fees provided herein and
subject to full compliance with all of the terms of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.010 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A.   1.   An application for an oil drilling permit shall contain a
description of the premises subject to the proposed drilling and a map or plot
plan of such premises, showing the following information:
         a.   All buildings, improvements and other structures within a radius
of one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the center of the proposed well hole;
         b.   The location of each derrick, tank, sump, boiler, and other major
equipment proposed in connection with the drilling, and all pipelines on the
premises; and
         c.   Additional information needed for review of the permit, as
required by the Director.
      2.   The application, when fully completed shall be filed with the
Director, together with the required fee as provided for in this Subchapter.
   B.   On receipt of an application, the City Council may require further
information of the applicant or from City Officers or Commissions, and in no
event shall a permit be issued unless the City's zoning regulations have been
adhered to. The issuance of an oil drilling permit, and the determination of
conditions that should be included therein for the protection of health,
safety, and welfare, are subject to the discretion of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2010-001 § 1)
§ 11.12.015 PERMIT APPLICATION FEES.
   A.   The applicant shall pay to the City a permit fee for the original oil
drilling permit or transfer of ownership, payable at the time of filing the
application, and, in addition, an annual renewal fee per well payable on July
1st of each year following the issuance of the original permit.
   B.   No oil drilling permit or annual oil well permit shall be issued, nor
shall any construction permits be issued, until the fees are paid in full,
together with full compliance with all of the other conditions of the permit
and of the regulations of this Chapter.
   C.   The fees discussed in this Section shall be established by a resolution
of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.020 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL RENEWAL FEE.
   A.   A penalty in an amount equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the annual
renewal fee shall be automatically added to such fee if the same is not paid on
or before July 15th of each fiscal year.
   B.   All license and permit fees, as required in this Subchapter, shall
constitute a lien on the premises where the drilling is occurring to the extent
of the permittee's interest therein.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.025 CONDITIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT.
   A.   No permit issued hereunder may be assigned or otherwise transferred by
the permittee without first obtaining the written consent of the City Council
to the proposed assignment or transfer.
   B.   Prior to giving such consent, a new application shall be filed with the
City and the new permittee shall be required to comply with all conditions and
requirements which are in effect at the time of assignment.
   C.   Any assignment or transfer attempted to be effected contrary to the
provisions hereof, shall be void and without any force and effect.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.030 PERMITTEE SUBJECT TO ALL APPLICABLE LAWS.
   All permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to the
provisions of all applicable City, County, State and Federal laws, rules and
regulations, and the failure to enforce any such law, rule or regulation shall
not constitute a waiver thereof.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.035 BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   No permit shall be issued under this Chapter, unless the applicant has
filed a bond and proof of general commercial liability insurance related to the
permittee's activities in such form, with endorsements, as determined by the
City Attorney.
      1.   Such bond and insurance shall be kept in full force and effect
during the entire time when such permit is in force and effect.
      2.   The insurance shall be in the minimum amount of ten million dollars
($10,000,000).
   B.   The bond shall guarantee the faithful performance of all of the
conditions of the permit, and all other pertinent City, State or Federal laws,
rules or regulations.
   C.   The bond shall further guarantee payment of all costs for removing,
dismantling or demolishing, in a manner approved by the City's Building
Official, and in strict accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources (DOG) of the State of California
or any regulatory authority having jurisdiction, any structures erected on the
premises, on the abandonment or cessation of the drilling activity on the
permitted premises.
   D.   An abandonment fee shall be paid for City's inspection of the premises.
   E.   The bond shall also guarantee the payment of all costs for returning
the premises to substantially its original condition, free from all oil, rotary
mud, oil-soaked earth, asphalt, concrete, litter, debris and other substances
caused by the drilling or pumping activity.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.040 WRITTEN AGREEMENT REQUIREMENT.
   A.   A written agreement, approved by the City Attorney, between the City
and the permittee, shall be filed with the Director, wherein the permittee
shall agree to comply, fully and faithfully, with all of the provisions,
requirements and conditions of the permit, this Chapter, and all City, State
and Federal laws, rules and regulations.
   B.   1.   Additionally, the agreement shall provide for the permittee, and
any approved assignee and transferee, to indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the City, and its officers, employees and agents, from any and all claims,
demands, actions, judgments, damages, and liability, including court costs and
attorney's fees, arising from the drilling, or any activity related, thereto.
      2.   The exact requirements for the indemnification and hold harmless
provision shall be approved by the City Attorney.
   C.   1.   The agreement shall further provide that the permittee will
suspend drilling or any work on the permitted premises, on reasonable notice
that such activity is annoying or endangering to the general public and
particularly to the occupants of adjacent properties.
      2.   In the event the drilling is annoying or endangering a particular
adjoining person, business or industry, eighteen (18) hours notice shall be
given to the permittee prior to suspension of operations, and the suspension
shall continue for a length of time which is reasonable under the
circumstances.
   D.   It shall further provide that within ninety (90) days after any well
permitted to be drilled has been placed in production, permittee will, if
required by the City Council, remove the derrick or other structures and
equipment, or make such changes in its operations as may be reasonably required
by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.045 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS REQUIRED.
   A.   The permittee shall be required to obtain a construction permit for the
erection of any structure on the permitted premises, and shall submit plans of
the derrick or structure to be erected to the City's Building Safety Division.
   B.   In addition, the permittee shall obtain a Fire Department special
permit to operate per the City of Culver City Fire Code.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any structure or derrick to be built without
the appropriate construction permits.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.050 TERMINATION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   A.   Every permit shall terminate and become inoperative without action of
the City Council, in the event that actual drilling operations have not been
commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of issuance of the permit, or
if drilling or other substantial work on the well shall cease for a period of
one hundred and eighty (180) days, in which case it will be deemed the
permittee has abandoned the drilling.
   B.   To reactivate an abandoned well, a new oil well application must be
filed with the Director.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to prevent the
City Council from extending the inoperative time provided for in this Section,
if the permittee can demonstrate a reasonable basis.
   D.   The City Council may revoke any permit granted under this Section,
following a public hearing scheduled therefor, in reliance on written or oral
testimony which, by a preponderance of evidence, shows it is in the interest of
the public health, welfare or safety to revoke the permit.
      1.   Notice of such revocation hearing shall be served, in writing, on
the permittee, at least twenty (20) working days prior to the hearing.
      2.   The City Council's determination in the matter of revocation shall
be binding.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 11.12.100 ONE WELL PER FIVE ACRES OF OPERATING UNIT.
   A.   It shall be unlawful to drill more than one (1) well or well hole for
each five (5) full acres for each oil-producing zone contained in the operating
unit in or on which such well or well hole is drilled or to be drilled.
   B.   The OPERATING UNIT shall mean all of the contiguous lands lying within
any portion of the City of Culver City in which drilling is permitted, and
which contiguous lands are included in the terms of the lease, permit or
agreement pursuant to which the well in question is drilled, or authorized to
be drilled, whether such contiguous lands are in one ownership or in different
ownerships, and whether such lands are described in a lease, permit or
agreement as one parcel or several parcels; provided, however, that if there
are separate units of non-contiguous lands included in the terms of such lease,
permit or agreement, each such unit of non-contiguous lands shall be deemed as
a separate OPERATING UNIT.
   C.   In determining the contiguity of such lands, no street, road, highway
or alley lying within the outer boundaries of the lands described in the lease,
permit or agreement shall deem to interrupt such contiguity.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.105 LOCATION OF WELL.
   A.   No person shall construct, locate, maintain or operate any petroleum
well derrick under the provisions of this Subchapter in such a manner that the
center of the well hole is:
      1.   Within 300 feet of any major public street, sidewalk or highway;
      2.   Within 100 feet of the outer boundary of the parcel of land on which
such well is situated or, where several contiguous parcels of land
uninterrupted by any street or sidewalk are operated as a single unit, the
outer boundary of all parcels of land included within such unit;
      3.   Within 100 feet of any steam boiler building or source of ignition,
unless otherwise approved by the City Council, and in no event within less than
25 feet of such boiler, building or source of ignition;
      4.   Within 300 feet of any school buildings or other places of public
assemblage, unless approved by the City Council.
   B.   1.   Oil wells and related equipment shall be fully screened from
adjacent private and/or public properties to the satisfaction of Planning
Division and the Building Official of the City.
      2.   The permittee is responsible for obtaining the required construction
permits for screening.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.110 OPERATING STANDARDS IN GENERAL.
   The drilling, operation and maintenance of any well, and all other
operations of the permittee, shall at all times be carried on in a lawful,
careful and workmanlike manner, in accordance with modern approved methods and
practices prevailing in the industry, and nothing except modern, roller-bearing
enclosed drilling engine and rotary tables shall be used in such drilling
operations.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.115 STEEL DERRICKS REQUIRED.
   A.   All derricks shall be constructed of steel, except that the derrick
floors, pump house floors, pipe racks, stills, postings, walkways, mud ditches,
bull wheels, calf wheels, and band wheels may be of wooden construction.
   B.   Each derrick shall have placed thereon a sign on which shall appear the
name of the well being drilled or operated, together with the name of the
permittee, the letters of which shall be at least two inches high and shall be
fully visible from two opposite sides of the derrick.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.120 FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   A.   Fire extinguishing equipment shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the Fire Chief of the City.
   B.   On every drilling or producing oil or gas well there shall be
maintained not less than two 2½-gallon, foam-type fire extinguishers or the
equivalent thereof, as approved by the Fire Chief.
   C.   There shall be available to any lease pumper or maintenance men engaged
in servicing operations on the apparatus, in connection with any producing oil
well, extinguishers within a distance of 100 feet or less of such well.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.125 BOILERS AND ENGINES.
   A.   The outlet from every exhaust of any engine or boiler used in
connection with any oil well derrick, or dehydrating plant, shall be connected
to an adequate exhaust and muffler box located not closer than 20 feet to any
public street, road or thoroughfare.
   B.   Every building or structure for such boiler shall be constructed of
non-combustible material.
   C.   The smoke stack on any such boiler, except boilers using gas
exclusively, shall be equipped with a screen or other adequate device to
prevent the escape from such smoke stacks of sparks or ignited carbon or soot;
provided, however, that when the top of any such smoke stack is at least 30
feet above the ground, the screen may be omitted.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install,
maintain or operate any steam boiler within 100 feet of the center of the well
hole of any oil well derrick, or any tank containing gas or flammable liquid,
where the property owned or controlled by the person, firm, or corporation will
permit that distance.
   E.   In no case shall a boiler be erected within 25 feet of any petroleum
well hole, production tank or container holding petroleum or any products
thereof.
   F.   If more than one steam boiler is to be erected, maintained or operated
for a particular use, such steam boilers must be so located as to form a
battery.
   G.   Every such steam boiler or battery of boilers, except when housed or
enclosed or except when elevated to a height of 24 inches above the surrounding
terrain, shall be completely surrounded by a dike not less than 24 inches in
height, constructed as provided for tanks, and located not less than 15 feet
distant from such boiler or battery of boilers.
   H.   Every steam boiler hereafter erected, or where otherwise required in
the judgment of the Building Official, when located within 100 feet of the
center of any petroleum well hole or tank, shall be equipped with a water or
steam line of not less than one inch in diameter, piped from a point outside
the retaining wall, where required, into the boiler fire box, with an adequate
spray head or any equivalent device approved by the Fire Chief.
      1.   Such water or steam line shall be controlled by an emergency valve
to be located as designated by the Fire Chief.
      2.   Such emergency control valve shall have a metal tag not less than 3
inches by 6 inches attached thereto, which tag shall have printed thereon
“EMERGENCY VALVE TO BOILERS (STEAM OR WATER).”
      3.   Every steam boiler erected, when located within 100 feet of the
center of any petroleum well hole or tank, or where required in the judgment of
the Fire Chief, shall be equipped with an emergency quick-action valve, so
arranged as to completely shut off all fuel feed lines to each and every
boiler, such valve to be located not more than two feet from the valve
controlling the steam or water line to the fire box, and shall have a metal tag
not less than 3 inches by 6 inches attached thereto, which tag shall have
printed thereon “EMERGENCY VALVE TO BOILERS (FUEL LINE).”
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.130 SUMPS OR RESERVOIRS.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct
or cause to be constructed, to use or cause to be used, or to maintain or cause
to be maintained, any permanent sump or reservoir hereafter constructed or
erected, for the purpose of storing petroleum or flammable liquids, unless such
sump is constructed as follows.
      1.   All earth sumps maintaining a fluid level more than one (1) foot
above the natural ground level at the lowest point shall have the inner sides
entirely lined with not less than three inches of concrete or masonry
construction.
      2.   The earth-filled walls of such sumps or reservoirs shall be
constructed in such manner as will meet the requirements of the Building and
Safety Division of the City.
      3.   The level of the fluid of such sumps or reservoirs shall not be
allowed or permitted or suffered, regardless of cause thereof, to rise above a
point 12 inches below the lowest top point of the enclosing walls of each sump
or reservoir, and such point shall be marked with a gauge or marker at least
four inches square, located at a point accessible for gauging, and the top of
such gauge shall not be below the top of each sump or reservoir.
      4.   Temporary sumps may be constructed, maintained and used during the
period of drilling a well for the normal purposes of mud usage or storage,
walls of which shall be of substantial earth construction, and the fluid level
of which shall not be allowed to rise above a point 6 inches from the top.
   B.   The construction of all sumps or reservoirs shall meet the requirements
of the Building Official of the City.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to set fire
to, or to burn, or to cause or permit any other person to set fire to or to
burn, any petroleum or liquid with petroleum contents in any sump hole, open
pool or reservoir, or to permit oil so situated on premises belonging to such,
person, firm or corporation, to be burned.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.135 REFINERIES, TANK FARMS AND ABSORPTION PLANTS PROHIBITED.
   No refineries, tank farms or absorption plants shall be constructed within
the City of Culver City.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.140 TANKS; CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   All tanks shall be constructed in accordance with the American
Petroleum Institute's Standard Nos. 12-A, 12-B, 12-C, 12-D, as amended.
      1.   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to drums constructed
in accordance with the regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission.
      2.   The venting provisions shall not apply to any container of 110
gallons capacity or less; providing, however, that whenever it is essential for
fire safety, vents shall be maintained on containers which are permanently
installed.
      3.   No unroofed tanks shall be used.
   B.   Adequate flame arresters or palate-type vacuum and pressure relief
valves shall be provided in all vents on tanks containing liquids which will
flash at a temperature of 100° F or less
      1.   The free area of such flame arresters shall in no case be less than
the area of the vent to which flame arrester is attached.
      2.   All such flame arresters or vents shall be maintained as to be
readily accessible for inspection.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.145 LOCATION OF TANKS.
   A.   Oil storage shall be limited to 6,000 bbls. for each producing well.
   B.   Storage tanks shall be located in conformity with the following table,
with measurements to be taken from the shell of the tank.
      1.   Where the configuration of the property will not permit of such
spacing, deviations may be made on the written approval of the Building
Official.
      2.   The spacing given in the table shall also apply to distances between
any tank and any building which is not of the fireproof construction.
   C.   No storage tank shall be installed or maintained within 100 feet of any
steam boiler or open flame.
      1.   Where the area under ownership or control of the person proposing to
install or maintain any such tank does not permit such spacing, the location
thereof shall then be designated by the Building Official, except that in no
case shall distance between any storage tank and a steam boiler or open flame
be less than 25 feet.
      2.   No tank hereafter, intended or used for the storage of petroleum
therein or any flammable liquids, shall be installed or maintained within 100
feet of any steam boiler or open flame.
      3.   Where the area under ownership or control of the person, firm or
corporation proposing to install or maintain any such tank does not permit of
the 100 feet spacing, as above specified, the location of any such tank shall
then be designated by the Building Official on the lands owned or controlled by
such person, firm or corporation; provided, however, that in no case shall the
distance between any tank containing petroleum or any products, or any
flammable liquids and a steam boiler or open flame be less than 25 feet.
LOCATION OF TANKS
Capacity of Tanks in 42- Distance from Nearest Lot
Gallon Barrels           Line of the Property That Distance from Nearest Tank
                         May be Built on
Capacity of Tanks in 42- Distance from Nearest Lot
Gallon Barrels           Line of the Property That Distance from Nearest Tank
                         May be Built on
1 to 266                 8 feet                    2 feet
267 to 720               10 feet                   3 feet
721 to 1,600             15 feet                   5 feet
1,601 to 2,854           15 feet                   6 feet
2,855 to 5,031           20 feet                   7 feet
5,032 to 10,200          20 feet                   7 feet
10,201 to 15,000         25 feet                   10 feet
15,001 to 23,500         30 feet                   15 feet
23,501 to 40,000         40 feet                   20 feet
40,001 to 70,000         50 feet                   25 feet
70,001 to 95,000         60 feet                   30 feet
95,001 to 135,000        80 feet                   40 feet
Over 135,000             120 feet                  60 feet
 
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.150 PIPING AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
   A.   All pipe and pipe fittings, including valves, gauge class fittings, and
other similar appurtenances used in connection with any derrick, loading rack
or tank, shall be designed, installed and maintained to safely withstand the
pressure to which they may be subjected.
      1.   All valves directly controlling the flow of inflammable liquids from
tanks shall be of the rising stem or self-indicating type, or other type
commonly used in oil field operations which is equally adequate or efficient.
Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to valves less than two
inches in diameter.
      2.   Gauge glass fittings for tanks and for containers, sample cocks and
other similar fittings intended or used for the purpose of drawing off
inflammable liquids from tanks and/or containers, in any quantity shall be
constructed of some metal having a melting point equal to steel or higher.
      3.   Gauge glass fittings shall be equipped with automatic ball checks.
   B.   Any system of piping connected to a positive acting pump shall be
equipped with an automatic pressure relief valve or suitable means to relieve
the pressure of any such system and prohibit such pressure from exceeding 125%
of the normal safe working pressure of the piping system or pump, whichever is
the lower pressure.
   C.   All electrical equipment proposed to be used, or used, in connection
with any permit issued hereunder shall conform to the State Electrical Safety
Orders of the Industrial Accident Commission.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.155 DIKES AND RETAINING WALLS.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used, or to
maintain or cause to be maintained, any surface storage tank or containers
located outside of any building, and in which flammable liquids, petroleum or
its liquid byproducts, or liquified petroleum gases are, or may be, placed or
stored, unless such surface storage tank or container is surrounded by masonry,
or reinforced concrete walls or dikes so designed, constructed and maintained
as to confine the total capacity of the largest tank or container within the
same and 10% of the capacity of such other tanks and containers as are located
within the same.
      1.   Such walls or dikes shall be increased for each additional tank or
container of smaller capacity located within the same by 10% of the capacity of
such additional tank or container.
      2.   Provided, however, that such walls, or dikes shall not be required
for tanks of less than 2,000 gallons capacity, tanks in isolated locations,
tanks located in absorption plants, tanks containing liquids used in
conjunction with orchard heating which will flash at a temperature in excess of
100° F and not more than 187° or tanks containing liquified petroleum gases,
except where in the opinion of the Fire Chief a hazardous condition exists.
   B.   Any surface storage tank or container located inside of any building
and in which flammable liquids are, or may be, placed or stored shall be
surrounded by masonry or reinforced concrete walls or dikes so designed,
constructed, and maintained as to confine the total capacity of all such tanks
or containers within the same.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.160 MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.
   A.   The Fire Chief of the City may require the immediate cessation of all
operations of the permittee whenever, in his or her judgment, an extraordinary
fire hazard exists.
   B.   The Fire Chief may also require the emptying, transference, or removal
of petroleum and/or flammable materials from any tank or sump to such location
as he or she deems advisable while such hazard exists.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for the permittee to allow flammable liquids or
waste materials to flow or remain on the surface of the ground, whether on the
permitted premises or any other premises, public or private.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or throw a burning object
within 25 feet of any derrick, loading rack, tank, or sump containing petroleum
or any products thereof, or any flammable liquids.
   E.   The permittee shall post the permitted premises with appropriate “No
smoking” signs, with letters at least four inches in height.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.165 TOILET FACILITIES.
   The permittee shall be required to provide a toilet on the permitted
premises, within 200 feet of the derrick.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.170 DISCHARGING OF GAS PROHIBITED.
   Permittee shall not discharge or cause, or suffer to be discharged into the
air any amount of natural gas, either before or after the removal of the
gasoline therefrom, and any such discharge may be temporarily excused solely by
an act of God or causes beyond the reasonable control of permittee while in the
exercise of utmost care and diligence.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.175 BLOW OUT PREVENTOR AND SAFETY APPLIANCES REQUIRED.
   A.   Permittee shall not drill a well without equipping same with adequate
blow out prevention equipment, installed and maintained as required by the
State Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources (DOG).
   B.   Permittee shall also equip his well with casings of sufficient strength
and with such safety devices as may be necessary and required by and in
accordance with methods approved by the State Division of Oil, Gas and
Geothermal Resources (DOG) of the State of California.
   C.   The permittee shall comply with all of the current safety precautions
required by any State agency or the City.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
OTHER REQUIREMENTS
§ 11.12.300 DIRECTIONAL SURVEYS REQUIRED ON CERTAIN WELLS.
   Whenever permittee shall drill, re-drill, or deepen any well, or well hole,
and the location of which at the surface of the ground, or the location of
which well hole at any point below the surface of the ground, is within 500
feet of any exterior boundary line of any City-owned property, he or she shall
make, record and keep true and accurate sub-surface directional surveys of such
well or well hole, with stations at not more than 100 foot intervals in such
well or well hole. The result of each survey shall be fully and accurately
shown on a plat, upon which shall appear:
   A.   The exterior boundaries of the property on which such well or well hole
has been or is being drilled, re-drilled or deepened; and, if such property is
part of, but less than the whole of, a larger parcel of land owned, leased or
controlled, or operated or to be operated, as a single drilling or operating
unit of lease, the exterior boundaries of such larger parcel.
   B.   The location of such well or well hole on the surface in relation to
such boundaries.
   C.   The sub-surface location of the point of cementing each string of
casing.
   D.   The sub-surface location of the lowest point in such well or well hole,
from which production of oil, gas and/or other hydrocarbon substances is
procured or obtained.
   E.   The continuous and entire course of the well hole, as surveyed, shall
be presented accurately on one plat.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.305 FILING SURVEYS REQUIREMENT.
   A.   A copy of the surface survey, which indicates the location and number
of the well head, and a copy of the plat of each sub-surface directional
survey, together with a written report from the engineer who made the survey,
fully and correctly interpreting such survey, and accompanied by the affidavit
of such engineer, made under oath, that the survey, plat and report thereof
were made by him or her, or under his or her direction or personal observation,
and that the result as shown thereon and thereby is a full, true and correct
representation of such survey, shall be filed with the Director.
   B.   The survey shall be based on the City's GPS coordinate system and be in
AutoCad format (latest version).
   C.   A digital copy of the survey shall also be submitted.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see  §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
§ 11.12.310 DRILLING INTO CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   A.   Any permit granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to be
revoked by the City Council, if it is determined that any well hole, during any
part of its course, encroaches upon any City land.
   B.   In the event of such encroachment, all proceeds obtained from the
marketing of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances shall be impounded in a
bank located within the City, and shall not be released or withdrawn until it
is determined who is the lawful recipient of such proceeds.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.315 DUPLICATE NOTICES REQUIRED.
   The permittee shall file with the Director a duplicate notice of all notices
required by any State regulatory agency, on ten (10) working days notice from
the City Council so to do.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.320 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP NOTICE.
   Permittee shall promptly notify the Director of any change in ownership of
the permittee's operation, and shall give the address of all principals
thereof.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.325 NOTICE OF ACCIDENTS REQUIRED.
   A.   As well as all other required authorities, permittee shall give written
notice to the Director of any and all accidents occurring as a result of
permittee's operation or on permittee's premises, within two (2) working days
of the accident.
   B.   Failure to provide the required notice will result in revocation of
permit by the City.
   C.   This requirement is for administrative purposes, and in no way is
intended to substitute for the permittee to respond to emergencies in an
appropriate manner.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.330 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Any City official shall have the right and privilege, at any time, to enter
upon any property of the permittee within the City for the purpose of making
inspections.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part))
§ 11.12.335 PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   Permittee shall keep and maintain all of the permitted premises in a clean,
healthy and sanitary condition in a manner consistent with the type of
operation authorized, and shall fully conform to all requirements of City
ordinances and regulations with respect to property maintenance.
(Ord. No. 2003-013 § 1 (part)) Penalty, see §§
1.01.040 -
1.01.055.
CHAPTER 11.13: ADULT USE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
11.13.005   Purpose
   
11.13.010   Definitions
   
11.13.015   Locational limitations
Development and Operating Standards
   
11.13.100   Hours of operation
   
11.13.105   Lighting requirements
   
11.13.110   Access provisions
   
11.13.115   Regulation of closed booths
   
11.13.120   Regulation of viewing areas
   
11.13.125   On-site manager; security measures
   
11.13.130   Sign requirements
   
11.13.135   Live entertainment; operating requirements
   
11.13.140   Adult motion picture theater
Development Permits
   
11.13.200   Requirements
   
11.13.205   Contents of application
   
11.13.210   Decision to grant or deny
   
11.13.215   Appeal
   
11.13.220   Approval criteria
   
11.13.225   New application and judicial review of decision to grant or deny
   
11.13.230   Expiration
   
11.13.235   Revocation
Administration
   
11.13.300   Temporary prohibition of any new or expanded adult-orientated
businesses
   
11.13.305   Applicability to other regulations
   
11.13.310   Conduct constituting a public nuisance
   
11.13.315   Amortization of legal non-conforming uses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11.13.005 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this Chapter to prevent community-wide adverse economic
impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of
neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult use
businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to incompatible uses
such as schools, religious institutions, and residentially zoned properties.
The City Council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities
that the concentration of adult use businesses causes an increase in the number
of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the
effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to relocate.
It is, therefore, the purpose of this Chapter to establish reasonable and
uniform operational and development regulations to prevent the concentration of
adult uses businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while
permitting the location of adult use businesses in certain areas and to
regulate the time, place and manner of the operation of adult uses in order to
minimize the negative secondary effects associated with such uses.
('65 Code, § 23-24.1) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.010 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained elsewhere in this Code, the
following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, be defined
as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning
is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with any other
provisions of this Code, these definitions shall prevail.
   ADULT ARCADE. A business establishment or concern to which the public is
permitted or invited and where coin, coin-card, slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled amusement devices,
still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images on a regular or substantial basis, where
the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. A business establishment or concern having as a regular and
substantial portion of its stock in trade, “material relative to adult uses”
(as defined below) which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT BOOTH. An enclosed or partially enclosed portion of an adult use used
for any of the following purposes:
      1.   Where a live or taped performance is presented or viewed, where the
material presented is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”;
      2.   Where persons engage in “specified sexual activities” or activities
involving “specified anatomical areas”; or
      3.   Where adult arcade devices are located.
   ADULT BUSINESS or ADULT USE.
      1.   A business establishment or concern which as a regular and
substantial course of conduct operates as an adult bookstore, adult theater,
adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motel or hotel; or
      2.   A business establishment or concern which as a regular and
substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes adult-oriented
merchandise or sexually-oriented merchandise, or which offers to its patrons
materials, products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical parts,” but not including those uses or
activities which are preempted by state law.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub or other business establishment or concern
(whether or not serving alcoholic beverages) which features live performances
by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers,
or similar performers, and where such performances are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT FIGURE MODELING STUDIO. Any establishment or business which provides,
for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward,
figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display
“specified anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted,
sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Modeling
studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the
State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio
or similar facility, owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or
group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available
“specified sexual activities.”
   ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL. A hotel or motel which is used for presenting on a
regular and substantial basis “material relative to adult uses” which is
distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”
through closed circuit or cable television or through videotape recorder where
videotapes are provided by the hotel/motel.
   ADULT-ORIENTED MERCHANDISE. Sexually oriented implements, paraphernalia, or
novelty items, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-
oriented vibrators, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with
orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually-oriented
devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human
genital organs or sadomasochistic activity or distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, on a regular
and substantial basis and for any form of consideration, “material relative to
adult uses” is presented through films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, laser disks, digital video disks, or similar electronically-generated
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ADULT USE. Any of the following:
      1.   The opening or commencement of any adult use as a new business;
      2.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult use,
to any adult use defined herein;
      3.   The conversion of a vacant building for use as any adult use defined
herein;
      4.   The addition of any of the adult uses defined herein to any other
existing adult use;
      5.   The relocation of any such adult use;
      6.   Physical changes that expand the square footage of an existing adult
use by more than ten percent (10%).
   MATERIAL RELATIVE TO ADULT USES. Anything including, but not limited to,
adult oriented merchandise, accessories, paraphernalia, books, magazines, laser
disks, compact discs, digital video disks, photographs, prints, drawings,
paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets, videos, slides, tapes, or electronically
generated images or devices including computer software, or any combination
thereof, which is or distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
   PERFORMER. A person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult
use, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of
consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult use.
“Performer” does not include a patron.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered, and/or simulated to be
reasonably anatomically correct;
      2.   Human genitals, pubic region;
      3.   Buttock;
      4.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
or
      5.   Human or simulated male genitals, in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      1.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      2.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal;
      3.   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus
or masturbation;
      4.   Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating, or the
infliction of pain, or bondage and/or restraints;
      5.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation; and/or
      6.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breast.
('65 Code, § 23-24.2) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.015 LOCATIONAL LIMITATIONS.
   A.   Subject to the limitations of this Chapter, adult uses may only be
located within the following zoning districts, as established by the Zoning
Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code:
      1.   C-3 (Commercial);
      2.   C-3E (Extended Commercial);
      3.   C-3LR (Lowrise Commercial);
      4.   C-3MR (Midrise Commercial);
      5.   M-1 (Light Manufacturing);
      6.   M-1A (Modified Light Manufacturing); or
      7.   M-2 (General Manufacturing and Industrial).
   B.   In those zoning districts where the adult uses regulated by this
Chapter would otherwise be permitted uses, it shall be unlawful to establish
any such adult use if the location is:
      1 .   Within six hundred (600) feet of any residential zone. The distance
between the adult use or proposed adult use and a residential zone shall be
measured between the nearest exterior wall of the facility or tenant space
housing the adult use or the proposed adult use, and the nearest property line
included within the residential zone, along a straight line extended between
the two (2) points.
      2.   Within six hundred (600) feet of any day care facility, park, public
school or private school, or religious institution. The distance between the
adult use or proposed adult use and a park or school shall be measured from the
nearest exterior wall of the facility or tenant space housing the adult use or
the proposed adult use to the property line of the school or park site,
measured along a straight line extended between the two (2) points.
      3.   Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other adult use regulated
under this Chapter. Distances between uses shall be measured between the
nearest exterior wall of the facility or tenant space housing such use or
proposed use along the shortest route intended and available for public
traverse between the uses.
      4.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
         (a)    DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility that meets the definition of “Day
Care Facility” as set forth in the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of
this Code.
         (b)    PARK. A facility that meets the definition of “Park,” as set
forth in §
9.10.005.
         (c)    PUBLIC SCHOOL or PRIVATE SCHOOL. An institution of learning for
minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of
study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant
to standards set by the State Board of Education and has an approved use
permit, if required, under the applicable jurisdiction. This definition
includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school,
senior high school, a special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of
the State Department of Education.
         (d)    RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A facility used primarily for religious
assembly or worship and related religious activities.
         (e)    RESIDENTIAL ZONE. Any property within the City which carries a
zoning designation of Single Family Dwelling Zone (R-1 and R-1a Zone); One
Family Dwelling/Zero Lot Line Zone (R-1z Zone); Two Family Dwelling Zone (R-
2 Zone); Low Density Multiple Family Dwelling Zones (R-3 and R-3a Zone); Medium
Density Multiple-Family Dwelling Zone (R-4 Zone) and property within the
Planned Development Zone (PD) that has been formally restricted by action of
the City Council to residential use. However, this does not include commercial
or industrial zones where a residence is permitted pursuant to a conditional
use permit or other special permit or zones in which a residential use may
exist as a non-conforming use.
('65 Code, § 23-24.3) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATING STANDARDS
§ 11.13.100 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator or employee of an adult use to allow
such adult use to remain open for business, or to permit any employee or
performer to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale,
solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of
midnight and 10:00 a.m. of any day.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(A)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.105 LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Exterior lighting requirement. All exterior areas, including parking
lots, of the adult use shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.50 foot-candle,
maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate devices to
screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such manner as to prevent glare or
reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public
and private properties.
   B.   Interior lighting requirements. All interior areas of the adult use
shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.00 foot-candle, maintained and evenly
distributed at floor level.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(B), (C)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.110 ACCESS PROVISIONS.
   A.   Generally. The operator shall not permit any doors on the premises to
be locked during business hours and, in addition, the operator shall be
responsible for making any room or area on the premises readily accessible at
all times and making open to view in its entirety for inspection by any
enforcement officer.
   B.   Minors' access.
      1.   X-rated movies. To the extent that it is in conformity with the
California Penal Code, X-rated movies, videotapes, digital video disks (DVDs),
compact disks (CDs) and laser disks shall be restricted to persons over 18
years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from
providing access to persons under 18 years of age sells, rents, or displays
movies, videos, DVDs, or laser disks that have been rated “X” or rated “NC-17”
by the motion picture rating industry (“MPAA”), or which have not been
submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the movies, videos,
DVDs, CDs, and laser disks shall be located in a specific section of the
establishment where persons under the age of 18 shall be prohibited.
      2.   Other material relative to adult uses.  For material relative to
adult uses not covered by division E.1. above, access shall be restricted to
persons over 18 years of age.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any employee, owner, operator, responsible
managing employee, manager or permittee of an adult entertainment business to
allow any person under the age of 18 years upon the premises or within the
confines of any adult entertainment business, either as a patron or employee,
if no liquor is served, or under the age of 21 if liquor is served.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(D), (E)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.115 REGULATION OF CLOSED BOOTHS.
   No one shall maintain any arcade booth or individual viewing area unless the
entire interior of such premises wherein the picture or entertainment that is
viewed is visible upon entering into such premises; and further, that the
entire body of any viewing person is also visible immediately upon entrance to
the premises without the assistance of mirrors or other viewing aids. No
partially or fully enclosed booths/individual viewing areas or partially or
fully concealed booths/individual viewing areas shall be maintained. No arcade
booth shall be occupied by more than one individual at a time. No holes or
other openings (commonly known as “glory holes”) shall be permitted between
arcade booths or individual viewing areas.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(F)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.120 REGULATION OF VIEWING AREAS.
   All viewing areas within the adult use shall be visible from a continuous
and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and not
obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would
prohibit a person from seeing into the viewing areas from the main aisle. A
manager shall be stationed in the main aisle or video monitoring shall be
established at a location from which the inside of all of the viewing areas are
visible at all times in order to enforce all rules and regulations. All viewing
areas shall be designed or operated to only permit occupancy of either one
person, or more than ten (10) persons. “Viewing area” shall mean any area in
which a person views performances, pictures, movies, videos, or other
presentations.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(G)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.125 ON-SITE MANAGER; SECURITY MEASURES.
   A.   All adult uses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least
eighteen (18) years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at
all times during which the business is open. The individual designated as the
on-site manager shall be registered with the City Manager or designee by the
owner to receive all complaints and be given by the owner and/or operator the
responsibility and duty to address and immediately resolve all violations
taking place on the premises.
   B.   The adult use shall provide a security system that visually records and
monitors all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, uniformed security
guards to patrol and monitor the parking lot areas during all business hours. A
sign indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on the exterior
of the premises between four (4) to six (6) feet from the ground and shall be
in addition to allowable wall sign area pursuant to the Zoning Code (Signs), as
set forth in Title 17 of this Code. The sign shall not exceed two (2) feet by
three (3) feet and shall at a minimum be one (1) foot by one and one-half (1½)
feet.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(H)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 §22
(part))
§ 11.13.130 SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   All adult uses shall comply with the following sign requirements, in
addition to those of the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code.
Should a conflict exist between the requirements of the Zoning Code, as set
forth in Title 17 of this Code, and this section, the more restrictive shall
prevail.
   A.   All exterior signs shall be flat (i.e., not angled to the front wall of
the building) wall signs.
   B.   No material relative to adult use on the premises shall be displayed in
window areas or any area where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of
the building.
   C.   Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way. No sign
shall be placed in any window. A one-square-foot sign may be placed on the door
to state hours of operations and admittance requirements.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(I)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.135 LIVE ENTERTAINMENT; OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult uses providing
live entertainment. No person, association, partnership, or corporation shall
engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit the operation of an adult use to
engage in, conduct or carry on unless all of the following requirements are
met:
   A.   No employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or
permittee of such use shall allow any person below the age of eighteen (18)
years upon the premises or within the confines if no liquor is served, or under
the age of twenty-one (21) if liquor is served.
   B.   No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult use
except upon a fixed stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the
floor.
   C.   No performer shall be within six (6) feet of a patron while the
performer is performing. This six (6) foot separation shall be marked by a
railing, fence, or other physical barrier designed to obstruct any contact
between the performer and the patron(s). No performer shall be within six (6)
feet of a performer while that performer is performing.
   D.   No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee
shall permit or allow: (1) any patron to approach within six (6) feet of a
performer who is either nude or displaying specified anatomical areas; or (2) a
performer who is either nude or displaying specified anatomical areas, whether
or not performing, to approach within six (6) feet of a patron; or (3) a
performer who is either nude or displaying specified anatomical areas to
approach within six feet of another performer while performing.
   E.   All performers, other than nude performers or performers displaying
specified anatomical areas while performing, shall, at a minimum while on or
about the premises or tenant space, wear an opaque covering which covers their
specified anatomical areas.
   F.   If patrons wish to tip performers, receptacles shall be at least six
(6) feet from the stage or other area used by the performers. Patrons shall not
provide tips directly to performers or place tips in the performers' costumes.
When patrons are at the establishment, a patron shall not be allowed to
directly touch, fondle or caress a performer, as those terms are defined in
Kev, Inc. v. Kitsep County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986). This prohibition
does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the
separation and no touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier
described in division C. above.
   G.   The adult use shall provide dressing rooms for performers, which are
separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers' use and which
the performers shall use at all times. Performers may share a dressing room.
   H.   The adult use shall provide an entrance/exit for performers which is
separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, which the performers shall use
at all times.
   I.   The adult use shall provide access for performers between the stage and
the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such
separate access is not physically feasible, the adult use shall provide a
minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room
area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other physical barrier separating
the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually results in)
preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers. Nothing in this
section is intended to exempt the adult use from compliance with the provisions
of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to handicapped
accessibility.
   J.   Fixed railing, fence, or other physical barrier at least thirty (30)
inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between
performers and patrons required by this section.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(J)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.140 ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.
   An adult motion picture theater shall observe the following special
requirements:
   A.    If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall
comply with each of the following provisions:
      1.   Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like,
to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the area;
      2.   Have a continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order
that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all
times; and
      3.   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each
entranceway to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of
persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not
exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area.
   B.   If an adult motion picture theater contains adult booths, each adult
booth shall comply with each of the following provisions:
      1.   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway
which states the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth, which
number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth;
      2.   Have a permanently open entranceway not less than two (2) feet wide
and not less than six (6) feet high, not capable of being closed or partially
closed by any curtain, door, or other partition which would be capable of
wholly or partially obscuring any person situated in the booth;
      3.   Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like,
which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth;
      4.   Have a continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each
person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and
      5.   Have, except for the entranceway, walls or partitions of solid
construction without any holes or openings in such walls or partitions.
   C.   If an adult motion picture theater is designed to permit outdoor
viewing by persons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture
screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the
material to be seen by those persons may not be seen from any public right-of-
way, day care facility, park, public school or private school, or religious
institution, as those terms are defined in this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 23-24.4(K)) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
§ 11.13.200 REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   No adult use may be established within the City by right - all persons
wishing to establish or expand an adult use within the City must apply for and
receive an Adult Use Development Permit (AUDP) under this Chapter before
opening to the public.
   B.   It is the burden of the applicant to supply evidence to justify
granting an AUDP.
   C.   Any person desiring to operate, establish or expand an adult use within
the City shall file with the Planning Division an AUDP application on a
standard application form supplied by the Planning Division.
(‘65 Code, § 23-24.5) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part); Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2
(part))
§ 11.13.205 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   A.   1.   The application for an AUDP must be signed by the property owner
or lessee. If the application is signed by a lessee, written acknowledgment of
the application signed by the property owner shall accompany the application.
Proof of status of ownership is required.
      2.   Any individual wishing to operate an adult use must sign the
application for an AUDP as an applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an
adult use is other than an individual, each individual having a ten percent
(10%) or greater interest in the profits or losses of the business must sign
the application for an AUDP as an applicant. If a corporation is listed as
owner of an adult use or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business,
each individual or entity holding ten percent (10%) or more of the outstanding
stock in the corporation must sign the application for an AUDP as an applicant.
      3.   Any individuals who signs the application for an AUDP as an
applicant, pursuant to the preceding section, must also provide on the
application their names, aliases, addresses, and dates of birth.
   B.   The City Council, by separate resolution, shall set forth all other
contents required for an application for an AUDP.
('65 Code, § 23-24.6) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.210 DECISION TO GRANT OR DENY.
   A.   The Planning Commission shall grant, conditionally grant or deny an
application for an AUDP. Any conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in
keeping with the objective site operational standards of this Chapter and the
development standards as to height, bulk, open space, landscaping, signs and
off-street parking of the underlying zone or specific plan in which the
property is located.
   B.   1.   Not later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the City has
received the application, the City Planner shall determine in writing whether
the application is complete and shall immediately transmit the determination to
the applicant. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the City
Planner's determination shall specify those parts of the application which are
incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which they can be made complete,
including a list and thorough description of the specific information needed to
complete the application. Upon receipt of any resubmittal of the application, a
new fifteen (15) day period shall begin, during which the City Planner shall
determine the completeness of the application. Nothing in this subdivision
precludes an applicant and the City from mutually agreeing to an extension of
any time limit provided by this section.
      2.   If the written determination is not made by the City Planner within
fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the application, or within fifteen
(15) calendar days of resubmittal of any application initially determined to be
incomplete, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of this
section.
   C.   The applicant may appeal a determination of incompleteness in writing
to the Community Development Director, within ten (10) calendar days of the
date of determination as indicated in the determination. The Community
Development Director shall render a final written determination on the appeal
not later than fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the applicant's
written appeal. If the Community Development Director fails to render a final
written determination within fifteen (15) calendar days, the application shall
be deemed complete for purposes of this section.
   D.   Upon the filing of a completed application, Planning Division staff
shall conduct an appropriate investigation, including a background check and
consultation as necessary with the Building Division, Police and Fire
Departments, and County Health Department and inspection of the premises as
needed. Consultation is not grounds for the City to unilaterally delay in
reviewing a completed application.
   E.   Concurrent with this investigation, the Planning Division shall notice
and schedule a public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission, as
prescribed in the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, on the
application for the AUDP.
   F.   In reaching a decision, the Planning Commission shall not be bound by
the formal rules of evidence in the California Evidence Code.
   G.   The Planning Commission shall render a written decision on the
application for an AUDP within thirty (30) calendar days of determining an
application is complete.
   H.   In the event that the project requires a negative declaration,
mitigated negative declaration or any type of environmental impact as defined
in the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”, Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§
21000 et seq.), the time frames set forth in CEQA and the companion Guidelines
(17 California Code of Regulations, §§ 15000 et seq.) shall govern. The failure
of the Planning Commission to render such a decision within this time frame
shall be deemed to constitute a denial and shall be automatically appealed to
the City Council.
   I.   The Planning Commission's decision shall be hand delivered or overnight
mailed to the applicant within five (5) calendar days of its decision. If a
permit is issued, the permit shall not be valid pending expiration of the ten
(10) day appeal period set forth in §
11.13.215.
('65 Code, § 23-24.7) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.215 APPEAL.
   A.   Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Planning
Commission to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the
City Clerk accompanied by payment of an appeal fee within ten (10) working days
after the Planning Commission's date of decision. The City Council, within the
same ten (10) days, may also initiate such an appeal.
   B.   A notice of appeal shall clearly identify the decision being appealed,
and shall include a complete description of all findings of fact or reasoning
challenged as erroneous or erroneously excluded, and indicate the basis
therefor. If the appeal is of conditions attached to an approval, the appeal
shall also specify which conditions were erroneously required, and what
additional conditions or changed limitations the appellant desires to impose.
Failure to substantially set forth the required matter in any purported notice
of appeal shall render such appeal ineffective.
   C.   The City Council, by resolution, shall set a reasonable appeal fee.
   D.   Any appealed AUDP shall be held in abeyance pending consideration of
the appeal.
   E.   Consideration of an appeal of the Planning Commission's decision shall
be at a public hearing which shall be noticed as provided in the Zoning Code,
as set forth in Title 17 of this Code. The City Council shall schedule the
public hearing to be held not later than thirty (30) calendar days after
receiving notice of the appeal.
   F.   The City Council shall grant, conditionally grant or deny the
application upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing. The City
Council's decision shall be final and conclusive.
   G.   In reaching its decision, the City Council shall not be bound by the
formal rules of evidence as set forth in the California Evidence Code.
('65 Code, § 23-24.8) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.220 APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   A.   The Planning Commission or City Council shall approve an application
for an AUDP where the information submitted by the applicant substantiates the
following findings:
      1.   That the proposed use meets the zoning requirements set forth in §
11.13.015.
      2.   That the proposed use complies with the objective site development
standards for height, bulk, open space, landscaping, signs and off-street
parking of this Chapter and the underlying zone in which the property is
located; and
      3.   That neither the applicant, if an individual, or shareholders,
partners, officers, directors, or parties possessing a major financial
interest, if a corporation or partnership, has been found guilty or pleaded
nolo contendere within the past four years of a misdemeanor or a felony
classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense.
   B.   Any conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the
objective site development standards for height, bulk, open space, landscaping,
signs and off-street parking of this Chapter and the underlying zone in which
the property is located.
('65 Code, § 23-24.9) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.225 NEW APPLICATION AND JUDICIAL REVIEW OF DECISION TO GRANT OR DENY.
   A.   In the event an application for a AUDP is denied pursuant to this
Chapter, no application may be filed for an AUDP to operate a substantially
similar adult use at the premises or leased space within twelve (12) months
after the date of such denial.
   B.   The time for any court challenge to a final decision by the City
Council is governed by Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 1094.6. Notice of the City
Council's decision and its written findings shall be mailed by first-class
mail, postage prepaid and including a copy of an affidavit or certificate of
mailing, to the applicant and any interested person. Such notice shall include
direct notice that the time within which judicial review of the decision must
be sought is governed by Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 1094.6.
('65 Code, § 23-24.10) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.230 EXPIRATION.
   Any AUDP approved pursuant to this Chapter shall become null and void unless
the proposed use is established within six (6) months of the date from the
approval. As to facilities that are a reuse of existing facilities, the AUDP
shall become null and void unless the proposed new use is established within
six (6) months from the date of approval unless, prior to the expiration date,
the permittee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City's Planning
Commission that it has a good faith intent to presently commence the proposed
use. Such extensions shall not exceed a total of one six-month extension.
('65 Code, § 23-24.11) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.235 REVOCATION.
   A.   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter may be
revoked by the City on the basis of any of the following:
      1.   That the business or activity has been conducted in a manner which
violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit
or which fails to conform to the approved plans and procedures described in the
application, or which violates the occupant load limits set by the Fire
Marshall;
      2.   That the permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required
City, County, and State licenses and permits;
      3.   That the permit is being used to conduct an activity different from
that for which it was issued;
      4.   That the permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the
application for permit or has not answered each question therein truthfully;
      5.   That the building or structure in which the adult use is conducted
is hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the
business or of the general public under the standards set forth in the Uniform
Building, Uniform Plumbing or Uniform Fire Codes;
      6.   That a permittee, including an owner, clerk, director, partner, or
employee of an adult use, has been convicted of an offense classified by the
State as a sex-related offense and less than two (2) years have elapsed since
the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or less than
five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement of conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction
is a felony; or less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two (2) or more
misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any
twenty-four (24) month period;
      7.   That an individual employed by the adult use has been convicted of
two (2) or more sex-related offenses that occurred in or on the licensed
premises within a twelve (12) month period and was an employee of the adult use
at the times the offenses were committed; or
      8.   That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist
or has been suspended for six (6) months or more.
   B.   Written notice of a hearing on the proposed permit revocation, together
with written notification of the specific grounds of complaint against the
permittee, shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the
permittee at least ten (10) working days prior to the hearing.
   C.   The revocation hearing shall be heard by the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence at the
hearing.
   D.   The Planning Commission shall notice and conduct a public hearing, as
prescribed in the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, on the
proposed permit revocation.
   E.   The Planning Commission shall revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add
additional conditions to, the permittee's AUDP. Any additional conditions
imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective site development
standards for height, bulk, open space, landscaping, signs and off-street
parking of this Chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the
property is located.
   F.   The Planning Commission's decision shall be in writing, and shall be
hand delivered or overnight mailed to the applicant within five (5) calendar
days of the decision.
   G.   The Planning Commission shall make its decision within thirty (30)
calendar days from the conclusion of the public hearing. The Planning
Commission's failure to render such a decision within this time frame shall
constitute a decision to revoke the AUDP and be automatically appealed to the
City Council.
   H.   Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Planning
Commission in writing within ten (10) working days in accordance with the
provisions of §
11.13.215.
   I.   In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this Chapter, another AUDP
to operate an adult use shall not be granted to the permittee within twelve
(12) months after the date of such revocation.
('65 Code, § 23-24.12) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
ADMINISTRATION
§ 11.13.300 PROHIBITION OF ANY NEW OR EXPANDED ADULT-ORIENTATED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   From January 27, 1997, until March 12, 1997, no application shall be
accepted by the City for the establishment of any new or the expansion of any
existing adult-oriented businesses. This will allow the City time to:
      (1)   Thoroughly examine its laws, rules, procedures and fees related to
adult-oriented businesses; and
      (2)   Revise them as determined necessary to conform with the latest
applicable case law and standards, which will allow for the rights of any
future applicants and will also protect the best interests, health, safety and
welfare of the City.
   (B)   This section is adopted as an emergency measure pursuant to Charter §
614.
      (1)   It is effective immediately.
      (2)   It shall remain in effect for a period of forty-five (45) days;
provided that, this period may be extended by the City Council should the
public interest require it.
(Ord. 97-004, §§ 1, 2)
§ 11.13.305 APPLICABILITY TO OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to provide exclusive
regulation of the regulated adult uses. Such uses must comply with any and all
applicable regulations imposed in other sections of the Culver City Municipal
Code, other City ordinances, and State and Federal laws.
('65 Code, § 23-24.13) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.310 CONDUCT CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The conduct of any business within the City in violation of any of the terms
of Chapter is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the City
Attorney or the District Attorney may, in addition or in lieu of prosecuting a
criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement,
removal and enjoyment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take
other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant
such relief as will abate or remove such adult use establishment and restrain
and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining an adult use
establishment contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 23-24.14) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
§ 11.13.315 AMORTIZATION OF LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USES.
   A.   Any adult use or establishment regulated under the provisions of this
Chapter which is non-conforming on September 10, 1998, shall be subject to an
amortization period expiring three (3) years therefrom, except that the that
the amortization period shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days therefrom
for §§
11.13.100 through
11.13.115,
11.13.125, and
11.13.135. Any adult use or establishment regulated under the provisions of
this Chapter which is non-conforming on September 10, 1998, only because it
does not have an approved AUDP from the City shall not be subject to an
amortization period.
   B.   An adult use or establishment operating as a conforming use with an
approved AUDP from the City shall not be rendered a non-conforming use by the
subsequent location of residential zones, residentially developed planned
district zone property, religious institutions, public or private schools, day
care facilities, or parks within the locational limitations of this Chapter.
For purposes of this section, a use shall be deemed to be subsequently located
if it commences following the date an application for an AUDP is deemed
complete pursuant to §
11.13.210.
   C.   Amortization; notice. The City Planner shall provide written notice to
the adult use business owner (and lessee/operator, if known by reference to
City's business license records) and property owner at least one hundred twenty
(120) calendar days prior to the expiration of this amortization period. This
notice is not mandatory and lack of notice shall not be deemed to prevent the
City from initiating an action seeking declaratory injunctive relief against
the owner and/or operator of such business. However, if notice of expiration of
amortization period is now given, any application by the owner or lessee/
operator of the business for an extension of the amortization period shall not
be denied on the grounds that it is untimely.
   D.   Amortization; application for extension.
      1.   The adult use business owner may file an application with the City
Planner for an extension of the amortization period. The applicant must state:
         a.   The reason why an extension is necessary;
         b.   Whether a previous extension had been requested and granted, as
well as the date of the previous request; and
         c.   The efforts that will be made to conform by the conclusion of the
extended period.
      2.   The adult use business owner's application shall be made in writing
and shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by the City
Council. The application shall include all information which the applicant
contends satisfy the eight factors set forth in division E. of this section.
      3.   Any application for an extension of the amortization period shall be
made prior to the expiration of the amortization period unless the Planning
Commission determines that good cause exists for the late filing of the
application.
   E.   Amortization; decision to grant or deny.
      1.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, noticed as
required pursuant to the Zoning Code, as set forth in Tile 17 of this Code, at
which time it shall consider the evidence and testimony regarding the request
for an extension of the amortization period. The Planning Commission shall
grant or deny an application for extension of the amortization period. The
Planning Commission shall make its decision within thirty (30) calendar days of
the filing of the request.
      2.   In rendering its decision, the Planning Commission shall determine
whether the adult use has been provided with a reasonable amortization period
commensurate with the investment involved. If the Planning Commission
determines that the amortization period is not reasonable, it shall prescribe
an amortization period that is commensurate with the investment involved. The
burden shall be on the applicant to establish that the extension should be
granted.
      3.   The Planning Commission shall consider the following factors in
making its determination:
         a.   The adult use owner's financial investment in the business;
         b.   The present actual and depreciated value of business
improvements;
         c.   The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedules;
         d.   The remaining useful life of the business improvements;
         e.   The remaining lease term;
         f.   The cost of relocating the business to a site conforming with the
provisions of this Chapter;
         g.   The ability of the business and/or land owner to change the use
to a conforming use; and
         h.   The secondary effects of the adult use on the health, safety and
welfare of surrounding businesses and uses if the adult use is permitted to
extend the amortization period.
      4.   The Planning Commission's decision shall be in writing, and shall be
hand delivered or sent by certified mail to the applicant, and shall be posted
at City Hall and on the outside of the adult use.
   F.   Amortization; appeal. Any interested person may appeal the decision of
the Planning Commission to the City Council in writing within ten (10) calendar
days after the written decision of the Planning Commission in accordance with
the provisions of §
11.13.215.
   G.   Amortization; public nuisance. The City Council declares to be a public
nuisance any parcel where an adult use is operating and where the amortization
period as a legal non-conforming use has expired and no application for an
extension is on file or has been granted, or no application for an AUDP is on
file or has been granted.
('65 Code, § 23-24.15) (Ord. No. 98-006, § 20 (part))
CHAPTER 11.14: FILMING ACTIVITY
Section
   
11.14.005   Purpose
   
11.14.010   Definitions
   
11.14.015   Permit required
   
11.14.020   Filming hours
   
11.14.025   Parking and street closures
   
11.14.030   Permit revocation
   
11.14.035   Additional duties of permittees
   
11.14.040   Exemptions
Cross-reference:
   Closed street, see §
7.02.045
   No parking areas, see §
7.03.215
§ 11.14.005 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to allow individuals and film companies to
conduct filming activity in the City without unreasonably impacting the peace
and comfort of the residents of the community, as well as providing a
streamlined process for issuing film permits.
(Ord. No. 2004-018 § 1 (part))
§ 11.14.010 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms defined herein shall have the following meanings when used in this
Chapter:
   FILM LOCATION. The location at which any filming activity occurs.
   FILM PERMIT. The document issued by the Film Permits Coordinator signifying
that a FILM PERMIT application has been completed by the applicant, including
all required documentation, the application has been accepted by the City's
Police Department, and all appropriate fees have been paid.
   FILM PERMITS COORDINATOR. The individual or individuals designated by the
Chief of Police to administer, coordinate and supervise the film permit
application process and issue all film permits.
   FILMING ACTIVITY. Activity, including still photography, associated with the
production of a film, video, television show, commercial advertisement or
public service announcement.  FILMING ACTIVITY also includes the setup and
dismantling of all equipment.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom a film permit is issued.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit.
(Ord. No. 2004-018 § 1 (part))
§ 11.14.015 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A.   No person as principal, agent, clerk, employee, corporate officer,
partner, trustee or otherwise, for himself/herself/itself, or for any other
person or entity, shall commence or conduct any filming activity within the
City without first obtaining a film permit from the Police Department.
      1.   No film permit shall be issued unless the film permit application
and all required information and documentation, including insurance and
indemnification, is submitted at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
scheduled start time of the filming activity.
      2.   For good cause, the film permit application and related
documentation may be submitted at another appropriate time but before the
filming activity occurs.
   B.   Insurance coverage. The permittee shall be required to maintain
insurance coverage in a type and amount as determined by the City, and execute
an indemnification agreement in a form acceptable to the City, prior to the
issuance of any film permit.
   C.   1.   Film permit fees. The permittee shall pay all required film permit
fees as established by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   Exception.  The Chief of Police, at his or her sole discretion, may
waive any film permit fees for any municipal, county, state and/or federal
government agency, government official, 501(c)(3) charitable non-profit
organization, or student of a certified film studies course, if he or she
determines that the public interest would be better served by such waiver.
   D.   Film permit change fee. A film permit change fee, in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council, shall be assessed for any change
made to a film permit after it has been issued.
   E.   Film permit cancellation fee. A film permit cancellation fee, in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council, shall be assessed for any
film permit that is cancelled less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
scheduled start time of the filming activity.
(Ord. No. 2004-018 § 1 (part))
§ 11.14.020 FILMING HOURS.
   A.   Permitted hours.  It is prohibited for any person to commence or
conduct, or permit the commencement or conduct of, any filming activity in
residentially-zoned neighborhoods, and commercially-zoned neighborhoods within
a three hundred-foot (300-foot) radius of a residential zone, except between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; 8:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m., Saturday; and 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Sunday and City-specified
holidays.
   B.   Exception – Extended hours. Filming activity in residentially-zoned
neighborhoods and commercially-zoned neighborhoods located within a three
hundred-foot (300-foot) radius of a residential zone, shall be permitted beyond
those hours set forth in §
11.14.020 A., if the permittee submits signatures of approval from one (1)
adult resident of at least seventy percent (70%) of the dwelling units located
within a three hundred-foot (300-foot) radius of the filming activity, at least
forty-eight (48) hours prior to the scheduled start time of the filming
activity.
(Ord. No. 2004-018 § 1 (part))
§ 11.14.025 PARKING AND STREET CLOSURES.
   A.   No person shall park a vehicle or place equipment associated with
filming activity on a street or alley adjacent to a business or residential
dwelling unit, unless the signature from a representative of the business and
residential dwelling unit directly impacted by that parking or placement has
been obtained.
   B.   No person shall park a vehicle or place equipment associated with
filming activity on any street or alley, except in a posted parking space.
   C.   The permittee shall post "No Parking" signs, as required by the Film
Permits Coordinator, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled
start time of the filming activity; except at such times when signs must be
posted by the Police Department.
   D.   1.   No person shall close any street or alley, unless first authorized
by the Film Permits Coordinator.
      2.   Before a street or alley closure can occur, the film permittee shall
submit to the Film Permits Coordinator, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to the scheduled start time of the filming activity, signatures of approval
from one (1) adult resident of at least seventy percent (70%) of the dwelling
units and businesses adjacent to or serviced by the street or alley proposed to
be closed.
(Ord. No. 2004-018 § 1 (part))
§ 11.14.030 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A.   The Film Permits Coordinator may revoke a film permit for any of the
following reasons:
      1.   The permittee's failure to comply with the conditions of the film
permit;
      2.   The permittee's failure to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter; or
      3.   If the permittee makes any false statement or material
misrepresentation of fact related to a film permit application.
   B.   Revocation of a film permit may be appealed to the City Manager, and
must be made within fifteen (15) calendar days after issuance of the notice of
revocation from the Film Permits Coordinator.
(Ord. No. 2004-018 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.14.035 ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF PERMITTEES.
   A.   The permittee shall be required to retain City Police Department
personnel, who shall be present at all times during filming activity on public
property, at the sole cost and expense of the permittee.
   B.   The permittee shall be required to retain City Fire Department
personnel who shall be present during filming activity, as required by the
Culver City Fire Code, at the sole cost and expense of the permittee.
   C.   The permittee shall be required to retain other City services, as
deemed necessary by the City Manager, for the purpose of protecting,assisting
and regulating the proposed activity, at the sole cost and expense of the
permittee.
   D.   At any time an unsafe condition is observed, City Police or Fire
Department personnel may order filming activity to stop until such time as the
unsafe condition is corrected, and all persons involved with the filming
activity shall immediately comply with those orders.
   E.   No person shall cause or allow filming of aerial activities, from the
air or ground, including helicopter landings, to occur unless the permittee
receives prior written authorization from the City Manager.
   F.   The permittee shall ensure the film location shall be cleaned of trash
and debris, to the Film Permits Coordinator's satisfaction, within two (2)
hours of the completion of the filming activity or within such other time
established in the film permit.
   G.   The permittee shall be responsible for restoring, to the Film Permits
Coordinator's satisfaction, any damaged or disrupted area before leaving the
film location.
(Ord. No. 2004-018 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.14.040 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Current news productions, which include reporters, photographers or
camerapersons in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting
station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of news events.
   B.   Productions which are conducted by the City or other governmental
agencies.
   C.   The filming, videotaping or other productions by private individuals
solely for private use.
   D.   All activities conducted at places of business, zoned S-1, or
otherwise, where the principal function is producing, making, taking,
developing, trading or dealing in motion pictures or photoplays, television or
commercial productions, sound film or animated cartoons.
(Ord. No. 2004-018 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 11.15: TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSING
Section
   
11.15.005   Purpose
   
11.15.010   Definitions
   
11.15.015   Requirements and prohibitions
   
11.15.020   Application procedure
   
11.15.025   License fee
   
11.15.030   Issuance of license
   
11.15.035   License renewal and expiration
   
11.15.040   Compliance monitoring and enforcement
   
11.15.045   Violations unlawful; penalties
   
11.15.050   License suspension and revocation; administrative fines
Cross-reference:
   Smoking regulations, see
Ch. 9.11
§ 11.15.005 PURPOSE.
   In promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its residents, the
City of Culver City has a substantial interest in encouraging compliance with
federal, State, and local laws regulating tobacco sales and use; discouraging
the purchase and use of tobacco products by youth; increasing compliance with
laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to youth; and in protecting
children from being lured into illegal activity through the misconduct of
adults. In enacting this Chapter, it is the intent of the City Council to
encourage responsible tobacco retailing and to discourage violations of
tobacco-related laws, especially those that prohibit or discourage the sale or
distribution of tobacco and nicotine product to youth, but not to expand or
reduce the degree to which the acts regulated by federal or State law are
criminally proscribed or otherwise regulated.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2019-013 § 1)
§ 11.15.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR. A taste or aroma, other than the taste or aroma of
tobacco, imparted either prior to or during consumption of a Tobacco Product or
any byproduct produced by the Tobacco Product, including, but not limited to,
tastes or aromas relating to menthol, mint, wintergreen, fruit, chocolate,
vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb, or spice;
provided, however, that a Tobacco Product shall not be determined to have a
Characterizing Flavor solely because of the use of additives or flavorings or
the provision of ingredient information.
   CONSUMER. A Person who purchases a Tobacco Product for consumption and not
for Sale to another.
   DEPARTMENT. The Finance Department of the City of Culver City.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electronic device that can be used to deliver
an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component,
part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. ELECTRONIC
SMOKING DEVICE includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an
electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other
product name or descriptor.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE PARAPHERNALIA. Cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid,
smoke juice, tips, atomizers, Electronic Smoking Device batteries, Electronic
Smoking Device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the
preparation, charging, or use of Electronic Smoking Devices.
   FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any Tobacco Product that imparts a Characterizing
Flavor.
   HOOKAH. A device used to smoke Hookah Tobacco or other substances such as
Flavored Tobacco Products, which typically has a head, a metal body, a water
bowl, and a flexible hose with a mouthpiece that people put into their mouths
to inhale tobacco smoke.
   HOOKAH LOUNGE. An establishment holding a valid Tobacco Retailer License
that: (i) exclusively occupies an enclosed indoor space and is primarily
engaged in the retail sale of Hookah Tobacco for consumption by customers on
the premises; (ii) generates more than 70% of its gross revenues annually from
the sale of Hookah Tobacco and the rental of on-site Hookahs, not including any
sales from vending machines; (iii) does not sell food or beverages for
consumption on the premises; and (iv) prohibits entry to a person that does not
meet the minimum age requirement under state law to purchase and possess
tobacco, Tobacco Product or Tobacco Paraphernalia.
   HOOKAH TOBACCO. A type of combustible tobacco that is smoked with a Hookah,
including waterpipe tobacco, maassel, shisha, narghile, and argileh.
   LABELING. Written, printed, or graphic matter upon any Tobacco Product or
any of its Packaging, or accompanying such Tobacco Product.
   LITTLE CIGAR. Any roll of tobacco other than a Cigarette wrapped entirely or
in part in tobacco or any substance containing tobacco and weighing no more
than three pounds per thousand. LITTLE CIGAR includes, but is not limited to,
Tobacco Products known or labeled as small cigar, little cigar, or cigarillo.
   MANUFACTURER. Any Person, including any repacker or relabeler, who
manufactures, fabricates, assembles, processes, or labels a Tobacco Product; or
imports a finished Tobacco Product for sale or distribution into the United
States.
   PACKAGE or PACKAGING. A pack, box, carton, or container of any kind or, if
no other container, any wrapping (including cellophane) in which a Tobacco
Product is Sold or offered for Sale to a Consumer.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, cooperative association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other
legal entity.
   PROPRIETOR. A person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business.
An OWNERSHIP INTEREST shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent
(10%) or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other
than the sole interest of security for debt. A MANAGERIAL INTEREST shall be
deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over
the day-to-day operations of a business.
   SALE or SELL. Any transfer, exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, or
distribution for a commercial purpose, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever.
   SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY. The open display of Tobacco Products or Tobacco
Paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the
general public, without the assistance of the Tobacco Retailer or employee of
the Tobacco Retailer, and a direct person-to-person transfer between the
purchaser and the Tobacco Retailer or employee of the Tobacco Retailer. A
Vending Machine is a form of Self-Service Display.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA. Any item designed or marketed for the consumption,
use, or preparation of Tobacco Products. TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA includes
Electronic Smoking Device Paraphernalia.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. 
      1.   Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine
that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to a cigarette, cigar, little cigar, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus and Hookah Tobacco; and
      2.   Any Electronic Smoking Device, as defined in §
11.15.010, and any substances that may be aerosolized or vaporized by such
device, whether or not the substance contains nicotine.
      3.   Notwithstanding the definitions set forth in Subsections 1. and 2.
to the contrary, TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any component, part, or accessory of
Subsections 1. and 2., whether or not any of these contains tobacco or
nicotine, including but not limited to filters, rolling papers, blunt or hemp
wraps, hookahs, and pipes.
      4.   TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include drugs, devices, or combination
products authorized for sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration,
as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
   TOBACCO RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. A fixed location at which Tobacco, Tobacco
Products and/or Tobacco Paraphernalia are sold, offered for sale, exchanged or
offered for exchange for any form of consideration.
   TOBACCO RETAILER. Any Person who Sells, offers for Sale, or does or offers
to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, Tobacco Products or Tobacco
Paraphernalia.
   TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSE. A license issued by the Department authorizing a
proprietor to engage in Tobacco Retailing.
   TOBACCO RETAILING.The Selling, offering for Sale, or exchanging or offering
to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, Tobacco Products or Tobacco
Paraphernalia. Any person who distributes free or low cost samples of tobacco,
Tobacco Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia shall be deemed to be a Tobacco
Retailer under this Chapter. This definition is without regard to the quantity
of Tobacco Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia sold, offered for Sale, exchanged,
or offered for exchange.
   TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that holds a valid Tobacco Retailer
License and meets all of the following requirements: (i) primarily sells
tobacco products; (ii) generates more than seventy percent (70%) of its gross
revenues annually from the sale of Tobacco Products and Tobacco Paraphernalia;
(iii) prohibits any person that does not meet the minimum age requirement under
state law to purchase and possess tobacco, Tobacco Product or Tobacco
Paraphernalia on the premises at any time; and (iv) does not sell food or
beverages for consumption on the premises.
   VENDING MACHINE. A machine, appliance or other mechanical device operated by
currency, token, debit card, credit card, or any other form of payment, that is
designed or used for vending purposes, including but not limited to, machines
or devices that use remote control locking mechanisms.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2015-004 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2019-013 §
2)
§ 11.15.015 REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   A.   License Required. No person shall operate as a Tobacco Retailer or
engage in Tobacco Retailing without first obtaining and maintaining a valid
Tobacco Retailer License, pursuant to this Chapter, for each Tobacco Retail
Establishment.
   B.   Display of License. Each Tobacco Retailer license shall be
conspicuously displayed at all times in a publicly visible location within the
licensed Tobacco Retail Establishment.
   C.   Self-Service Displays Prohibited. Tobacco Retailing by means of a Self-
Service Display is prohibited.
   D.   Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products Prohibited.
      1.   It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any Tobacco Retailer or
any of the Tobacco Retailer’s agents or employees to Sell or offer for Sale, or
to possess with intent to Sell or offer for Sale, any Flavored Tobacco Product.
      2.   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a Tobacco Retailer in
possession of four or more Flavored Tobacco Products, including, but not
limited to, individual Flavored Tobacco Products, Packages of Flavored Tobacco
Products, or any combination thereof, possesses such Flavored Tobacco Products
with intent to Sell or offer for Sale.
      3.   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a Tobacco Product is a
Flavored Tobacco Product if a Tobacco Retailer, Manufacturer, or any employee
or agent of a Tobacco Retailer or Manufacturer has:
         a.   Made a public statement or claim that the Tobacco Product imparts
a Characterizing Flavor;
         b.   Used text and/or images on the Tobacco Product’s Labeling or
Packaging to explicitly or implicitly indicate that the Tobacco Product imparts
a Characterizing Flavor; or
         c.   Taken action directed to Consumers that would be reasonably
expected to cause Consumers to believe the Tobacco Product imparts a
Characterizing Flavor.
      4.   This §
11.15.015.D. shall not apply to a Hookah Lounge, as defined in §
11.15.010, that has a valid Tobacco Retailer License as of October 14, 2019 and
continues under the same ownership and control existing as of October 14, 2019.
         a.   A Hookah Lounge meeting these requirements shall be considered a
legal nonconforming use and subject to the nonconforming use provisions set
forth in Title 17 of this Code.
         b.   In the event a Hookah Lounge changes ownership or control, in any
manner, including any change to any interest in any type of business entity,
the exemption granted by this §
11.15.015.D. shall no longer apply.
      5.   Any Tobacco Store that has a valid Tobacco Retailer License as of
October 14, 2019 shall comply with the provisions of this §
11.15.015.D. on or before November 27, 2020.
      6.   Except as provided in §§
11.15.015.D.4. and
11.15.015.D.5., all other Tobacco Retailers shall comply with the provisions of
§
11.15.015.D. on or before May 25, 2020.
   E.   Positive Identification Required. No Tobacco Retailer shall Sell or
transfer tobacco, a Tobacco Product or Tobacco Paraphernalia, to another Person
who appears to be under the age of 27 years, without first examining the
identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the
minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco, Tobacco
Product or Tobacco Paraphernalia.
   F.   Restrictions on Persons Selling. No Tobacco Retailer shall permit any
person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the
purchase or possession of tobacco, Tobacco Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia,
to participate in the sale of tobacco, Tobacco Products or Tobacco
Paraphernalia.
   G.   False and Misleading Advertising Prohibited. A Tobacco Retailer without
a valid Tobacco Retail License or a Proprietor without a valid Tobacco Retailer
License, including, for example, a Person whose license has been suspended or
revoked:
      1.   Shall keep all tobacco,Tobacco Products and Tobacco Paraphernalia
out of public view. The public display of tobacco, Tobacco Products and Tobacco
Paraphernalia in violation of §
11.15.015.F.1. shall constitute Tobacco Retailing without a Tobacco Retail
License and a violation of §
11.15.015.A. of this Chapter.
      2.   Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco, Tobacco
Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of
such products from the Tobacco Retail Establishment, or that could lead a
reasonable Consumer to believe such products can be obtained at the Tobacco
Retail Establishment, without the Tobacco Retailer first obtaining and
maintaining a valid Tobacco Retailer License, pursuant to this Chapter, for
each Tobacco Retail Establishment at which the advertisement is displayed.
   H.   On-Site Sales. The Sale of tobacco, Tobacco Products or Tobacco
Paraphernalia from other than a Tobacco Retail Establishment, including but not
limited to, Tobacco Retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles, is
prohibited, and no Tobacco Retailer License shall be issued under this Chapter
for any such activity. All Sales of Tobacco Products and Tobacco Paraphernalia
to Consumers shall be conducted in-person at a Tobacco Retail Establishment. It
shall be a violation of §
11.15.015.H. for any Tobacco Retailer or any of the Tobacco Retailer’s agents
or employees to Deliver Tobacco Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia to any Person
that intends to Deliver the Tobacco Product or Tobacco Paraphernalia to a
Consumer in the City. For purposes of this Subsection, DELIVER means the
commercial transfer of Tobacco Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia to a Consumer
at a location not licensed pursuant to this Chapter.
   I.   Lawful Business Operation. In the course of Tobacco Retailing or in the
operation and maintenance of the Tobacco Retail Establishment, it shall be a
violation of this Chapter for a Tobacco Retailer Licensee, or any of the
licensee’s agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or federal law
applicable to Tobacco Products, Tobacco Paraphernalia, or Tobacco Retailing.
   J.   Application of State and Federal Law. Nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a Tobacco Retailer
License any status or right other than the right to act as a Tobacco Retailer
at the licensed Tobacco Retail Establishment in the City. Nothing in this
Chapter is intended to be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or
affect any other provision of applicable state or federal law.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2019-013 § 3)
§ 11.15.020 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   A.   All applications shall be completed on a form prepared and supplied by
the Department. The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury. The
following information shall be included, without limitation, on the
application:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the proprietor, including,
for non-corporate proprietors, the names of all principals. Corporate
proprietors shall include the name of the designated agent for service of
process.
      2.   A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to
receive all communications and notices (the “authorized address”) required by,
authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this Chapter. If an
authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to
consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified on the
application.
      3.   The business name, address and telephone number of the tobacco
retail establishment for which the application is submitted.
      4.   Proof that the tobacco retail establishment for which the
application is submitted has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer license
by the California Board of Equalization.
      5.   Whether any other licenses have been issued to the proprietor for
tobacco retail sales within the city, and, if so, the name and address of each
of the tobacco retail establishments for which these licenses have been issued.
      6.   Whether or not any proprietor or any agent or employee of the
proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this
Chapter, and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the
previous five (5) years.
      7.   A statement by the proprietor, under penalty of perjury, that the
contents of the application are true and correct.
      8.   Such other information as the Department deems necessary for the
administration or enforcement of this Chapter, as specified on the application
form required by this section.
   B.   For proprietors with multiple tobacco retail establishments within the
City, a separate application is required for each proposed tobacco retail
establishment.
   C.   Any change to the information required to be submitted in order to
apply for a tobacco retailer license shall be provided to the Department within
ten (10) business days of such change in information.
   D.   The proprietor shall be required to disclose any violations of the
state tobacco licensing laws at any tobacco retail establishment within the
five (5) years prior to the application for which the proprietor's state
tobacco retailer's license was either suspended or revoked.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.15.025 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a Tobacco Retailer License and the procedures for the
processing and collection of such fee shall be established by resolution of the
City Council.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.15.030 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, and except where a tobacco
retailer establishment would not otherwise be permitted under local, state or
federal laws, a license shall be issued upon receipt of a complete application
in conformity with all requirements set forth in §
11.15.020, and the payment of the required license fee.
   B.   A tobacco retailer license shall not be issued where:
      1.   Suspension or revocation proceedings are pending before any local,
state or federal agency for violations of local, state or federal tobacco
control laws.
      2.   The proprietor or any person employed by the proprietor has been
convicted of any violation of any local, state or federal tobacco control law
within six (6) months prior to the date of application.
      3.   The proprietor's tobacco retailer license was revoked for the same
tobacco retail establishment within the five (5) years preceding the date of
the application.
      4.   The proprietor has not obtained a valid state tobacco retailer
license from the California Board of Equalization.
      5.   The proprietor does not have a valid City business tax certificate
or is delinquent on the payment of business tax, late payment penalties or
other associated fees.
      6.   The information presented on the application is incomplete,
inaccurate or false.
      7.   The application seeks a tobacco retailer license for a proprietor to
whom this Chapter prohibits a license to be issued.
   C.   A tobacco retailer license is valid only for the tobacco retail
establishment for which it has been issued and may not be transferred from one
(1) person to another, or from one (1) tobacco retail establishment to another.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.15.035 LICENSE RENEWAL AND EXPIRATION.
   A.   A tobacco retailer license will be valid through the last day of
February of every year, and if not renewed, will expire.
   B.   If any material information required for issuance of a tobacco retailer
license has changed since the original license was issued, the proprietor shall
be ineligible for a license renewal, but must apply for a new tobacco retailer
license in accordance with the application procedures set forth in §
11.15.020 of this Chapter.
   C.   A tobacco retailer license that is not timely renewed shall expire at
the end of its term. To reinstate a license that has expired or to renew a
license not timely received pursuant to this Chapter, the proprietor must
follow the application procedures set forth in §
11.15.020 of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.15.040 COMPLIANCE MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be monitored by the
Finance Department, Police Department and/or Enforcement Services Division,
including any authorized designee of such departments and division, and/or by
any other person or persons so designated by the City Manager.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.15.045 VIOLATIONS UNLAWFUL; PENALTIES.
   A.   A violation of any provision of this Chapter is unlawful.
   B.   The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   C.   A violation of any provision of this Chapter is subject to a civil
action brought by the City Attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than
one hundred dollars ($100) and not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) per
violation.
   D.   A violation of any provision of this Chapter may, at the discretion of
the City Attorney, be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor.
   E.   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish the penalties for a
violation of this Chapter, but in no event shall such penalties exceed the
maximum penalties permitted under state law.
   F.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any
provision of this Chapter shall also constitute a violation of this Chapter.
   G.   In addition to the criminal penalties attached to violations of this
Chapter, any violation of this Chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.15.050 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION; ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   A.   In addition to any criminal or other penalty authorized by this Code
and other applicable law, a tobacco retailer license may be suspended or
revoked by the City Manager or their designee, as set forth herein, based on
one or more of the following findings:
      1.   The tobacco retailer, or his or her agents or employees, has
violated any provision of this Chapter, or any other local, state or federal
tobacco-related law; or
      2.   The information contained in the application, including supplemental
information, ifany, is found to be false or misleading in any material respect;
or
      3.   The tobacco retailer license was issued in error, or on the basis of
false or misleading information supplied by the proprietor; or
      4.   The tobacco retailer license fee is unpaid; or
      5.   The tobacco retailer license has been transferred in violation of
this Chapter.
   B.   Upon a finding of a first license violation, the tobacco retailer
license shall be suspended for thirty (30) days; upon a finding of a second
license violation within five (5) years of the first violation, the tobacco
retailer license shall be suspended for ninety (90) days; and upon a finding of
a third license violation within five (5) years of the first violation, the
tobacco retailer license shall be revoked.
   C.   In addition to any criminal or other penalty authorized by this Code
and other applicable law, an administrative fine may be imposed on a tobacco
retailer for a violation of any provision of this Chapter, in accordance with
the procedures set forth in §§
11.01.600 et seq. of this Code.
   D.   The procedure used for appealing a revocation or suspension shall be in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this Code.
   E.   A tobacco retailer, whose license has been revoked, may not apply for a
new tobacco retailer license for a period of five (5) years after the effective
date of the revocation.
   F.   During any period of license suspension or revocation, the tobacco
retailer must remove from public view all tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
paraphernalia, and tobacco-related advertising.
(Ord. No. 2009-006 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 11.16: PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG REGULATIONS
Section
   
11.16.005   Definitions
   
11.16.010   Plastic carryout bags prohibited
   
11.16.015   Permitted bags
   
11.16.020   Regulation of recyclable paper carryout bags
   
11.16.025    Use of reusable bags
   
11.16.030    Exempt customers
   
11.16.035    Operative date
   
11.16.040   Enforcement and violation--penalty
   
11.16.045   No conflict with federal or state law
§ 11.16.005 DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions apply to this Chapter:
   CUSTOMER.  Any person purchasing goods from a store.
   OPERATOR.  The person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the
operation of a store, which may include, but is not limited to, the owner of
the store.
   PERSON.  Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other
organization or group however organized.
   PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG.  Any bag made predominantly of plastic derived from
either petroleum or a biologically-based source, such as corn or other plant
sources, which is provided to a customer at the point of sale. PLASTIC CARRYOUT
BAG includes compostable and biodegradable bags but does not include reusable
bags, produce bags, or product bags.
   POSTCONSUMER RECYCLED MATERIAL.  A material that would otherwise be destined
for solid waste disposal, having completed its intended end use and product
life cycle. POSTCONSUMER RECYCLED MATERIAL does not include materials and by-
products generated from, and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing
and fabrication process.
   PRODUCE BAG or PRODUCT BAG.  Any bag without handles used exclusively to
carry produce, meats, or other food items to the point of sale inside a store
or to prevent such food items from coming into direct contact with other
purchased items.
   RECYCLABLE.  Material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using
available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered
form in the manufacture of a new product. “Recycling” does not include burning,
incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste.
   RECYCLABLE PAPER CARRYOUT BAG.  A paper bag that meets all of the following
requirements: (1) contains no old growth fiber, (2) is one hundred percent
(100%) recyclable overall and contains a minimum of forty percent (40%) post-
consumer recycled material; (3) is capable of composting, consistent with the
timeline and specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials
(ASTM) Standard D6400; (4) is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in
the City; (5) has printed on the bag the name of the manufacturer, the location
(country) where the bag was manufactured, and the percentage of postconsumer
recycled material used; and (6) displays the word “Recyclable” in a highly
visible manner on the outside of the bag.
   REUSABLE BAG.  A bag with handles that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements:
(1) has a minimum lifetime of 125 uses, which for purposes of this subsection,
means the capability of carrying a minimum of 22 pounds 125 times over a
distance of at least 175 feet; (2) has a minimum volume of 15 liters; (3) is
machine washable or is made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected;
(4) does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts;
(5) has printed on the bag, or on a tag that is permanently affixed to the bag,
the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was
manufactured, a statement that the bag does not contain lead, cadmium, or any
other heavy metal in toxic amounts, and the percentage of postconsumer recycled
material used, if any; and (6) if made of plastic, is a minimum of at least
2.25 mils thick.
   STORE.  Any of the following retail establishments located within the
incorporated area of Culver City:
      1.    A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of
two million dollars ($2,000,000), or more, that sells a line of dry grocery,
canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items;
      2.   A store of at least 10,000 square feet of retail space that
generates sales or use tax pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales
and Use Tax Law (Part 1.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code) and that has a pharmacy licensed pursuant to Chapter
9 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions
Code; or
      3.   A drug store, pharmacy, supermarket, grocery store, convenience food
store, foodmart, or other entity engaged in the retail sale of a limited line
of goods that includes milk, bread, soda, and snack foods, including those
stores with a Type 20 or 21 license issued by the Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1)
§ 11.16.010 PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAGS PROHIBITED.
   A.   No store shall provide to any customer a plastic carryout bag.
   B.    This prohibition applies to bags provided for the purpose of carrying
away goods from the point of sale and does not apply to produce bags or product
bags.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1) Penalty, see §
11.16.040
§ 11.16.015 PERMITTED BAGS.
   All stores shall provide or make available to a customer only recyclable
paper carryout bags or reusable bags for the purpose of carrying away goods or
other materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this Chapter.
Nothing in this Chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type that
they bring to the store themselves or from carrying away goods that are not
placed in a bag, in lieu of using bags provided by the store.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1)
§ 11.16.020 REGULATION OF RECYCLABLE PAPER CARRYOUT BAGS.
   A.   Any store that provides a recyclable paper carryout bag to a customer
must charge the customer at least 10 cents ($0.10) for each bag provided,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
   B.    The City Council may, by resolution, change the minimum charge for a
recyclable paper carryout bag, so long as the minimum charge does not go below
the charge set forth in Subsection A.
   C.   No store shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer any portion of
the minimum charge required in Subsection A, except as otherwise provided in
this Chapter.
   D.   All stores must post signage clearly indicating the per bag charge for
recyclable paper carryout bags.
   E.   All stores must indicate on the customer receipt the number of
recyclable paper carryout bags provided and the total amount charged for the
bags.
   F.   All monies collected by a store under this Chapter will be retained by
the store and may be used only for any of the following purposes: (1) costs
associated with complying with the requirements of this Chapter, (2) actual
costs of providing recyclable paper carryout bags, or (3) costs associated with
a store’s educational materials or education campaign encouraging the use of
reusable bags, if any.
   G.   All stores must keep records of the total number of recyclable paper
carryout bags provided, the total amount of monies collected for providing
recyclable paper carryout bags, and a summary of any efforts a store has
undertaken to promote the use of reusable bags by customers in the prior
calendar year. Such records must be made available for the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee to review at any time.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1)
§ 11.16.025 USE OF REUSABLE BAGS.
   A.   All stores must provide reusable bags to customers, either for sale or
at no charge.
   B.   Each store is strongly encouraged to educate its staff to promote
reusable bags and to post signs encouraging customers to use reusable bags.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1)
§ 11.16.030 EXEMPT CUSTOMERS.
   All stores must provide at the point of sale, free of charge, either
reusable bags or recyclable paper carryout bags or both, at the store’s option,
to any customer participating either in the California Special Supplemental
Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing
with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Health and
Safety Code or in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1)
§ 11.16.035 OPERATIVE DATE.
   This Chapter shall become operative six (6) months after its effective date
for stores defined in divisions (1) and (2) under the definition of “store” in
§
11.16.010. For stores defined in division (3) under the definition of “store”
in §
11.16.010, this Chapter shall become operative twelve (12) months after its
effective date.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1)
§ 11.16.040 ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATION--PENALTY.
   A.   The Director of Public Works has primary responsibility for enforcement
of this Chapter. The Director of Public Works is authorized to promulgate
regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to
enforce this Chapter, including, but not limited to, investigating violations,
issuing fines and entering the premises of any store during business hours.
   B.   If the Director of Public Works determines that a violation of this
Chapter has occurred, he/she will issue a written warning notice to the
operator of a store that a violation has occurred and the potential penalties
that will apply for future violations.
   C.   Any store that violates or fails to comply with any of the requirements
of this Chapter after a written warning notice has been issued for that
violation shall be guilty of an infraction.
   D.   If a store has subsequent violations of this Chapter that are similar
in kind to the violation addressed in a written warning notice, the following
penalties will be imposed and shall be payable by the operator of the store:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
violation after the written warning notice is given;
      2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second
violation after the written warning notice is given; or
      3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third
and any subsequent violations after the written warning notice is given.
   E.   A fine shall be imposed for each day a violation occurs or is allowed
to continue.
   F.   Any store operator who receives a written warning notice or fine may
request an administrative review of the accuracy of the determination or the
propriety of any fine issued, by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Director of Public Works no later than 30 days after receipt of a written
warning notice or fine, as applicable. The notice of appeal must include all
facts supporting the appeal and any statements and evidence, including copies
of all written documentation and a list of any witnesses, that the appellant
wishes to be considered in connection with the appeal. The appeal will be heard
by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works will conduct a
hearing concerning the appeal within 45 days from the date that the notice of
appeal is filed, or on a later date if agreed upon by the appellant and the
Director of Public Works, and will give the appellant 10 days prior written
notice of the date of the hearing. The Director of Public Works may sustain,
rescind, or modify the written warning notice or fine, as applicable, by
written decision. The Director of Public Works will have the power to waive any
portion of the fine in a manner consistent with the decision. The decision of
the Director of Public Works is final and effective on the date of service of
the written decision, is not subject to further administrative review, and
constitutes the final administrative decision.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1)
§ 11.16.045 NO CONFLICT WITH FEDERAL OR STATE LAW.
   Nothing in this Chapter is intended to create any requirement, power or duty
that is in conflict with any federal or state law.
(Ord. No. 2013-006 § 1)
CHAPTER 11.17: COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
11.17.005   Purpose and intent
   
11.17.010   Legal authority
   
11.17.015   Commercial cannabis cultivation and commercial cannabis activities
prohibited unless specifically authorized by this chapter
   
11.17.020   Compliance with laws
   
11.17.025   Definitions
Permit Procedures; Administration
   
11.17.100   Commercial cannabis business permit required to engage in
commercial cannabis business
   
11.17.105   Maximum number and type of authorized commercial cannabis
businesses permitted
   
11.17.110   Initial application procedure
   
11.17.115   Permittee selection process
   
11.17.120   Expiration of commercial cannabis business permits
   
11.17.125   Revocation of permits
   
11.17.130   Renewal applications
   
11.17.135   Effect of state license suspension, revocation, or termination
   
11.17.140   Appeals
   
11.17.145   Commercial cannabis business permit—Nonassignable and
nontransferable
   
11.17.150   Change in location of commercial cannabis business
   
11.17.155   Changes in ownership of commercial cannabis business
   
11.17.160   Changes in information on application; alterations to approved
facility; amendments to permit
   
11.17.165   City business tax certificate
   
11.17.170   Permits and inspections prior to commencing operations
   
11.17.175   Limitations on city’s liability
   
11.17.180   Fees; debt to the city
   
11.17.185   Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties
Operating Requirements
   
11.17.200   Operating requirements applicable to all commercial cannabis
businesses
   
11.17.205   Operating requirements for storefront retail facilities
   
11.17.210   Operating requirements for delivery—Only retailers
   
11.17.215   Operating requirements for cultivation facilities
   
11.17.220   Operating requirements for cannabis manufacturing businesses
   
11.17.225   Operating requirements for cannabis distribution
   
11.17.230   Operating requirements for cannabis testing
   
11.17.235   Records and recordkeeping
   
11.17.240   Security measures
   
11.17.245   Restriction on alcohol and tobacco sales
   
11.17.250   Community relations
Enforcement and Penalties
   
11.17.300   Responsibility for violations
   
11.17.305   Inspections
   
11.17.310   Violations and penalties
   
11.17.315   Effect on other ordinances
Adoption by Reference of Part 7 of Chapter 8.04, “Commercial Cannabis
Activities,”
and Chapter 11.37, “Cannabis Facilities,” of the Los Angeles County Code
   
11.17.400   Adoption by reference of Los Angeles County Cannabis Public Health
Ordinance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11.17.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to implement the provisions of
the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA") to
accommodate the needs of medically-ill persons and provide access to cannabis
for medicinal purposes as recommended by their health care provider(s), and to
provide access to adult-use of cannabis for persons over the age of 21 as
authorized by the Control, Tax & Regulate the Adult Use Cannabis Act ("AUMA" or
"Proposition 64" passed by California voters in 2016), while imposing
reasonable regulations on the use of land to protect the City's residents,
neighborhoods, and businesses from disproportionately negative impacts. As
such, it is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to regulate the cultivation,
processing, manufacturing, testing, sale, delivery, distribution and
transportation of medicinal and adult-use cannabis and cannabis products in a
responsible manner to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of Culver City and to enforce rules and regulations consistent with state law.
It is the further purpose and intent of this Chapter to require all commercial
cannabis businesses to obtain and renew annually a permit to operate within
Culver City. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to authorize the possession,
use, or provision of cannabis for purposes that violate state law. It is
neither the intent nor the effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the
illegal use or consumption of cannabis under federal, state or local law. The
provisions of this Chapter are in addition to any other permits, licenses and
approvals which may be required to conduct business in the City, and are in
addition to any permits, licenses and approvals required under state, county,
or other law.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.010 LEGAL AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to Sections 5 and 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution,
the provisions of MAUCRSA, any subsequent state legislation and/or regulations
regarding same, the City of Culver City is authorized to adopt ordinances that
establish standards, requirements and regulations for the licensing and
permitting of commercial medicinal and adult-use cannabis activity. Any
standards, requirements, and regulations regarding health and safety, security,
and worker protections established by the State of California, or any of its
departments or divisions, shall be the minimum standards applicable in the City
of Culver City to all commercial cannabis activity.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.015 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION AND COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES
PROHIBITED UNLESS SPECIFICALLY AUTHORIZED BY THIS CHAPTER.
   Except as specifically authorized in this Chapter, the commercial
cultivation, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
sale, delivery, distribution or transportation (other than as provided under
California Business & Professions Code § 26090(e)), of cannabis or cannabis
products is expressly prohibited in the City of Culver City.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.020 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   A.   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions
that violate state law or local law with respect to the operation of a
commercial cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of the permittees
and responsible persons of a commercial cannabis business to ensure that a
commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant
with all applicable state and local laws, including for as long as applicable
all state cannabis laws, any subsequently enacted state law or regulatory,
licensing, or certification standards or requirements, and any specific,
additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as
conditions of approval of the Commercial Cannabis Business Permit.
   B.   All commercial cannabis businesses authorized by this Chapter shall
comply with the applicable provisions of the Los Angeles County Public Health
Code.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018–007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.025 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as set forth herein. Any reference to California statutes
includes any regulations promulgated thereunder, and is deemed to include any
successor or amended version of the referenced statute or regulatory provision.
   A-LICENSE. A license issued by the State of California under MAUCRSA for
cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults 21 years of age and
over and who do not possess a physician's recommendation.
   APPLICANT. Applicant shall include any person applying for a Commercial
Cannabis Business Permit under this Chapter, including any officer, director,
partner, or other duly authorized representative applying on behalf of an
entity.
   BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE. The certificate issued by the City's Revenue
Division after payment of the business tax fee as set forth in
Chapter 11.01 of the City of Culver City Municipal Code.
   CANNABIS. Except as specified herein, all parts of the Cannabis sativa
Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis"
does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this
Chapter, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by § 11018.5 of
the California Health and Safety Code.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. Cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate
one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency.
Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for
purposes of this Chapter. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as
defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code, or drug, as
defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant
material has been transformed into a concentrate, including but not limited to
concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or
concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
   CANOPY. All areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, inclusive of
all vertical planes, whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site.
   CAREGIVER OR PRIMARY CAREGIVER. Has the same meaning as that term is defined
in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of the Culver City Police Department, including
his or her designee.
   CITY. The City of Culver City, California.
   CITY MANAGER. City Manager of the City of Culver City, including his or her
designee.
   CODE. The Culver City Municipal Code.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY. Activities that include the cultivation,
possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing,
packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis
products as provided for in MAUCRSA and its related or successor laws and
regulations.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any business or operation which engages in
medicinal or adult-use commercial cannabis activity.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT. The regulatory permit issued by the
City pursuant to this Chapter, to a commercial cannabis business, which is
required before any commercial cannabis activity may be conducted in the City.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Director of the City's Community
Development Department, including his or her designee.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
   CUSTOMER. A natural person twenty-one (21) years of age or older; or, a
natural person eighteen (18) years of age or older who possesses a physician's
recommendation, or a primary caregiver.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Day care center has the same meaning as in § 1596.76 of the
California Health and Safety Code.
   DELIVERY. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a
customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform.
   DISPENSING. Any activity involving the retail sale of cannabis or cannabis
products from a retailer.
   DISTRIBUTION. The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis
products between licensees.
   DISTRIBUTOR. A person holding a valid Commercial Cannabis Business Permit
for distribution issued by the City of Culver City, and, a valid state license
for distribution.
   EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCT. Cannabis product that is intended to be used, in
whole or in part, for human consumption, and is not considered food. Edible
cannabis product has the same meaning as § 26001 of the California Business and
Professions Code.
   EMPLOYEE. Each person who renders any service, with or without compensation,
for the owner, permittee, or agent of either an owner or permittee of a
commercial cannabis business. For purposes of this Chapter, the term employee
shall include part-time, full-time, temporary, or permanent employees.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Culver City Fire Department, including his or
her designee.
   LICENSE OR STATE LICENSE. A permit or license issued by the State of
California, or one of its departments or divisions, under MAUCRSA and any
subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same, to engage in
commercial cannabis activity.
   LICENSEE. Any person holding a license issued by the State of California to
conduct commercial cannabis business activities.
   LIVE PLANTS. Living cannabis flowers and plants including seeds, immature
plants, and vegetative stage plants.
   MANAGER. Any person(s) designated by the commercial cannabis business to act
as the representative or agent of the commercial cannabis business in managing
day-to-day operations with corresponding liabilities and responsibilities, and/
or the individual in apparent charge of the premises where the commercial
cannabis business is located. Evidence of management includes, but is not
limited to, evidence that the individual has the power to direct, supervise, or
hire and dismiss Employees, controls hours of operations, creates policy rules,
or purchases supplies.
   M-LICENSE. A license issued by the state of California under MAUCRSA for
commercial cannabis activity involving medicinal cannabis.
   MANUFACTURE. To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or
prepare a cannabis product.
   MANUFACTURED CANNABIS. Raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, extraction or
other manufactured product intended for internal consumption through inhalation
or oral ingestion or for topical application.
   MANUFACTURER. A licensee that conducts the production, preparation,
propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or
indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed
location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or
container. A manufacturer may also be a person that infuses cannabis in its
products but does not perform its own extraction.
   MEDICINAL CANNABIS OR MEDICINAL CANNABIS PRODUCT. Cannabis or a cannabis
product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at § 11362.5 of the
California Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in
California who possesses a physician's recommendation.
   OWNER. Any of the following:
      (1)   An entity or individual with an aggregate ownership interest of ten
percent (10%) or more in the applicant or permittee, whether a partner,
shareholder, member, or the like, unless the interest is solely a security,
lien, or encumbrance.
      (2)   The chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity.
      (3)   A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit.
   PARK AND PLAYGROUND. Public parks, play lots, playgrounds, and athletic
fields for non-commercial or private neighborhood or community use, including
tennis courts. Does not include parkways, golf courses, country clubs, private
sport courts or play structures accessory to a single-family dwelling.
   PATIENT OR QUALIFIED PATIENT. The same definition as §§ 11362.7 et seq. of
the California Health and Safety Code, as it may be amended, and which means a
person who is entitled to the protections of § 11362.5 of the California Health
& Safety Code.
   PERMIT ADMINISTRATOR. The Chief Financial Officer of the City, or his/her
designee.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a current and valid City-issued Commercial
Cannabis Business Permit has been issued.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and
the plural as well as the singular.
   PREMISES. The designated structure or structures and land specified in the
application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the
applicant or permittee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is
conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only be occupied
by one permittee.
   PURCHASER. The customer who is engaged in a transaction with a permittee for
purposes of obtaining cannabis or cannabis products.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. All owners and operators of a commercial cannabis
business, including the permittee and all officers, directors, managers, or
partners, and all persons with authority, including apparent authority, over
the premises of the commercial cannabis business.
   RETAILER-STOREFRONT. A storefront retailer is a commercial cannabis business
facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis
or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination,
for retail sale to customers at an on-site fixed location, including an
establishment that also offers delivery of cannabis and cannabis products as
part of a retail sale, in addition to on-site sales, and where the permittee
holds a valid Commercial Cannabis Business Permit authorizing the operation of
a retailer, and a valid state license as required by state law to operate a
retailer.
   RETAILER-DELIVERY ONLY. A delivery only retailer is a commercial cannabis
business facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of
cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any
combination, for retail sale to customers, where the premises are closed to the
public and sales are conducted exclusively by delivery, where a vehicle is used
to convey the cannabis or cannabis products to the customer from a fixed
location, and where the permittee holds a valid Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit authorizing the operation of a retailer, and a valid state license as
required by state law to operate a retailer.
   SELL, SALE, AND TO SELL. Includes any transaction whereby, for any
consideration, title to cannabis or cannabis products are transferred from one
person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products
pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or
receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or
cannabis products by a licensee to the licensee from whom the cannabis or
cannabis product was purchased.
   STATE CANNABIS LAWS. Laws of the State of California, which include
California Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.1 through 11362.45; California
Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996); California
Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program);
California Health and Safety Code §§ 26000 through 26211 (Medicinal and Adult-
Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA")); California Health and
Safety Code §§ 26220 through 26231.2; the California Attorney General's
Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical
Use issued in August, 2008, as such guidelines may be revised from time to time
by action of the Attorney General; California Labor Code § 147.5; California
Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 31020 and 34010 through 34021.5; California Fish
and Game Code § 12029; California Water Code § 13276; all state regulations
adopted pursuant to MAUCRSA; and all other applicable laws of the state of
California.
   TESTING LABORATORY. A laboratory, facility, or entity in the state that
offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of
the following:
      (1)   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all
other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state.
      (2)   Licensed by the State of California.
   TOPICAL CANNABIS. A product intended for external application and/or
absorption through the skin. A topical cannabis product is not considered a
drug as defined by § 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   YOUTH CENTER. The same meaning as in § 11353.1 of the California Health and
Safety Code.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
PERMIT PROCEDURES; ADMINISTRATION
§ 11.17.100 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS.
   No person may engage in any commercial cannabis business or in any
commercial cannabis activity within the City of Culver City including
cultivation, manufacturing, processing, laboratory testing, transporting,
dispensing, distribution, or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product unless the
person:
   A.   Has a valid Commercial Cannabis Business Permit;
   B.   Has a valid State of California Seller's Permit; and
   C.   Is currently in compliance with all applicable state and local laws and
regulations pertaining to the commercial cannabis business and the commercial
cannabis activities, including the duty to obtain any required state licenses.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.105 MAXIMUM NUMBER AND TYPE OF AUTHORIZED COMMERCIAL CANNABIS
BUSINESSES PERMITTED.
   A.   The maximum number of each type of commercial cannabis business that
shall be permitted to operate in the City shall be established by resolution of
the City Council.
   B.   This section is only intended to create a maximum number of commercial
cannabis businesses that may be issued Commercial Cannabis Business Permits to
operate in the City under each category of commercial cannabis business.
Nothing in this Chapter creates a mandate that the City must issue all or any
of the Commercial Cannabis Business Permits, if it is determined that it is in
the best interest of the City to issue a lesser number than the maximum number
of Commercial Cannabis Business Permits, or not issue any Commercial Cannabis
Business Permits at all; or if the applicants do not meet the standards which
are established in the application requirements or further amendments thereto.
   C.   Each year following the initial award of permits, if any, or at any
time in the City Council's discretion, the City Council may reassess the number
of Commercial Cannabis Business Permits which are authorized for issuance. The
City Council, in its discretion, may determine by resolution that the number of
Commercial Cannabis Business Permits should remain the same, be reduced, or be
increased.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.110 INITIAL APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   A.   The City Council shall adopt by resolution the procedures to govern the
application process for issuance of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit. The
resolution shall authorize the City Manager to prepare the necessary forms, and
adopt any necessary rules, regulations and processes concerning the
applications and the application process.
   B.   Any person seeking to obtain a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit
shall submit a written application to the City, signed under penalty of
perjury, using the form approved by the City for that purpose. The application
shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee established by
resolution of the City Council, to defray the costs incurred by the City in the
application process set forth in this Chapter.
   C.   As part of the application process, the Applicant shall be required to
obtain all required land use approvals from the City's Community Development
Department, including a certification from the Community Development Director
certifying that the business is a permitted use in the zone where it is
located, and the proposed premises meets all the requirements of Title 17 of
this Code.
   D.   Any person intending to open and to operate a commercial cannabis
business shall provide sufficient evidence of the legal right to occupy and to
use the proposed premises. In the event the proposed premises will be leased
from another person, the applicant shall be required to provide a signed and
notarized statement from the owner of the property, in a form approved by the
City, acknowledging that the property owner has read this Chapter and consents
to the operation of the commercial cannabis business on the owner's property.
   E.   Background check. Pursuant to §§ 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11) of the
California Penal Code, which authorizes city authorities to access state and
local summary criminal history information for employment, licensing, or
certification purposes, and authorizes access to federal level criminal history
information by transmitting fingerprint images and related information to the
Department of Justice to be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
every applicant, owner, manager and responsible person of the commercial
cannabis business must submit fingerprints and other information deemed
necessary by the Chief of Police for a background check by the Culver City
Police Department. No applicant shall be issued a Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit unless the applicant, owner, manager and responsible person have first
cleared the background check, as determined by the Chief of Police, as required
by this section. A fee for the cost of the background investigation, which
shall be the actual cost to the City to conduct the background investigation as
it deems necessary and appropriate, shall be paid at the time the application
for a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit is submitted.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.115 PERMITTEE SELECTION PROCESS.
   A.   Storefront retail commercial cannabis businesses.
      1.   Applicants shall be selected through a multi-stage screening process
to be adopted by City Council resolution. No applicant is guaranteed any
particular result in the application process.
      2.   One stage of the process shall include a public meeting where the
public may comment on the proposed storefront retail commercial cannabis
business applicants. At least ten (10) days prior to the public meeting, the
proposed premises will be posted, and notice of the public meeting will be
delivered to all property owners and occupants located within two thousand five
hundred (2,500) feet of the proposed premises of each of the applicants that
will be present at the meeting.
      3.   Each commercial cannabis storefront retail business shall comply
with the requirements of §17.220.015 of this Code to have a valid Conditional
Use Permit in place prior to operation.
      4.   City Council shall select the applicants to be awarded a storefront
retail Commercial Cannabis Business Permit at a public City Council meeting.
The City Council's decision as to those applicants that are issued a Commercial
Cannabis Business Permit shall be final.
      5.   No applicant shall be selected if the proposed location is not in
compliance with the following distancing requirements:
         a.   No storefront retailer shall be located within a six hundred
(600)-foot radius of a school providing instruction in kindergarten or any
grades one (1) through twelve (12), day care center, youth center, or park or
playground (“sensitive receptor”), that is in existence at the time the City
receives a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit application from the proposed
storefront retailer. One or more of the following factors may be considered by
the City to determine if the sensitive receptor was in existence at the time of
the City’s receipt of the commercial cannabis business permit application:
            (1)   The sensitive receptor is open and operating;
            (2)   The sensitive receptor has a Culver City Business Tax
Certificate for the specific location and sensitive use;
            (3)   The sensitive receptor has submitted a business tax
certificate application to the City for the specific location and sensitive use
and is undergoing construction or other tenant improvements at the specific
location in question; and
            (4)   Other factors that may indicate a sensitive receptor was in
existence as determined by the City Manager.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an application for a storefront retail
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit may be deemed in compliance with this
Section 11.17.115.A.5.a. if evidence is submitted, to the satisfaction of the
City Manager, that the sensitive receptor will cease operation at the location
prior to the issuance of a building permit for the storefront retail location.
The distance specified in this subsection 5.a. shall be the horizontal distance
measured in a straight line from the property line of the sensitive receptor to
the closest property line of the lot on which the cannabis business is to be
located without regard to intervening structures.
         b.   No storefront retailer shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any other storefront retailer within the City. The distance
specified in this subsection 5.b shall be the horizontal distance measured in a
straight line from the property line of the lot on which one storefront
retailer is located to the closest property line of the lot on which the second
storefront retailer is to be located without regard to intervening structures.
         c.   No storefront retailer shall be located on a corner parcel where
the structure on the premises is within forty- five (45) feet of a residential
zoning district. The distance specified in this subsection 5.c shall be the
horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the exterior wall of the
structure on the premises, to the closest property line of the nearest property
in a residential zoning district within the City.
   B.   All other Commercial Cannabis Business Permits. Commercial Cannabis
Business Permits for manufacturing, cultivation, distribution, testing and
delivery-only retailers shall be issued by the Permit Administrator. City
Council shall adopt by resolution a selection process for the issuance of these
categories of Commercial Cannabis Business Permits.
   C.   Requirements applicable to all Commercial Cannabis Business.
      1.   All applicants shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age or
older.
      2.   Issuance of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit does not create a
land use entitlement. No Commercial Cannabis Business Permit shall be issued
and no applicant selected for issuance of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit
may begin operations, until the applicant has demonstrated compliance with all
the state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the
requirements of this Code and of the Commercial Cannabis Business Permit.
      3.   Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, the City
reserves the right to reject any or all applications if it determines it would
be in the best interest of the City, taking into account the public health,
safety and welfare. Applications may also be rejected for the following
reasons:
         a.   The application is received after the designated time and date in
which the City will receive applications.
         b.   The applicant has failed to submit a complete application, or the
application is not organized in the required format.
         c.   The applicant has failed to pay the application fee as required
by this Chapter and by City Council resolution.
         d.   The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement or omission of fact in the application or in the application process.
         e.   The application contains excess or extraneous material not called
for in the application package.
         f.   The applicant, an owner, or manager has been sanctioned or fined
for, enjoined from, operating a cannabis dispensary or retailer in the state
without the necessary permits and approvals from the applicable state and/or
local jurisdictions.
      4.   Conviction of the applicant, or an owner, manager, or responsible
person, including a plea of guilty or no contest, to any the following offenses
shall be grounds for denial of a Commercial Cannabis Business application:
         a.   A violent felony, as specified in § 667.5(c) of the California
Penal Code.
         b.   A serious felony, as specified in § 1192.7(c) of the California
Penal Code Section.
         c.   A felony involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement.
         d.   A felony for hiring, employing, or using a minor in transporting,
carrying, selling, giving away, preparing for sale, or peddling, any controlled
substance; or selling, offering to sell, furnishing, offering to furnish,
administering, or giving any controlled substance to a minor.
         e.   A felony for drug trafficking with enhancements pursuant to §§
11370.4 or 11379.8 of the California Health and Safety Code.
         f.   A felony involving the illegal possession for sale, sale,
manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance.
      5.   An applicant shall have no right to a Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit until a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit is actually issued, and then
only for the duration of the Commercial Cannabis Business Permit's term. Each
Applicant assumes the risk that, at any time prior to the issuance of a
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit, the City Council may terminate or delay
the issuance of permits as established by this Chapter.
      6.   Prior to operating a commercial cannabis business, each person
awarded a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit shall be required to pay a permit
fee established by resolution of the City Council, to cover the costs of
administering this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-013 § 1)
§ 11.17.120 EXPIRATION OF COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMITS.
   Each Commercial Cannabis Business Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter
shall expire twelve (12) months after the date of its issuance. Commercial
cannabis business permits may be renewed as provided in §
11.17.130.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.125 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   A.   Failure of a permittee to comply with any requirement imposed by the
provisions of this Code (or successor provision or provisions) including any
rule, regulation, condition or standard adopted pursuant to this Chapter, or
any term or condition imposed on the Commercial Cannabis Business Permit, or
any provision of state law, may be grounds for revocation of the permit.
   B.   Revocation of a state license issued under MAUCRSA shall be grounds for
immediate revocation of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit.
   C.   Any of the grounds for rejection or denial of a permit under §
11.17.115.
   D.   If the City Manager determines that a ground for revocation of a
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit for a storefront retail commercial cannabis
business exists, the City Manager shall give dated written notice of revocation
to the permittee. For all other categories of Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit, the Permit Administrator shall make the determination if grounds for
revocation exist, and give the dated written notice of revocation to the
permittee.
   E.   The permittee shall be served, either personally or by first class mail
addressed to the address listed on the application, with a written notice to
revoke a permit. This notice shall state the reasons for the action, the
effective date of the decision, the right of the permittee to appeal the
decision, and that the notice of revocation will be final if no written appeal
is timely submitted to, and received by, the City, pursuant to the provisions
in §
11.17.140 of this Chapter. The notice will be effective within fifteen (15)
calendar days from the date of service of the notice. If an appeal is timely
and properly filed in accordance with §
11.17.140, the effective date of the notice is stayed until a final decision on
the appeal is rendered.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.130 RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.
   A.   An application for renewal of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit
shall be filed with the Permit Administrator's office at least sixty (60)
calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current permit, on a form
designated by the City.
   B.   Any permittee submitting an application less than sixty (60) days
before the expiration of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit shall be
required to pay a late renewal application fee, as established by resolution of
the City Council. Any renewal application filed less than thirty (30) days
before the expiration of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit may be rejected
by the City on that basis alone.
   C.   The permittee shall include on the renewal application any information
that has changed since the filing of the initial application or prior year's
renewal application, as applicable.
   D.   The permittee shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by resolution of
the City Council to cover the costs of processing the renewal application,
together with any costs incurred by the City to administer the permit scheme
created under this Chapter.
   E.   An application for renewal of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit may
be denied if any of the following exists:
      1.   Any of the grounds for rejection or revocation of an application
under §§
11.17.115 or
11.17.125.
      2.   The Commercial Cannabis Business Permit is suspended or revoked at
the time of the application.
      3.   The commercial cannabis business has not been in regular and
continuous operation in the four months prior to the renewal application.
      4.   The permittee fails or is unable to renew its State of California
license.
      5.   The permittee has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement
or omission of fact in the renewal application.
   F.   The Permit Administrator is authorized to make all decisions concerning
the renewal of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit, except for renewal of a
storefront retail Commercial Cannabis Business Permit, which decisions shall be
made by the City Manager. When making the decision on a renewal application,
additional conditions to the renewal of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit
may be imposed, if it is determined to be necessary to ensure compliance with
state or local laws and regulations or to preserve the public health, safety or
welfare.
   G.   Permittees will be notified in writing of the decision to deny a
renewal application. Appeals from a denial of a renewal application shall be
handled pursuant to §
11.17.140.
   H.   If an application for renewal of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit
is denied, a person may file a new application pursuant to this Chapter no
sooner than one year from the date of the denial.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.135 EFFECT OF STATE LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR TERMINATION.
   A.   Suspension of a permittee's license issued by the State of California,
or by any of its departments or divisions, shall immediately suspend the
permittee's Commercial Cannabis Business Permit and permittee's ability to
operate a commercial cannabis business within the City, until the State of
California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or reissues
permittee's State license.
   B.   Should the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions,
revoke or terminate permittee's license of a commercial cannabis business, such
revocation or termination shall also immediately revoke or terminate
permittee's Commercial Cannabis Business Permit and permittee's ability to
operate a commercial cannabis business within the City of Culver City.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.140 APPEALS.
   A.   Appeals from any decision of the Permit Administrator pertaining to
Commercial Cannabis Business Permits for manufacturing, cultivation,
distribution, testing, and delivery-only retailers shall follow the process set
forth in §
11.07.100 of this Code.
   B.   Appeals from any decision of the City Manager pertaining to Storefront
Retail Commercial Cannabis Business Permits shall be conducted as follows:
      1.   A commercial cannabis storefront retail permittee may appeal any
decision of the City Manager, by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of
appeal within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of service of the notice
issued by the City Manager of his or her decision.
      2.   The notice of appeal shall be in writing and signed by the person
making the appeal ("appellant"), or his or her legal representative, and shall
contain the following:
         a.   Name, address, and telephone number of the appellant.
         b.   Statement that the person is appealing from a specified decision,
action, or a particular part thereof, made by the City Manager.
         c.   True and correct copy of the notice issued by the City Manager
for which the appellant is appealing.
         d.   Statement with specificity the reasons and grounds for making the
appeal, including, but not limited to, a statement of facts upon which the
appeal is based in sufficient detail to enable the City Council, or any
appointed hearing officer, to understand the nature of the controversy, the
basis of the appeal, and the relief requested.
         e.   All documents or other evidence pertinent to the appeal that the
appellant requests the City Council consider at the hearing.
      3.   Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a
waiver of the right to appeal the notice issued by the City Manager. In this
event, City Manager's notice of revocation, nonrenewal, suspension and/or other
action is final and binding.
      4.   In the event a written notice of appeal is timely filed, the
nonrenewal, suspension, revocation, or other action shall not become effective
until a final decision has been rendered and issued by the City Council or
appointed hearing officer. If no appeal is timely filed in the event of a
decision of nonrenewal, the Commercial Cannabis Business Permit shall expire at
the conclusion of the term of the permit. If no appeal is timely filed in the
event of a decision of suspension or revocation, the suspension or revocation
shall become effective upon the expiration of the period for filing a written
notice of appeal.
   C.   All appellants shall, subject to filing a timely written notice of
appeal, obtain review thereof before the City Council or appointed hearing
officer.
      1.   The administrative appeal shall be scheduled no later than sixty
(60) calendar days, and no sooner than twenty- one (21) calendar days, after
receipt of a timely filed notice of appeal. The appellant(s) listed on the
written notice of appeal shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and
location of the hearing at least ten (10) calendar days before the date of the
hearing ("notice of appeal hearing").
      2.   All requests by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted
to the City Clerk in writing no later than three business days before the date
scheduled for the hearing. The City Council may continue a hearing for good
cause or on its own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued
for more than thirty (30) calendar days without stipulation by all parties.
      3.   The City Council shall preside over the hearing on appeal, or in the
alternative, the City Council may appoint a hearing officer to conduct the
hearing if a quorum of the City Council is unavailable or unable to timely hear
the appeal.
      4.   At the date, time and location set forth in the notice of appeal
hearing, the City Council or an appointed hearing officer, shall hear and
consider the testimony of the appellant(s), City staff, and/or their witnesses,
as well as any documentary evidence properly submitted.
      5.   The following rules shall apply at the appeal hearing:
         a.   Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply. However, rules of privilege shall be applicable to the
extent they are permitted by law, and irrelevant, collateral, undue, and
repetitious testimony may be excluded.
         b.   The City bears the burden of proof to establish the grounds for
denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation by a preponderance of evidence.
         c.   The issuance of the City Manager's notice constitutes prima facie
evidence of grounds for the denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation, and
City or county personnel who significantly took part in the investigation,
which contributed to the City Manager issuing a notice, may be required to
participate in the appeal hearing.
         d.   Each party shall have the right to introduce evidence, to present
and examine witnesses, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who have
testified under direct examination. The City Council, or the appointed hearing
officer, may also call witnesses, and examine any person who introduces
evidence or testifies at any hearing.
         e.   The City Council, or the appointed hearing officer, may accept
and consider late evidence not submitted initially with the notice of appeal
upon a showing by the appellant of good cause. The City Council or hearing
officer shall determine whether a particular fact or facts amount to a good
cause on a case-by-case basis.
         f.   The appellant may bring a language interpreter to the hearing at
his or her sole cost and expense.
         g.   The City may, at its discretion, record the hearing by
stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording.
      6.   If the appellant, or his or her legal representative, fails to
appear at the appeal hearing, the City Council, or the appointed hearing
officer, may cancel the appeal hearing and send a notice thereof to the
appellant by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the notice of
appeal. A cancellation of a hearing due to non-appearance of the appellant
shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal and a failure to
exhaust all administrative remedies. In such instances, the City Manager's
notice of decision is final and binding. In the alternative, the City Council
or the appointed hearing officer may hear the appeal and render a determination
in the absence of the appellant.
   D.   Following the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the City Council or
appointed hearing officer shall determine if any ground exists for the
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit
or other action. At the discretion of the City Council, deliberations on the
appeal may be continued to the next City Council meeting. If the appeal is
heard by a hearing officer, the determination shall be issued no later than ten
days following the conclusion of the appeal hearing.
      1.   If the City Council or appointed hearing officer determines that no
grounds for denial, nonrenewal, suspension, revocation, or other action exist,
the City Manager's notice of decision shall be deemed cancelled. If the City
Council or appointed hearing officer, determines that one or more of the
reasons or grounds enumerated in notice of decision exists, a written final
decision shall be issued within ten (10) days, which shall at minimum contain
the following:
         a.   A finding and description of each reason or grounds for
nonrenewal, suspension, revocation, or other action that exist.
         b.   Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant
or related to the subject matter of the appeal.
      2.   The decision of the City Council or appointed hearing officer, is
final and conclusive. The written final decision shall also contain the
following statement: "The decision of the City Council [or appointed hearing
officer], is final and binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to
the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section
1094.6."
      3.   A copy of the final decision shall be served by first class mail on
the appellant. If the appellant is not the owner of the premises in which the
commercial cannabis storefront retail business is located, or proposed to be
located, a copy of the Final Decision may also be served on the property owner
by first class mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed final decision shall not
invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.145 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT—NONASSIGNABLE AND
NONTRANSFERABLE.
   A.   A Commercial Cannabis Business Permit issued under this Chapter is
valid only as to the permittee and approved premises, and is therefore
nontransferable to other persons, projects or locations.
   B.   No Commercial Cannabis Business Permit may be sold, transferred or
assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons,
or entities. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale,
transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of
such Commercial Cannabis Business Permit and such permit shall thereafter be
null and void, except as set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.150 CHANGE IN LOCATION OF COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS.
   A.   No permittee shall change the premises of a commercial cannabis
storefront retailer business specified in the Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit until such change of premises is approved by the City Council. All other
changes of premises of any commercial cannabis business must be approved by the
Permit Administrator.
   B.   The City Manager shall adopt a process (to include any necessary forms
and procedures) for the relocation of any commercial cannabis business. As part
of the process, Storefront Retail Permittees proposing to relocate shall give
notice to all property owners and occupants located within two thousand five
hundred (2,500) feet of the proposed premises.
   C.   The proposed premises shall meet all the requirements under this Code,
including but not limited to this Chapter and Title 17.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.155 CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP OF COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS.
   A.   No permittee shall transfer greater than fifty percent (50%) of
ownership or control of a commercial cannabis business unless and until the
proposed new owner submits all required application materials and pays all
applicable fees, and independently meets the requirements of this Chapter such
as to be entitled to the issuance of a commercial Cannabis Business Permit.
   B.   Any changes in ownership or control of greater than fifty percent (50%)
of a commercial cannabis storefront retail permittee must be submitted to the
City Council for review and approval.
   C.   No permittee may add a new owner of ten percent (10%) or more ownership
interest unless the proposed new owner undergoes and passes a background check
as provided for in this Chapter.
   D.   A permittee may change the form of business entity without applying to
the City Council for a new Commercial Cannabis Business Permit, provided that
one of the following applies:
      1.   The ownership of the new business entity is the same as the business
entity that was issued the existing Commercial Cannabis Business Permit; or
      2.   The existing permittee is an unincorporated association, mutual or
public benefit corporation, agricultural or consumer cooperative corporation
and subsequently transitions to or forms a new business entity as allowed under
the MAUCRSA, provided that the Board of Directors (or in the case of an
unincorporated association, the individual(s) listed on the City permit
application) of the existing permittee entity are the same as the new business
entity.
   E.   Although a new Commercial Cannabis Business Permit is not required in
the two circumstances listed in Subsection D. above, the permittee shall notify
the City in writing of the change within fifteen (15) days of the change, and
obtain an amendment to the existing Commercial Cannabis Business Permit after
paying the fee set by resolution of the City Council.
   F.   The City Manager shall adopt a process (to include any necessary forms
and procedures) for the change in ownership of any commercial cannabis business
as set forth in this Section.
   G.   No permittee may avail themselves of the provisions of this Section if
the City Manager or Permit Administrator has notified the permittee that the
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit has been or may be suspended or revoked, or
may not be renewed.
   H.   Failure to comply with this Section is grounds for revocation of a
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit.
   I.   Any attempt to transfer a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit either
directly or indirectly in violation of this Section is hereby declared void,
and such a purported transfer shall be deemed a ground for revocation of the
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.160 CHANGES IN INFORMATION ON APPLICATION; ALTERATIONS TO APPROVED
FACILITY; AMENDMENTS TO PERMIT.
   A.   A permittee shall advise the City within fifteen (15) calendar days of
all changes of name or designation under which the commercial cannabis business
is to be conducted. The change of name or designation shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the City Council to defray the
costs of amendment to and reissuance of the Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit.
   B.   No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on a
commercial cannabis business under any name other than the name of the
commercial cannabis business specified in the Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit.
   C.   All required City approvals, plan approvals, and permits must be
obtained before causing, allowing, or permitting alterations to, and/or
extensions or expansions of, the existing building(s), structure(s), or
portions thereof, approved as the premises for a commercial cannabis business.
Said alterations, extensions, or expansions shall comply with all applicable
laws, regulations and standards, including those concerning building safety and
occupancy.
   D.   Within fifteen (15) calendar days of any other change in the
information provided in the application form or any change in status of
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, including any change in the
commercial cannabis business form of ownership or management members, the
permittee shall notify the City on a form approved by the City Manager for
review along with a permit amendment fee, as adopted by resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.165 CITY BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATE.
   Prior to commencing operations, a permittee of a commercial cannabis
business shall obtain a City of Culver City business tax certificate.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.170 PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS PRIOR TO COMMENCING OPERATIONS.
   Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall be
subject to a mandatory inspection of the premises, and must obtain all required
building permits and approvals which would otherwise be required for any
business of the same size and intensity operating in the zone in which the
premises are located. The permittee shall also obtain all required Building
Safety Division approvals, Fire Department approvals, County Health Department
approvals and any other permit or approval required by this Code or applicable
law.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.175 LIMITATIONS ON CITY'S LIABILITY.
   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City of Culver City shall not
assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a Commercial
Cannabis Business Permit pursuant to this Chapter or otherwise approving the
operation of any commercial cannabis business. As a condition to the approval
of any Commercial Cannabis Business Permit, the applicant, owner and permittee
shall be required to meet all of the following conditions before a Commercial
Cannabis Business Permit is issued:
   A.   The applicant, owner, and permittee must execute an agreement, in a
form approved by the City Attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend (at
applicant's, owner's and permittee's sole cost and expense), and hold harmless
the City of Culver City, and its officers, officials, employees,
representatives, and agents from any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries,
liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way related to,
the City's issuance of the Commercial Cannabis Business Permit, the City's
decision to approve the operation of the commercial cannabis business or
activity, the process used by the City in making its decision, or the alleged
violation of any federal, state or local laws by the commercial cannabis
business applicant, owner, permittee, or any of their officers, managers,
employees or agents.
   B.   Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon
determined necessary and appropriate from time to time, as determined by the
City Manager and City Attorney.
   C.   The applicant, owner, and permittee must execute an agreement, in a
form approved by the City Attorney, agreeing to reimburse the City of Culver
City for all costs and expenses, including but not limited to attorney fees and
costs, which the City of Culver City may be required to pay as a result of any
legal challenge related to the City's approval of the applicant's, owner's and
permittee's Commercial Cannabis Business Permit, or related to the City's
approval of the applicant's commercial cannabis activity. The City of Culver
City may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense
of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve any of the
obligations imposed hereunder.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.180 FEES; DEBT TO THE CITY.
   A.   No person may commence or continue any commercial cannabis activity in
the City, without timely paying in full all fees required for the operation of
a commercial cannabis business. Fees associated with the operation of a
commercial cannabis business shall be established by resolution of the City
Council which may be amended from time to time.
   B.   All commercial cannabis businesses authorized to operate under this
Chapter shall pay all sales, use, business and other applicable taxes, and all
license, registration, and other fees required under federal, state and local
law. Each commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with the City with
respect to any reasonable request to audit the commercial cannabis business'
books and records for the purpose of verifying compliance with this section,
including but not limited to a verification of the amount of taxes required to
be paid during any period.
   C.   The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this Chapter
shall be deemed a debt to the City of Culver City that is recoverable in any
manner authorized by this Code, state law, or in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.185 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND OTHER LEGAL DUTIES.
   A.   In addition to any regulations adopted by the City Council, the City
Manager is authorized to establish any additional rules, regulations and
standards related to the issuance, denial or renewal of Commercial Cannabis
Business Permits, the ongoing operation and City's oversight of commercial
cannabis businesses, or any other subject determined to be necessary to carry
out the purposes of this Chapter.
   B.   Regulations promulgated by the City Manager shall be published on the
City's website and maintained and available to the public in the Office of the
City Clerk.
   C.   Regulations promulgated by the City Manager shall become effective upon
date of publication on the City's website. Commercial cannabis businesses shall
be required to comply with all state and local laws and regulations, including
but not limited to any rules, regulations or standards adopted by the City
Manager.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
OPERATING REQUIREMENTS
§ 11.17.200 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL COMMERCIAL CANNABIS
BUSINESSES.
   A.   Commercial cannabis businesses may operate only during the hours
established by resolution of the City Council and specified in the Commercial
Cannabis Business Permit issued by the City.
   B.   Cannabis shall not be consumed by anyone on the Premises of any
commercial cannabis business.
   C.   No outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis products is permitted at any
time.
   D.   Each commercial cannabis business shall have in place a point-of-sale
or management inventory tracking system to track and report on all aspects of
the commercial cannabis business including, but not limited to, such matters as
cannabis tracking, inventory data, gross sales (by weight and by sale) and
other information which may be deemed necessary by the City. The system must
have the capability to produce historical transactional data for review. Any
system selected must be in compliance with state law.
   E.   All cannabis and cannabis products sold, tested, distributed or
manufactured shall be cultivated, manufactured, and transported by licensed
facilities that maintain operations in full conformance with State and local
regulations.
   F.   No physician shall be permitted in any commercial cannabis business at
any time for the purpose of evaluating patients for the issuance of a medicinal
cannabis recommendation or medicinal cannabis identification card.
   G.   All commercial cannabis retailers shall have a manager on the premises
at all times during hours of operation.
   H.   Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the City Manager with
the name and telephone number (both land line and mobile, if available) of a
manager or owner to whom emergency notice may be provided twenty-four (24)
hours a day.
   I.   Business identification signage for a commercial cannabis business
shall conform to the requirements of state law and this Code, including, but
not limited to, the requirements for a City sign permit.
   J.   Each commercial cannabis business premises shall be visibly posted with
a clear and legible notice indicating that smoking, ingesting, or otherwise
consuming cannabis on the premises or in the areas adjacent to the commercial
cannabis business is prohibited.
   K.   Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall not be allowed on
the premises of a commercial cannabis business, and shall not be allowed to
serve as a driver for a mobile delivery service. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
persons at least eighteen (18) years old with a physician's recommendation are
permitted on the premises of a storefront retailer selling medicinal cannabis
and medicinal cannabis products. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
Chapter for any person to employ any person at a commercial cannabis business
who is not at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
   L.   Odor control devices and techniques shall be incorporated in all
commercial cannabis businesses to ensure that odors from cannabis are not
detectable off-site. Commercial cannabis businesses shall provide a sufficient
odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the
commercial cannabis business that is distinctive to its operation is not
detected outside of the facility, anywhere on adjacent property or public
rights-of-way, on or about the exterior or interior common area walkways,
hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for use
by common tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit located
inside the same building as the commercial cannabis business. As such,
commercial cannabis businesses must install and maintain the following
equipment, or any other equipment which the Community Development Director
determines is a more effective method or technology, or that has been approved
by the County of Los Angeles Department of Public Health:
      1.   An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents
internal odors from being emitted externally;
      2.   An air system that creates negative air pressure between the
commercial cannabis business' interior and exterior, so that the odors
generated inside the commercial cannabis business are not detectable on the
outside of the commercial cannabis business.
   M.   The original copy of the Commercial Cannabis Business Permit issued by
the City pursuant to this Chapter and the City-issued business tax certificate
shall be posted inside the commercial cannabis business in a location readily-
visible to the public.
   N.   The permittee of a commercial cannabis business shall prohibit
loitering by persons outside on the premises.
   O.   Nothing in this Chapter exempts a commercial cannabis business from
complying with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations
pertaining to persons with disabilities.
   P.   No commercial cannabis business may discriminate or exclude patrons in
violation of local, state and federal laws and regulations.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.205 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR STOREFRONT RETAIL FACILITIES.
   Commercial cannabis storefront retailers shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
   A.   Prior to dispensing medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products
to any person, the storefront retailer shall obtain verification from the
recommending physician that the person requesting medicinal cannabis or
medicinal cannabis products is a qualified patient.
   B.   Storefront retailers also providing delivery shall comply with the
requirements pertaining to deliveries in §
11.17.210 of this Chapter.
   C.   Storefront retailers selling medicinal cannabis shall verify the age
and all necessary documentation of each customer to ensure the customer is not
under the age of eighteen (18) years and that the potential customer has a
valid doctor's recommendation. Adult use retailers shall verify the age of all
customers to ensure persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are not on the
premises.
   D.   All restroom facilities shall remain locked and under the control of
management.
   E.   A storefront retailer may sell, give away, or donate specific devices,
contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia necessary for consuming cannabis or
cannabis products, including but not limited to rolling papers and related
tools, pipes, water pipes, and vaporizers. The equipment may only be provided
to qualified patients, primary caregivers, or customers in accordance with §
11364.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   F.   A storefront retailer shall notify qualified patients, primary
caregivers, and customers of the following verbally (or by written agreement)
and by posting of a notice or notices conspicuously within the permitted
premises:
      1.   "The sale or diversion of cannabis or cannabis products without a
permit issued by the City of Culver City is a violation of State law and the
Culver City Municipal Code."
      2.   "Secondary sale, barter, or distribution of cannabis or cannabis
products purchased from [Insert Name of Permittee] is a crime and can lead to
arrest."
      3.   "Patrons must immediately leave the premises and not consume
cannabis or cannabis products until at home or in an equivalent private
location."
      4.   "The use of cannabis or cannabis products may impair a Person's
ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate heavy machinery."
      5.   "CALIFORNIA PROP. 65 WARNING: Smoking of cannabis and cannabis-
derived products will expose you and those in your immediate vicinity to
cannabis smoke. Cannabis smoke is known by the State of California to cause
cancer."
   G.   During business hours, shipments of cannabis or cannabis products shall
not enter the premises through an entrance that is available to the public.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.210 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR DELIVERY—ONLY RETAILERS.
   Commercial cannabis delivery-only retailers shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
   A.   From a public right-of-way, there shall be no exterior evidence of
commercial cannabis activity except for any signage authorized by this Code.
   B.   The general public is not permitted on the premises. Only owners,
managers, employees, agents and volunteers of the delivery-only permittee and
agents or employees of the City of Culver City, the County of Los Angeles or
the state are permitted to be on-site.
   C.   Delivery-only retailers may only deliver cannabis or cannabis products
to customers within a city or county that does not expressly prohibit such
delivery by ordinance. Deliveries shall be made to a physical address and no
deliveries shall be made in the public right of way.
   D.   Security plans developed pursuant to this Chapter shall include
provisions relating to vehicle security and the protection of employees and
product during loading and in transit.
   E.   A delivery-only retailer shall facilitate the delivery of cannabis or
cannabis products with a technology platform that uses point-of-sale technology
to track and database technology to record and store the following information
for each transaction involving the exchange of cannabis or cannabis products
between the permittee and qualified patient, primary caregiver, or customer:
      1.   The identity of the individual dispensing cannabis or cannabis
products on behalf of the permittee;
      2.   The identity of the qualified patient, primary caregiver, or
customer receiving cannabis or cannabis products from the permittee;
      3.   The type and quantity of cannabis or cannabis products dispensed and
received; and
      4.   The dollar amount charged by the permittee and received by the
delivery driver for the cannabis or cannabis products dispensed and received.
   F.   A permittee shall maintain a database and provide to the City a list of
the individuals and vehicles authorized to conduct deliveries on behalf of the
permittee.
   G.   Individuals authorized to conduct deliveries on behalf of the permittee
shall have a valid California Driver's License.
   H.   Individuals making deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products on
behalf of the permittee shall maintain a physical or electronic copy of the
delivery request (and/or invoice) and shall make it available upon request of
City employees or agents.
   I.   During delivery, a copy of the permittee's Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit shall be in the vehicle at all times, and the driver shall make it
available upon request of City employees and agents.
   J.   A permittee shall only permit or allow delivery of cannabis or cannabis
products in a vehicle that (i) is insured at or above the legal requirement in
California; (ii) is capable of securing (locking) the cannabis or cannabis
products during transportation; (iii) is capable of being temperature
controlled if perishable cannabis or cannabis products are being transported;
and (iv) does not display advertising or symbols visible from the exterior of
the vehicle that suggest the vehicle is used for cannabis delivery or
affiliated with a cannabis retailer.
   K.   A delivery-only retailer shall facilitate deliveries with a technology
platform that uses global positioning system technology to track and database
technology to record and store the following information:
      1.   The time that the delivery vehicle departed the permitted premises.
      2.   The time that the delivery vehicle completed delivery to the
qualified patient, primary caregiver, or customer.
      3.   The time that the delivery vehicle returned to the permitted
premises.
      4.   The route the delivery vehicle traveled to conduct deliveries
between departing and returning to the permitted premises.
      5.   For each individual transaction, the identity of the individual
conducting deliveries on behalf of the delivery-only retailer permittee.
      6.   For each individual transaction, the vehicle used to conduct
deliveries on behalf of the delivery-only retailer permittee.
      7.   For each individual transaction, the identity of the qualified
patient, primary caregiver, or customer receiving cannabis or cannabis products
from the delivery-only retailer.
      8.   For each individual transaction, the type and quantity of cannabis
or cannabis products dispensed and received.
      9.   For each individual transaction, the dollar amount charged by the
delivery-only retailer and received by the delivery driver for the cannabis or
cannabis products dispensed and received.
   L.   The delivery driver shall personally verify for each individual
transaction the identity of the qualified patient, primary caregiver, or
customer receiving cannabis or cannabis products from the delivery-only
retailer.
   M.   A delivery-only retailer may sell, give away, or donate specific
devices, contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia necessary for consuming
cannabis or cannabis products, including but not limited to rolling papers and
related tools, pipes, water pipes, and vaporizers. The equipment may only be
provided to qualified patients, primary caregivers, or customers in accordance
with § 11364.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.215 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR CULTIVATION FACILITIES.
   Commercial cannabis indoor cultivation facilities must comply with all of
the following requirements:
   A.   The cultivation of all cannabis must occur indoors only, and outdoor
cultivation is prohibited.
   B.   From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of
cannabis cultivation except for any signage authorized by this Code.
   C.   The general public is not permitted on the cannabis cultivation
premises. Only owners, managers, employees, agents and volunteers of the
cannabis cultivation permittee and agents or employees of the City of Culver
City, the County of Los Angeles or the state are permitted to be on-site.
   D.   A permittee shall only be allowed to cultivate the square feet of
canopy space permitted by state law and in the Commercial Cannabis Business
Permit issued for the premises.
   E.   Cannabis cultivation shall be conducted in accordance with state and
local laws related to electricity, water usage, water quality, discharges,
waste disposal and similar matters.
   F.   A cultivation permittee shall comply with all applicable federal, state
and local laws and regulations regarding use and disposal of pesticides and
fertilizers.
   G.   Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to
avoid contamination through erosion, leakage or inadvertent damage from pests,
rodents or other wildlife.
   H.   The cultivation of cannabis shall at all times be operated in such a
way as to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the employees
working at the commercial cannabis business, neighboring properties, and the
end users of the cannabis being cultivated, to protect the environment from
harm to waterways, fish, and wildlife; to ensure the security of the cannabis
being cultivated; and to safeguard against the diversion of cannabis.
   I.   Prior to transportation, a cannabis cultivation permittee shall package
and seal all cannabis or cannabis products in tamper-evident packaging and use
a unique identifier, such as a batch and lot number or bar code, to identify
and track the cannabis or cannabis products.
   J.   All applicants for a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit pertaining to
cannabis cultivation shall submit the following in addition to the information
otherwise required for a Commercial Cannabis Business Permit:
      1.   A cultivation and operations plan that meets or exceeds minimum
legal standards for water usage, conservation and use; drainage, watershed and
habitat protection; waste disposal; and proper storage of fertilizers,
pesticides, and other regulated products to be used on the parcel, and a
description of the cultivation activities and schedule of activities during
each month of growing and harvesting, or explanation of growth cycles and
anticipated harvesting schedules for all-season harvesting.
      2.   A description of a legal water source, irrigation plan, and
projected water use.
      3.   Identification of the source of electrical power and plan for
compliance with applicable Building Codes and related Codes.
      4.   Plan for addressing odor and other public nuisances that may derive
from the cultivation site.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.220 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS MANUFACTURING BUSINESSES.
   Commercial cannabis manufacturing businesses shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
   A.   From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of
cannabis manufacturing except for any signage authorized by this Chapter.
   B.   The general public is not permitted on the cannabis manufacturing
premises. Only owners, managers, employees, agents and volunteers of the
cannabis manufacturing permittee and agents or employees of the City of Culver
City, the County of Los Angeles or the state are permitted to be on-site.
   C.   All cannabis manufacturing shall comply with the standards set by state
and local law, including but not limited to those related to safety,
discharges, waste disposal and similar matters.
   D.   Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing process shall not be
stored on any property within the City of Culver City in containers that
exceeds the amount which is approved by the Fire Chief and authorized by the
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit. Each manufacturing premises subject to a
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit shall be limited to a total number of tanks
as authorized by the Fire Chief on the property at any time.
   E.   Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use the hydrocarbons N-butane,
isobutane, propane, or heptane or other solvents or gases exhibiting low to
minimal potential human-related toxicity approved by the Fire Chief. These
solvents must be of at least ninety-nine percent (99%) purity and any
extraction process must use them in a professional grade closed loop extraction
system designed to recover the solvents and work in an environment with proper
ventilation, controlling all sources of ignition where a flammable atmosphere
is or may be present.
   F.   If an extraction process uses a professional grade closed loop C02 gas
extraction system every vessel must be certified by the manufacturer for its
safe use. Closed loop systems for compressed gas extraction systems must be
commercially manufactured and bear a permanently affixed and visible serial
number.
   G.   Certification from an engineer licensed by the State of California must
be provided to the Fire Chief for a professional grade closed loop system used
by any commercial cannabis manufacturing manufacturer to certify that the
system was commercially manufactured, is safe for its intended use, and was
built to codes of recognized and generally accepted good engineering practices,
including but not limited to:
      1.   The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME);
      2.   American National Standards Institute (ANSI);
      3.   Underwriters Laboratories (UL); or
      4.   The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).
   H.   The certification document reference in Subsection G. above must
contain the signature and stamp of the professional engineer and serial number
of the extraction unit being certified.
   I.   Professional closed loop systems, other equipment used, the extraction
operation, and facilities must be approved for their use by the Fire Chief and
meet any required fire, safety, and building code requirements specified in the
California Building and Fire Codes, as adopted by the City.
   J.   Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use heat, screens, presses, steam
distillation, ice water, and other methods without employing solvents or gases
to create keef, hashish, bubble hash, or infused dairy butter, or oils or fats
derived from natural sources, and other extracts.
   K.   Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use food grade glycerin, ethanol,
and propylene glycol solvents to create or refine extracts. Ethanol should be
removed from the extract in a manner to recapture the solvent and ensure that
it is not vented into the atmosphere.
   L.   Cannabis manufacturing facilities creating cannabis extracts must
develop standard operating procedures, good manufacturing practices, and a
training plan prior to producing extracts for the marketplace. Such plan shall
be submitted to the City as part of the application process.
   M.   Any person using solvents or gases in a closed looped system to create
cannabis extracts must be fully trained on how to use the system, have direct
access to applicable material safety data sheets and handle and store the
solvents and gases safely.
   N.   Parts per million for one gram of finished extract cannot exceed state
standards for any residual solvent or gas when quality assurance tested.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.225 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS DISTRIBUTION.
   Commercial cannabis distribution businesses shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
   A.   From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of
cannabis distribution except for any signage authorized by this Chapter.
   B.   The general public is not permitted on the cannabis distribution
premises. Only owners, managers, employees, agents and volunteers of the
cannabis distribution permittee and agents or employees of the City of Culver
City, the County of Los Angeles or the state are permitted to be on-site.
   C.   A cannabis distribution permittee shall only procure, sell, or
transport cannabis or cannabis products that is packaged and sealed in tamper-
evident packaging that uses a unique identifier, such as a batch and lot number
or bar code, to identify and track the cannabis or cannabis products.
   D.   A cannabis distribution permittee shall maintain a database and provide
to the City a list of the individuals and vehicles authorized to conduct
transportation on behalf of the cannabis distribution licensee.
   E.   Individuals authorized to conduct transportation on behalf of the
cannabis distribution permittee shall have a valid California driver's license.
   F.   Individuals transporting cannabis or cannabis products on behalf of the
cannabis distribution permittee shall maintain a physical or electronic copy of
the transportation request (and/or invoice) and shall make it available upon
request of City employees and agents.
   G.   During transportation, the individual conducting transportation on
behalf of the cannabis distribution permittee shall maintain a copy of the
cannabis distribution permittee's Commercial Cannabis Business Permit and shall
make it available upon request of City employees and agents.
   H.   A cannabis distribution permittee facility shall only transport
cannabis or cannabis products in a vehicle that is:
      1.   Insured at or above the legal requirement in California;
      2.   Capable of securing (locking) the cannabis or cannabis products
during transportation; and
      3.   Capable of being temperature controlled if perishable cannabis
products are being transported.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.230 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS TESTING.
   Commercial cannabis testing businesses shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
   A.   Cannabis testing shall take place within an enclosed locked structure.
   B.   From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of
cannabis testing except for any signage authorized by this Chapter.
   C.   The general public is not permitted on the cannabis testing premises.
Only owners, managers, employees, agents and volunteers of the cannabis testing
permittee and agents or employees of the City of Culver City, the County of Los
Angeles or the state are permitted to be on-site.
   D.   All cannabis testing shall be performed in accordance with state law.
   E.   A cannabis testing permittee shall adopt a standard operating procedure
using methods consistent with general requirements established by the
International Organization for Standardization, specifically ISO/IEC 17025, to
test cannabis or cannabis products, and shall operate in compliance with state
law at all times.
   F.   A cannabis testing permittee shall be accredited by a body that is a
signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation Mutual
Recognition Arrangement.
   G.   A cannabis testing permittee shall establish standard operating
procedures that provide for adequate chain of custody controls for samples
transferred to the testing laboratory for testing.
   H.   A cannabis testing permittee shall destroy the remains of samples of
any cannabis or cannabis product upon completion of analyses.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.235 RECORDS AND RECORDKEEPING.
   A.   Each permittee of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain
accurate books and records in an electronic format, detailing all of the
revenues and expenses of the business, and all of its assets and liabilities.
On no less than an annual basis (at or before the time of the renewal of a
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter), or at any
time upon reasonable request of the City, each permittee shall file a sworn
statement detailing the commercial cannabis business' revenue and number of
sales during the previous twelve (12)-month period (or shorter period based
upon the timing of the request), provided on a per-month basis. The statement
shall also include gross revenues for each month, and all applicable taxes paid
or due to be paid. On an annual basis, each permittee shall submit to the City
a financial audit of the business' operations conducted by an independent
certified public accountant. Each permittee shall be subject to a regulatory
compliance review and financial audit as determined by the City Manager.
   B.   Each permittee of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain a
current register of the names and the contact information (including the
address, e-mail address and telephone number) of anyone owning or holding an
interest in the commercial cannabis business, and separately of all the
officers, managers, employees, responsible persons and volunteers currently
employed or otherwise engaged by the commercial cannabis business. The register
required by this paragraph shall be provided to the City Manager upon a
reasonable request.
   C.   All records collected by a permittee pursuant to this Chapter shall be
maintained for a minimum of seven years and shall be made available by the
permittee to the agents or employees of the City upon request, except that
private medical records shall be made available only pursuant to a properly
executed search warrant, subpoena, or court order.
   D.   All permittees shall maintain an inventory control and reporting system
that accurately documents the present location, amounts, and descriptions of
all cannabis and cannabis products for all stages of the growing and production
or manufacturing, laboratory testing and distribution processes until purchase
as set forth MAUCRSA.
   E.   Subject to any restrictions under the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations, each permittee shall allow City of
Culver City officials to have access to the business's books, records,
accounts, together with any other data or documents relevant to its permitted
commercial cannabis activities, for the purpose of conducting an audit or
examination. Books, records, accounts, and any and all relevant data or
documents will be produced no later than 24 hours after receipt of the City's
request, unless otherwise stipulated by the City. The City may require the
materials to be submitted in an electronic format that is compatible with the
City's software and hardware.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.240 SECURITY MEASURES.
   A.   All permittees shall implement sufficient security measures to deter
and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis or
cannabis products, and to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis or cannabis
products at the commercial cannabis business. Except as may otherwise be
determined by the Chief of Police, these security measures shall include, but
shall not be limited to, all of the following:
      1.   Preventing individuals from remaining on the premises of the
commercial cannabis business if they are not engaging in an activity directly
related to the permitted operations of the commercial cannabis business.
      2.   Establishing limited access areas accessible only to authorized
commercial cannabis business personnel.
      3.   Except for live growing plants which are being cultivated at a
cultivation facility, all cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a
secured and locked room, safe, or vault when not contained within a sales
display. All cannabis and cannabis products, including live plants that are
being cultivated, shall be kept in a manner as to prevent diversion, theft, and
loss,
      4.   Installing twenty- four (24)-hour security surveillance cameras of
at least HD-quality to monitor all entrances and exits to and from the
premises, all interior spaces within the commercial cannabis business which are
open and accessible to the public, all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or
currency, is being stored for any period of time on a regular basis, and all
interior spaces where diversion of cannabis could reasonably occur. Video
recordings shall be maintained for a minimum of sixty (60) days, and shall be
made available to the Chief of Police upon request. Video shall be of
sufficient quality for effective prosecution of any crime found to have
occurred on the site of the commercial cannabis business.
      5.   Sensors shall be installed to detect entry and exit from all secure
areas.
      6.   Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial cannabis
businesses.
      7.   Having a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm
system, with the required Culver City alarm permit pursuant to
Chapter 11.04 of this Code.
      8.   Any bars installed on the windows or the doors of the commercial
cannabis business shall be installed only on the interior of the building and
in compliance with all City Building and Fire Codes.
      9.   Security personnel shall be on-site during operating hours or
alternative security may be provided, as authorized by the Police Chief.
Security personnel must be licensed by the State of California Bureau of
Security and Investigative Services Personnel and shall be subject to the prior
review and approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
      10.   Each commercial cannabis business shall have the capability to
remain secure during a power outage and shall ensure that all access doors are
not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks are
not released during a power outage.
   B.   Each permittee shall identify a designated security representative/
liaison to the City, who shall be reasonably available to meet with the Chief
of Police regarding any security related measures or any operational issues.
   C.   Any security plan required by this Chapter shall not be made public in
the interest of safety and security.
   D.   Upon request and reasonable notice of not less than twenty-four (24)
hours, except in exigent circumstances or in a time frame as determined by the
City, each permittee shall make the premises and its security measures
available for inspection or audit for the purpose of determining the
effectiveness of the security plan and compliance with the requirements of this
Chapter.
   E.   A permittee shall notify the Chief of Police within twenty-four (24)
hours after discovering any of the following:
      1.   Significant discrepancies identified during inventory. The level of
significance shall be determined by the regulations promulgated by the Chief of
Police.
      2.   Diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the
commercial cannabis business or any agent or employee of the commercial
cannabis business.
      3.   The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis,
registering qualifying patients, primary caregivers, or employees or agents of
the commercial cannabis business.
      4.   Any other breach of security.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.245 RESTRICTION ON ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO SALES.
   No person shall cause or permit the sale, dispensing, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages or tobacco products on or about the premises of a
commercial cannabis business.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.250 COMMUNITY RELATIONS.
   A.   Each permittee shall provide the name, telephone number, and email
address of a community relations contact to whom notice of problems associated
with the commercial cannabis business can be provided. Each permittee shall
also provide the above information to all businesses and residences located
within six hundred (600) feet of the commercial cannabis business.
   B.   During the first year of operation pursuant to this Chapter, the owner,
manager, and community relations representative from each permittee may be
required to attend a quarterly meeting with the City Manager and other
interested parties as deemed appropriate by the City Manager, to discuss costs,
benefits, and other community issues arising as a result of implementation of
this Chapter. After the first year of operation, the owner, manager, and
community relations representative from each such permittee shall meet with the
City Manager when and as requested by the City Manager.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 11.17.300 RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Permittees and their responsible persons and managers shall be responsible
for violations of the laws of the State of California or of this Code, whether
committed by the permittee, or any employee or agent of the permittee, which
violations occur on the premises of the commercial cannabis business, or when
engaged in the business activity of the commercial cannabis business permittee,
regardless of location, and whether or not said violations occur within the
permittee's presence. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission
of the permittee for purposes of determining whether the permit shall be
revoked, suspended, or not renewed.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.305 INSPECTIONS.
   A.   The City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Chief or City personnel charged
with enforcing the provisions of this Code may enter the location of a
commercial cannabis business at any time during regular business hours, without
notice, and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business as well as
any recordings and records required to be maintained pursuant to this Chapter
or under applicable provisions of State law.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person having responsibility over the operation
of a commercial cannabis business, to impede, obstruct, interfere with, or
otherwise not to allow, the City to conduct an inspection, review or copy
records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a
commercial cannabis business under this Chapter or under state or local law. It
is also unlawful for a person to conceal, destroy, deface, damage, or falsify
any records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a
commercial cannabis business under this Chapter or under state or local law.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.310 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   B.   It is unlawful for any permittee of a commercial cannabis business, or
its responsible person, manager or any other responsible person employed by or
working in concert with them or on their behalf, whether directly or
indirectly, to continue to operate, conduct, or maintain a commercial cannabis
business after the Commercial Cannabis Business Permit has been suspended or
revoked, or not renewed, pursuant to a non-contested notice of decision issued
by the City Manager, or after the issuance of a final determination after an
appeal hearing.
   C.   Any commercial cannabis business operated, conducted, or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be, and the same is declared
to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City may, in addition to or in
lieu of prosecuting a criminal action, commence an administrative or civil
action(s) or proceeding(s), for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof,
in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply
to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief to abate
or remove such commercial cannabis business and restrain and enjoin any person
from operating, conducting or maintaining a commercial cannabis business
contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.
   D.   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this Chapter, or of any law
or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained
or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.
   E.   Whenever in this Chapter any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall
include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the
fact of such act or omission.
   F.   The penalties set forth herein are cumulative and in addition to all
other remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in this Chapter, this Code,
or in any other ordinance, laws, rules or regulations of the City, County, or
the State of California.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
§ 11.17.315 EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES.
   Except as designated in this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall
control for regulation of commercial cannabis businesses as defined herein if
other provisions of this Code conflict therewith. This Chapter shall not,
however, relieve any person of his or her duty to comply with such laws if
additional obligations, duties, or prohibitions are imposed thereby.
(Ord. No. 17-018 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-020 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-007 §
2 (part))
ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF PART 7 OF CHAPTER 8.04, “COMMERCIAL CANNABIS
ACTIVITIES,” AND CHAPTER 11.37, “CANNABIS FACILITIES,” OF THE LOS ANGELES
COUNTY CODE
§ 11.17.400 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY CANNABIS PUBLIC HEALTH
ORDINANCE.
   A.   The City of Culver City hereby adopts by reference Part 7 of Chapter
8.04 "Commercial Cannabis Activities" and Chapter 11.37 "Cannabis Facilities"
of the Los Angeles County Code, dated December 9, 2017. The provisions of the
Los Angeles County Code described herein shall be applicable in the City and
referred to as the City's Cannabis Public Health Ordinance.
   B.   A copy of Part 7 of Chapter 8.04 "Commercial Cannabis Activities" and
Chapter 11.37 "Cannabis Facilities" of the Los Angeles County Code shall be
available for public inspection in the City Clerk's office.
(Ord. No. 2018-005 § 2; Ord. No. 2018-007 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 11.18: SIDEWALK VENDING PROGRAM
Section
   
11.18.010   Purpose
   
11.18.020   Definitions
   
11.18.030   Permit required
   
11.18.040   Issuance of permit
   
11.18.050   Operating conditions
   
11.18.060   Prohibited activities and locations
   
11.18.070   Penalties
   
11.18.080   Revocation
   
11.18.090   Appeals
§ 11.18.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a sidewalk vendor permitting and
regulatory program. The provisions of this Chapter allow the City to encourage
small business activities by removing total prohibitions on portable food
stands and certain forms of solicitation while still permitting regulation and
enforcement of unpermitted sidewalk vending activities to protect the public’s
health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.18.020 DEFINITIONS.
   A.   If a term or phrase is not defined in this section, or elsewhere in
this Code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.
   B.   As used in this Chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are
used clearly requires otherwise:
      1.   CANNABIS shall have the same meaning as defined in Section
11.17.025, or any successor section.
      2.   CULVER CITY NATURE TRAIL. The wooden boardwalk that leads from the
parking lot of Culver City Park near the Ropes Course to the parking lot of the
lower ball field at Culver City Park.
      3.   CERTIFIED FARMERS’ MARKET. A location operated in accordance with
Division 17, Chapter 10.5 (commencing with § 47000) of the Cal. Food and
Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any
successor chapter;
      4.   CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER. The City of Culver City’s Chief Financial
Officer or their designee.
      5.   CITY HALL. The building, facilities, and parking structure located
at 9770 Culver Boulevard, Culver City, CA 90232.
      6.   FIRE STATION. Any facility where fire engines and other equipment of
the City’s Fire Department are housed.
      7.   FOOD. Any item provided in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113781, or
any successor section.
      8.   HEATING ELEMENT. Any device used to create heat for food
preparation.
      9.   MERCHANDISE. Any item(s) that can be sold and immediately obtained
from a sidewalk vendor, which is not considered food. Items for rent shall not
be considered MERCHANDISE.
      10.   PARK. The public parks defined in §
9.10.005.A of this Code, or any successor ordinance or regulation.
      11.   PATHWAY. A paved path or walkway owned by the City or other public
entity that is specifically designed for pedestrian or bicycle travel, other
than a sidewalk.
      12.   PERSON. A “person” as defined in §
1.01.010 of this Code and includes a corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an
individual.
      13.   POLICE STATION. The facility where police vehicles and other
equipment of the City’s Police Department are housed.
      14.   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All property owned or controlled by the City,
including, but not limited to, buildings, alleys, parks, pathways, roadways,
streets, parking lots, sidewalks, parkways, biking, and walking paths, or other
public-rights-of-way.
      15.   RESIDENTIAL. Any area zoned exclusively as residential in a
Residential Zoning District as defined in §
17.210.010 of this Code.
      16.   ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR shall have the same meaning as defined in
Cal. Government Code § 51036, or any successor section.
      17.   SIDEWALK. That portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set
apart by curbs, barriers, markings, or other delineation specifically designed
for pedestrian travel and that is owned by the City or other public entity.
      18.   SIDEWALK VENDING RECEPTACLE or SIDEWALK VENDOR RECEPTACLE. A
pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack equipment,
buckets, supplies or other non-motorized conveyance used for sidewalk vending
activities.
      19.   SIDEWALK VENDOR or VENDOR shall have the same meaning as defined in
Cal. Government Code § 51036, or any successor section.
      20.   SIDEWALK VENDOR ACTIVITIES or SIDEWALK VENDING ACTIVITY. Actions
that qualify a person as a sidewalk vendor or actions done in anticipation of
becoming a sidewalk vendor such as, but not limited to, placement or
maintenance of any sidewalk vendor receptacles.
      21.   SPECIAL EVENT. Any special event described in Chapter 17.520 of
this Code, or any successor section.
      22.   STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR shall have the same meaning as defined
in Cal. Government Code § 51036, or any successor section.
      23.   SWAP MEET. A location operated in accordance with Division 8,
Chapter 9, Article 6 (commencing with § 21660) of the Cal. Business and
Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any
successor chapter.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.18.030 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A.   No person, either for themselves or any other person, shall engage in
any sidewalk vendor activities within the City without first applying for and
receiving a permit from the Chief Financial Officer under this Chapter.
   B.   Sections
11.09.200 through
11.09.215 (Street Vendors) of this Code shall not apply to a sidewalk vendor.
   C.   A written application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be filed with
the Chief Financial Officer, on a form provided by the City, and shall contain
the following information:
      1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying to
become a sidewalk vendor;
      2.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be in
charge of any roaming sidewalk vendors, sidewalk vending activity and/or be
responsible for the person(s) working at the sidewalk vending receptacle;
      3.   The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that will be
employed as roaming sidewalk vendors or at a sidewalk vending receptacle;
      4.   The number of sidewalk vending receptacles the sidewalk vendor will
operate within the City under the permit;
      5.   The location(s) in the City where the sidewalk vendor intends to
operate;
      6.   The day(s) and hours of operation the sidewalk vendor intends to
operate at such location(s);
      7.   Whether the vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk
vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor and, if roaming, the intended path of
travel and, if stationary, a map with the location designated;
      8.   The dimensions of the sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle
(s), including a picture of each sidewalk vending receptacle operating under
the permit and any signs that will be affixed thereto;
      9.   Whether the sidewalk vendor will be selling food, merchandise, or
both;
      10.   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, a description of the type
of food to be sold, whether such foods are prepared on site, whether such foods
will require a heating element inside or on the sidewalk vending receptacle for
food preparation, and the type of heating element, if any;
      11.   If the vendor is selling merchandise, a description of the
merchandise to be sold;
      12.   A copy of the County of Los Angeles Department of Public Health
Permit required for any sidewalk vendors selling food, or proof of an
applicable exemption;
      13.   Proof the person possesses a valid California Department of Tax and
Fee Administration seller’s permit which notes the City as a location or
sublocation, which shall be maintained for the duration of the sidewalk
vendor’s permit;
      14.   An acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all
other generally applicable local, State, and Federal laws;
      15.   A certification that, to their knowledge and belief, the
information contained within the application is true;
      16.   An agreement by the sidewalk vendor to defend, indemnify, release
and hold harmless the City, its City Council, boards, commissions, officers and
employees from and against any and all claims, demands, obligations, damages,
actions, causes of action, suits, losses, judgments, fines, penalties,
liabilities, costs and expenses (including without limitation attorney’s fees,
disbursements and court costs) of every kind and nature whatsoever which may
arise from or in any manner relate (directly or indirectly) to the permit or
the vendor's sidewalk vending activities. This indemnification shall include,
but not be limited to, damages awarded against the City, if any, costs of suit,
attorneys’ fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with such claim,
action, or proceeding whether incurred by the permittee, City, and/or the
parties initiating or bringing such proceeding;
      17.   An acknowledgement that use of public property is at the sidewalk
vendor’s own risk, the City does not take any steps to ensure public property
is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities, and the sidewalk
vendor uses public property at their own risk;
      18.   An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor will obtain and
maintain throughout the duration of any permit issued under this Chapter any
insurance required by the City;
      19.   If the sidewalk vendor has operated in the City in the past, proof
of prior sales tax payments made to the State and allocated to the City; and
      20.   Any other relevant information required by the Chief Financial
Officer.
   D.   Each application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution of the City Council.
The application and permit are only applicable to the individual(s) named on
the application. An approved sidewalk vendor permit is required prior to the
applicant obtaining its official City business tax certificate, as set forth in
Chapter 11.01, to carry on the activities authorized by said permit.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.18.040 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   A.   The Chief Financial Officer may issue a sidewalk vending permit, with
appropriate conditions, including but not limited to the review and approval of
the Public Works Director, and as provided for herein, if they find based on
all of the relevant information that:
      1.   The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with
traffic or pedestrian movement, or tend to interfere with or endanger the
public peace or rights of nearby residents to the quiet and peaceable enjoyment
of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health,
safety, or general welfare;
      2.   The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with
the ingress or egress of commercial properties nor create an unsafe condition
for adjacent businesses;
      3.   The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with
normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in damage or
detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring costs or
expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the
vendor;
      4   The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not constitute a
fire hazard, and all proper safety precautions will be taken;
      5.   The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not require the
diversion of police officers to properly police the area of such activity as to
interfere with normal police protection for other areas of the City;
      6.   The sidewalk vendor has paid all previous administrative fines,
completed all community service, and completed any other alternative
disposition associated in any way with a previous violation of this Chapter or
any other City regulation governing sidewalk vending;
      7.   The sidewalk vendor has not had a permit revoked within the past
twelve (12) months;
      8.   The sidewalk vendor’s application contains all required information;
      9.   The sidewalk vendor has not made a materially false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of fact to the City in the application process;
      10.   The sidewalk vendor has satisfied all the requirements of this
Chapter;
      11.   The sidewalk vendor has paid all applicable fees as set by City
Council resolution;
      12.   The sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle and proposed
activities conform to the requirements of this Chapter;
      13.   The sidewalk vendor has adequate insurance, as determined by the
City, to protect the City from liability associated with the sidewalk vendor’s
activities. If approved, all insurance policies required by this permit, except
workers’ compensation, shall name the City as an additional insured, and shall
contain a waiver of subrogation against City, its agents, and employees. The
sidewalk vendor shall provide a copy of a certificate of insurance with
required endorsements providing this coverage; and
      14.   The sidewalk vendor has satisfactorily provided all information
requested by the Chief Financial Officer, to consider the vendor’s application.
   B.   A sidewalk vendor permit is nontransferable. Any change in ownership or
operation of a sidewalk vendor or sidewalk vending receptacle requires a new
permit under this Chapter.
   C.   All permits issued under this Chapter shall expire twelve (12) months
from date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.18.050 OPERATING CONDITIONS.
   All sidewalk vendors are subject to the following operating conditions when
conducting sidewalk vending activities:
   A.   All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to
the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and
merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property. If
affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle, the overall space taken up by the
sidewalk vendor receptacle shall not exceed the size requirements provided in
this section.
   B.   The sidewalk vendor permit shall be affixed to and conspicuously
displayed at all times on the sidewalk vending receptacle and the sidewalk
vendor’s person. If multiple sidewalk vendors are staffing a sidewalk vendor
receptacle or working as roaming sidewalk vendors, each person shall wear their
permit on their person in a conspicuous manner.
   C.   Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle
unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities.
   D.   Sidewalk vendors shall not call out, yell, ring bells or other devices
to attract the attention of potential customers.
   E.   Sidewalk vendors are not allowed to provide onsite dining, nor provide,
allow, or encourage others to provide or utilize tables, chairs, tents,
umbrellas, or similar items on public property.
   F.   All signage and advertising related in any way to the sidewalk vendor
shall be attached to the sidewalk vending receptacle, if any, or the sidewalk
vendor’s person.
   G.   Sidewalk vendors shall not use any electrical, flashing, wind powered,
or animated sign.
   H.   Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not be stored on public property and
shall be removed from public property when not in active use by a sidewalk
vendor.
   I.   All sidewalk vendors shall allow any government official charged with
enforcing laws related to the sidewalk vendor’s activities to inspect their
sidewalk vending receptacle at any time for compliance with the size
requirements of this Chapter and to ensure the safe operation of any heating
elements used to prepare food.
   J.   Sidewalk vending receptacles and any attachments thereto shall not
exceed a total height of six (6) feet, a total width of six (6) feet, and a
total length of four (4) feet.
   K.   No sidewalk vending receptacle shall contain or use propane, natural
gas, batteries, or other explosive or hazardous materials.
   L.   Sidewalk vendors shall comply with CCMC Chapter 11.18.015 Polystyrene
Regulations, which include the prohibition of polystyrene food service ware.
   M.   If a sidewalk vending receptacle requires more than one person to
conduct the sidewalk vending activity, all sidewalk vendors associated with the
sidewalk vending receptacle shall be within five (5) feet of the sidewalk
vending receptacle when conducting sidewalk vending activities.
   N.   Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall have the County of Los Angeles
Department of Public Health permit in their possession at all times they are
conducting sidewalk vending activities. If applicable, a sidewalk vendor shall
have proof of a permit exemption from County of Los Angeles Department of
Public Health.
   O.   Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall maintain separate food waste,
trash, and recycling bins in or on their sidewalk vending receptacle and shall
not empty their waste into public trashcans. The size of the vendor’s trash
container shall be taken into account when assessing the total size limit of a
sidewalk vending receptacle. Sidewalk vendors shall not leave any location
without first picking up, removing, and disposing of all trash or refuse from
their operation.
   P.   Sidewalk vendors shall immediately clean up any food, grease or other
fluid or item related to sidewalk vending activities that falls on public
property; washing down hard surfaces must comply with §
5.05.025 Prohibited Activities and §
5.05.030 Requirements for Existing Properties; Good Housekeeping Provisions.
   Q.   Sidewalk vendors shall maintain a minimum four-foot clear accessible
path free from obstructions, including sidewalk vending receptacles and
customer queuing area.
   R.   Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the noise provisions, including but
not limited to those in §
9.04.015 and
Chapter 9.07, including but not limited to permit requirements for loudspeakers
and amplified devices.
   S.   In parks, sidewalk vendors shall not interfere in any way with anyone
engaged in a sporting activity or other activity for which a permit has been
obtained from the City.
   T.   Sidewalk vendors shall ensure that all City-required insurance is in
effect prior to conducting any sidewalk vendor activities and maintained for
the duration of the permit.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.18.060 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AND LOCATIONS.
   A.   Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all operating conditions including
those conditions set forth in §
11.18.050, or any successor sections.
   B.   Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against, or be
affixed at any time to any building or structure including but not limited to
lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches,
bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans, or traffic barriers.
   C.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:
      1.   Renting merchandise to customers;
      2.   Displaying merchandise or food that is not available for immediate
sale;
      3.   Selling of alcoholic beverages of any kind, cannabis, cannabis
concentrate, or cannabis products, adult oriented material, tobacco products,
products that contain nicotine or any product used to smoke/vape nicotine or
cannabis;
      4.   Using an open flame on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle;
      5.   Using an electrical outlet or power source that is owned by the City
or another person other than the sidewalk vendor;
      6.   Conducting sidewalk vending activities outside of allowed hours of
operation:
         a.   In nonresidential areas, the hours of operation for sidewalk
vending shall be the same as the hours of operation imposed on other businesses
or uses on the same street;
         b.   No person shall peddle or solicit for commercial purposes in any
area of the city, which is zoned for residential use under this Code, from 8:00
p.m. until 9:00 a.m. of the following day;
      7.   Continuing to offer food or merchandise for sale, following, or
accompanying any potential customer who has been offered food or merchandise
after such person has refused an offer and has asked to be left alone or after
the person has declined the offer to purchase food or merchandise;
      8.   Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the
course of offering food or merchandise for sale;
      9.   Blocking or impeding the path of the person(s) being offered food or
merchandise to purchase;
      10.   Making any statement, gesture, or other communication which a
reasonable person in the situation of the person(s) being offered food or
merchandise to purchase would perceive to be a threat and which has a
reasonable likelihood to produce in the person(s) a fear that the threat will
be carried out;
      11   Touching the person(s) being offered food or merchandise without
that person(s)’ consent;
      12.   Advertising any product or service that is not related to the food
or merchandise being offered for immediate sale;
      13.   Placing their sidewalk vending receptacles on private property or
any other non-permitted space when engaging in sidewalk vending activities; or
      14.   Soliciting or conducting business with persons in motor vehicles
located on traffic lanes of public streets, highways, or parking lots.
   D.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities at the
following locations:
      1.   The Culver City Nature Trail;
      2.   Carlson Park;
      3.   Coombs Park;
      4.   The Dale Jones City Hall Courtyard;
      5.   Quotation Courtyard;
      6.   Town Plaza;
      7.   Bikeways or bike paths;
      8.   Within a marked bus zone;
      9.   Where placement impedes the flow of pedestrian traffic by reducing
the clear space to less than four (4) feet, or impedes access to or the use of
abutting property, including, but not limited to, residences and places of
business;
      10.   Any public property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk
including, but not limited to, any alley, square, roadway, street, street end,
median island, pedestrian island, or parking lot, without prior City approval;
      11.   On City-owned property without prior City approval;
      12.   Within 18 inches of the curb;
      13.   Within 15 feet of another sidewalk vendor;
      14.   At any park where the City has signed an agreement for concessions
that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire;
      15.   On private property without the written consent and prior approval
of the City; or
      16.   Within one block of any school between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and
5:30 p.m. on days when the school is in session.
   E.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within
five (5) feet of:
      1.   A marked crosswalk;
      2.   The curb return of an unmarked crosswalk;
      3.   Any fire hydrant, fire call box, or other emergency facility;
      4.   An area improved with lawn, flowers shrubs, trees, or street tree
well;
      5.   An alley or entrance to a parking lot or parking garage;
      6.   A driveway or driveway apron;
      7.   An outdoor dining or patio dining area;
      8.   An entrance or exit to a building, structure, or facility; or
      9.   An entrance to a bike path.
   F.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within
ten (10) feet of:
      1.   A transit shelter or bench;
      2.   An automated teller machine (ATM);
      3.   The gated entrance to a public community center, athletic field,
softball/baseball diamond, basketball court, handball court, pickleball, paddle
tennis court, tennis court, soccer field, or other recreational field,
facility, or court;
      4.   Any public picnic area, outdoor exercise equipment, playground area
or playground equipment;
      5.   Any public restroom; or
      6.   Any athletic field, basketball court, softball/baseball diamond,
tennis court, soccer field, or volleyball court.
   G.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within
fifty (50) feet of:
      1.   A permitted certified farmers’ market or swap meet during the
limited operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or swap meet;
      2.   An area designated for a special event permit issued by the City,
during the limited duration of the special event, if the City provides the
sidewalk vendor any notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights
the City provided to any affected businesses or property owners under the
City’s special event permit; or
      3.   A place of worship, or a large or general child day-care facility,
or day camp, while children are present.
   H.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within
one hundred (100) feet of:
      1.   The driveways and entrances to the Police Station;
      2.   The driveways and entrances to a fire station;
      3.   Any police officer, firefighter, lifeguard, or emergency medical
personnel who are actively performing their duties or providing services to the
public.
   I.   Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not sell food or merchandise or
engage in any sidewalk vending activities:
      1.   On any sidewalk or pathway that is not a minimum width of eight (8)
feet;
      2.   On sidewalks or pathways directly adjacent to or within residential
areas; or
      3.   On any city block where there are already two stationary vendors.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.18.070 PENALTIES.
   Violations of this Chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or
misdemeanors and shall only be enforced by the administrative citations as
defined in §
1.02.025 of this Code and the revocation provisions of this Chapter.
   A.   If a sidewalk vendor conducts business without a valid permit, the
sidewalk vendor shall be assessed administrative fines in the following
amounts:
      1.   An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for a first violation.
      2.   An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for a second violation within one year of the first violation.
      3.   An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first
violation.
   B.   If a sidewalk vendor violates any portion of this Chapter other than
conducting business without a valid permit, the sidewalk vendor shall be
assessed administrative fines in the following amounts:
      1.   An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for a first violation.
      2.   An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00)
for a second violation within one year of the first violation.
      3.   An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.18.080 REVOCATION.
   A.   The Chief Financial Officer may revoke a permit issued to a sidewalk
vendor for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The permittee’s failure to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter;
      2.   If the permittee makes any false statement or material
misrepresentation of fact related to a sidewalk vendor permit application; or
      3.   Upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations within one year
of the first violation.
   B.   The revocation takes effect upon delivery of the notice of decision to
revoke the license and remains in effect unless overturned on appeal.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
§ 11.18.090 APPEALS.
   A.   Administrative citations may be appealed as provided in §§
1.02.045 and
1.02.050 of this Code.
   B.   Decisions of the Chief Financial Officer to revoke a permit shall be
appealed in the following manner:
      1.   Appeals may be initiated by the person whose permit was revoked;
      2.   Appeals shall be initiated within fifteen (15) calendar days of
service of notice of the decision to revoke the license;
      3.   Appeals of decisions shall be made in writing and shall state the
factual basis and evidence to substantiate the appeal;
      4.   All appeals of decisions shall be heard by a Hearing Officer
appointed by the City Manager;
      5.   A hearing before the Hearing Officer may be set for a date that is
not less than fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that
the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. The appellant shall be notified of the time and place set for the
hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The City and
appellant may mutually agree to waive, modify, or change the date of the
proceeding;
      6.   All appeals of decisions shall be conducted in accordance with the
following procedures:
         a.   At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the appellant shall
be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents or
evidence submitted or relied upon by the Chief Financial Officer;
         b.   No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall
not apply. Appeal hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Each party
shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support of his or her case,
and to cross-examine witnesses. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence
shall be excluded;
         c.   The failure of the appellant to appear at the hearing shall
constitute a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies.
      7.   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision within ten (10)
days of the hearing and shall list in the decision the reasons for that
decision.
         a.   The Hearing Officer may uphold or deny the decision;
         b.   The appellant shall be served with a copy of the Hearing
Officer's written decision; and
         c.   The decision of the Hearing Officer is final.
(Ord. No. 2023-006 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 11.19: FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
11.19.005   Purpose of chapter
   
11.19.010   Definitions
   
11.19.015   Regulatory permit—required
   
11.19.020   Regulatory permit—application
   
11.19.025   Regulatory permit—application fee
   
11.19.030   Investigation by Police Chief
   
11.19.035   Grounds for permit denial or revocation
   
11.19.040   On-site security requirements
   
11.19.045   Liability insurance
   
11.19.050   Restricted admittance of minors and other prohibited purchasers
   
11.19.055   Inventory reports
   
11.19.060   Display of regulatory permit
   
11.19.065   Issuance of regulatory permit—duration
   
11.19.070   Nonassignability
   
11.19.075   Compliance by existing business
   
11.19.080   Law enforcement inspections
   
11.19.085   Posted warnings
   
11.19.090   Violations
   
11.19.095   Report of permit revocation to federal and state authorities
   
11.19.100   Hearing for permit denial or revocation
   
11.19.105   Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties
§ 11.19.005 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to establish a local program
for the license and regulation of the sale, lease, or transfer of firearms or
ammunition. The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to contradict or
duplicate any applicable state or federal law.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the following words, terms and phrases have the meanings
given to them in this section:
   AMMUNITION. Ammunition or cartridge cases, primers, bullets, or propellant
powder designed for use in any firearm, and any component thereof, but shall
not include blank cartridges or ammunition that can be used solely in an
"antique firearm" as that term is defined in § 921(a)(16) of Title 18 of the
United States Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who applies for a regulatory permit, or the renewal of
such a permit, to sell, lease or transfer firearms or ammunition, including any
officer, director, partner, or other duly authorized representative applying on
behalf of an entity.
   ENGAGE IN THE BUSINESS OF SELLING, LEASING, OR OTHERWISE TRANSFERRING ANY
FIREARM OR AMMUNITION. To conduct a business by the selling, leasing or
transferring of any firearm or ammunition, or to hold one's self out as engaged
in the business of selling, leasing or otherwise transferring any firearm or
ammunition, or to sell, lease or transfer firearms or ammunition in quantity,
in series, or in individual transactions, or in any other manner indicative of
trade.
   FIREARM. Any device, designed to be used as a weapon or modified to be used
as a weapon, from which is expelled through a barrel a projectile by the force
of explosion or other means of combustion, provided that the term FIREARM shall
not include an "antique firearm" as defined in § 921(a)(16) of Title 18 of the
United States Code.
   PERMITTEE. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity engaged in
the business of selling, leasing, or otherwise transferring any firearm or
ammunition, which person or entity has obtained a regulatory permit to sell,
lease or transfer firearms or ammunition.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and
the plural as well as the singular.
   POLICE CHIEF. The City of Culver City Police Chief or the Chiefs designated
representative.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.015 REGULATORY PERMIT—REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other entity to
engage in the business of selling, leasing, or otherwise transferring any
firearm or ammunition within the City without a regulatory permit, as required
by this Chapter, and without complying with all applicable requirements of the
City's Zoning Code as set forth in Title 17.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.020 REGULATORY PERMIT—APPLICATION.
   An Applicant for a permit or renewal of a permit under this Chapter shall
file with the Police Chief an application in writing, signed under penalty of
perjury, on a form prescribed by the City. The Applicant shall provide all
relevant information requested to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter,
including:
   A.   The Applicant's name, including any aliases or prior names age and
address;
   B.   The Applicant's federal firearms license and California firearms dealer
numbers, if any;
   C.   A photocopy of the Applicant's driver's license, passport, or other
government-issued identification card bearing a photograph of the Applicant;
   D.   The address of the proposed location for which the permit is sought,
together with the business name, and the name of any corporation, partnership
or other entity that has any ownership in, or control over, the business;
   E.   The names of all persons who will have access to or control of
workplace firearms or ammunition, including but not limited to, the Applicant's
employees, agents and/or supervisors, if any; such information shall be kept
confidential and shall not be disclosed as a public record;
   F.   A current Certificate of Eligibility from the California Department of
Justice under Cal. Penal Code § 26710 for the Applicant and for each individual
identified in subsection E. above, demonstrating that the person is not
prohibited by state or federal law from possessing firearms or ammunition;
   G.   Proof of a possessory interest in the property at which the proposed
business will be conducted, as owner, lessee or other legal occupant, and, if
the Applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which, the
Applicant's business is to be located and conducted, the written consent of the
owner of record of such real property to the Applicant's proposed business;
   H.   A floor plan of the proposed business which illustrates the Applicant's
compliance with the security provisions outlined in §
11.19.040 of this Chapter;
   I.   Proof of compliance with all applicable federal, state and local
licensing and other business laws;
   J.   Information relating to every license or permit to sell, lease,
transfer, purchase, or possess firearms or ammunition which was sought by the
Applicant, or by any individual identified in subsection E., from any
jurisdiction in the United States, including, but not limited to, the date of
each application and whether it resulted in the issuance of a license, and the
date and circumstances of any revocation or suspension;
   K.   The Applicant's agreement to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
City, its officers, elected officials, agents and employees from and against
all claims, losses, costs, damages and liabilities of any kind pursuant to the
operation of the business, including attorneys' fees, arising in any manner out
of the negligence or intentional or willful misconduct of (a) the Applicant;
(b) the Applicant's officers, employees, agents and/or supervisors; or (c) if
the business is a corporation, partnership or other entity, the officers,
directors or partners, which shall be in a format approved by the City;
   L.   A Certificate of Insurance reflecting liability insurance and
endorsement requirements in compliance with §
11.19.045 of this Chapter; and
   M.   The date, location and nature of all criminal convictions of the
Applicant, if any, in any jurisdiction in the United States.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.025 REGULATORY PERMIT—APPLICATION FEE.
   Each application for a regulatory permit shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee for administering this Chapter as established by City Council
resolution.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.030 INVESTIGATION BY POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief shall conduct an investigation of the Applicant and the
Applicant's employees, agents, and/or supervisors, if any, as set forth in the
subsections below, to determine, for the protection of the public health and
safety, whether the regulatory permit may be issued or renewed.
   A.   Prior to permitting an Applicant to engage in the business of selling,
leasing, or otherwise transferring any firearm or ammunition, or prior to the
issuance or renewal of a regulatory permit under this Chapter, the Police Chief
shall review all application materials, employee lists, current Certificates of
Eligibility and all other documentation to confirm compliance with state and
federal law.
   B.   Prior to issuance or renewal of the permit, the Police Chief shall
inspect the premises to ensure compliance with this Chapter.
   C.   The Police Chief may grant or renew a regulatory permit if the
Applicant or Permittee is in compliance with this Chapter and all other
applicable federal, state and local laws.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.035 GROUNDS FOR PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   A.   The Police Chief shall deny the issuance or renewal of a regulatory
permit, or shall revoke an existing permit, if the operation of the business
would not or does not comply with federal, state or local law, or if any of the
following conditions exist:
      1.   The Applicant, or any individual identified in §
11.19.020E., does not have a current Certificate of Eligibility issued by the
California Department of Justice.
      2.   The Applicant is not licensed as a dealer in firearms under all
applicable federal, state and local laws.
      3.   The Applicant has not satisfied all applicable requirements of the
Zoning Code.
      4.   The Applicant has failed to fully comply with the application
requirements, such as by refusing or failing to provide all of the requested
information or refusing to agree to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the
City of Culver City, its elected and appointed officials, officers, and
employees, against claims arising from operation of the business.
      5.   The Applicant has made a false or misleading statement of a material
fact or omission of a material fact in the application for a regulatory permit,
or in any other documents submitted to the Police Chief pursuant to this
Chapter. If a permit is denied on this ground, the Applicant is prohibited from
reapplying for a permit for a period of five (5) years.
      6.   The Applicant, or any individual identified in §
11.19.020E., has had a license or permit to sell, lease, transfer, purchase or
possess firearms or ammunition from any jurisdiction in the United States
revoked, suspended or denied for good cause within the immediately preceding
five (5) years.
      7.   The Applicant is within a class of persons defined in Cal. Welfare
and Institutions Code §§ 8100 or 8103.
   B.   The regulatory permit of any person or entity found to be in violation
of any of the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.040 ON-SITE SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   If the proposed or current business location is to be used at least in
part for the sale of firearms, the permitted place of business shall be a
secure facility within the meaning of Cal. Penal Code § 17110.
   B.   If the proposed or current business location is to be used at least in
part for the sale of firearms, all heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and
service openings shall be secured with steel bars or metal grating.
   C.   If the proposed or current business location is street level, bollards
or other barriers, such as security planters or other devices with a similar
structural integrity of bollards, shall be installed to protect the location's
front entrance, any floor-to-ceiling windows, and any other doors, that could
be breached by a vehicle. This subsection C. shall not apply to elevated
loading docks or to locations of a licensee's premises that are fitted with
steel rolldown doors. Any bollards shall not obstruct accessible routes or
accessible means of egress in compliance with state and federal law.
   D.   Any time a Permittee is not open for business, every firearm shall be
stored in a secure facility within the meaning of Cal. Penal Code § 17110, or
in a locked fireproof safe or vault in the licensee's business premises that
meets the standards for a gun safe implemented by the Attorney General pursuant
to Cal. Penal Code § 23650.
   E.   Any time a Permittee is open for business, every firearm shall be
unloaded, inaccessible to the public and secured using one of the following
three (3) methods, except in the immediate presence of and under the direct
supervision of an employee of the Permittee:
      1.   Secured within a locked case so that a customer seeking access to
the firearm must ask an employee of the Permittee for assistance;
      2.   Secured behind a counter where only the Permittee and the
Permittee's employees are allowed. During the absence of the Permittee or a
Permittee's employee from the counter, the counter shall be secured with a
locked, impenetrable barrier that extends from the floor or counter to the
ceiling; or
      3.   Secured with a hardened steel rod or cable through the trigger guard
of the firearm, which shall be secured with a hardened steel lock that has a
shackle, and the lock and shackle shall be protected or shielded from the use
of a bolt cutter and the rod or cable shall be anchored in a manner that
prevents the removal of the firearm from the premises, or in the alternative,
the firearm is secured in a equivalent manner, as approved by the Chief of
Police.
   F.   Any time a Permittee is open for business, all ammunition shall be
stored so that it is inaccessible to the public and secured using one of the
methods mentioned in subsection E.1. or E.2., except in the immediate presence
of and under the direct supervision of an employee of the Permittee.
   G.   The permitted business location shall be secured by an alarm system
that is installed and maintained by an alarm company operator licensed pursuant
to state law. The alarm system must be monitored by a central station and in
compliance with Chapter 11.04 of this Code.
   H.   The permitted business location shall be monitored by a video
surveillance system approved by the Police Chief and that includes cameras,
monitors, and video recorders.
      1.   The interior and exterior of the permitted business location shall
be monitored. The number and location of the cameras are subject to the
approval of the Police Chief. At a minimum, the cameras shall be sufficient in
number and location to monitor the critical areas of the business premises,
including, but not limited to, all places where firearms or ammunition are
stored, sold, or transferred, including, but not limited to, all counters,
safes, vaults, cabinets, cases, entryways, and parking lots.
      2.   The video surveillance system shall operate continuously, without
interruption, whenever the Permittee is open for business. Whenever the
Permittee is not open for business, if not operating continuously, the system
shall be triggered by a motion detector and begin recording immediately upon
detection of any motion within the monitored area.
      3.   The video surveillance system must be maintained in proper working
order at all times. If the system becomes inoperable, it must be repaired or
replaced within fourteen (14) calendar days. The Permittee must inspect the
system at least weekly to ensure that it is operational, and images are being
recorded and retained as required by the Police Chief.
   I.   Business operating hours shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
seven (7) days a week.
   J.   The Applicant shall comply with all California laws regulating the
sales of firearms and ammunition, including but not limited to Cal. Penal Code
§§ 26815, 26885, 30363, 32000 and 32310.
   K.   The Police Chief may impose security requirements in addition to those
listed in this section prior to issuance of the regulatory permit. Failure to
fully comply with the requirements of this section shall be sufficient cause
for denial or revocation of the regulatory permit by the Police Chief.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.045 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   A.   If the proposed or current business location is to be used for the sale
of firearms, no regulatory permit shall be issued or reissued unless there is
in effect a policy of insurance in a form approved by the City and executed by
an insurance company approved by the City, insuring the Applicant against
liability for damage to property and for injury to or death of any person as a
result of the theft, sale, lease or transfer or offering for sale, lease or
transfer of a firearm or ammunition, or any other operations of the business.
The policy shall also name the City and its officials, officers, employees and
agents as additional insureds. The limits of commercial general liability shall
be in an amount consistent with the City's standard insurance requirements; the
Certificate of Insurance and required endorsements shall be submitted to and
approved by the City. Limits of liability may be increased if deemed necessary
by the City Attorney.
   B.   Upon expiration of the policy of insurance, if no additional insurance
is obtained, the regulatory permit shall be revoked.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.050 RESTRICTED ADMITTANCE OF MINORS AND OTHER PROHIBITED PURCHASERS.
   A.   Where firearm sales activity is the primary business performed at the
business premises, no Permittee or any of his or her agents, employees, or
other persons acting under the Permittee's authority shall allow the following
persons to remain on the premises unless accompanied by his or her parent or
legal guardian:
      1.   Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, if the Permittee
sells, keeps or displays only firearms capable of being concealed on the
person, provided that this provision shall not prevent a supervisory agent or
employee who has the authority to control activities on the business premises
from keeping a single firearm capable of being concealed on the person on the
business premises for purposes of lawful self-defense; or
      2.   Any person under eighteen (18) years of age, if the Permittee sells,
keeps or displays firearms other than firearms capable of being concealed on
the person.
   B.   Where firearm sales activity is the primary business performed at the
business premises, the Permittee and any of his or her agents, employees, or
other persons acting under the Permittee's authority shall be responsible for
requiring clear evidence of age and identity of persons to prevent persons not
permitted to remain on the premises pursuant to subsection A. by reason of age
from remaining on the premises. Clear evidence of age and identity includes,
but is not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a state
identification card, an armed forces identification card, or an employment
identification card which contains the bearer's signature, photograph and age,
or any similar documentation which provides reasonable assurance of the
identity and age of the individual.
   C.   Where firearm sales activity is the primary business performed at the
business premises, no Permittee or any of his or her agents, employees, or
other persons acting under the Permittee's authority shall allow any person to
remain on the premises who the Permittee or any of his or her agents,
employees, or other persons acting under the Permittee's authority knows or has
reason to know is prohibited from possessing or purchasing firearms pursuant to
federal, state, or local law, except as required by law or court order.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.055 INVENTORY REPORTS.
   A.   Within the first ten (10) business days of April and October of each
year, the Permittee shall cause a physical inventory to be taken that includes
a listing of each firearm held by the Permittee by make, model, and serial
number, together with a listing of each firearm the Permittee has sold since
the last inventory period. In addition, the inventory shall include a listing
of each firearm lost or stolen that is required to be reported pursuant to Cal.
Penal Code § 26885.
   B.   Immediately upon completion of the inventory, the Permittee shall
forward a copy of the inventory to the address specified by the Police Chief,
by such means as specified by the Police Chief. With each copy of the
inventory, the Permittee shall include an affidavit signed by an authorized
agent or employee on behalf of the Permittee under penalty of perjury stating
that within the first ten (10) business days of that April or October, as the
case may be, the signer confirmed that the inventory was conducted by the
signer, or by store personnel under the supervision of the signer, and to the
best of their knowledge, the inventory is true and correct.
   C.   The Permittee shall maintain a copy of the inventory on the premises
for which the regulatory permit was issued for a period of not less than five
(5) years from the date of the inventory and shall make the copy available for
inspection by federal, state or local law enforcement upon request.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.060 DISPLAY OF REGULATORY PERMIT.
   The regulatory permit, or a certified copy of it, shall be displayed in a
prominent place on the business premises where it can easily be seen by those
entering the premises.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.065 ISSUANCE OF REGULATORY PERMIT—DURATION.
   A.   A regulatory permit expires one year after the date of issuance.
   B.   A permit may be renewed for additional one (1) year periods if the
Permittee submits a timely application for renewal, accompanied by a
nonrefundable renewal fee established by City Council resolution. Renewal of
the permit is contingent upon the Permittee's compliance with the terms and
conditions of the original application and permit, as detailed in this Chapter.
Police Department personnel, at the direction of the Chief, shall inspect the
permitted business premises for compliance with this Chapter prior to renewal
of the permit. The renewal application and the renewal fee must be received by
the Police Department no later than forty-five (45) days before the expiration
of the current permit.
   C.   A decision regarding issuance, renewal, or revocation of the regulatory
permit may be appealed in the manner provided in §
11.19.100.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.070 NONASSIGNABILITY.
   A regulatory permit issued under this Chapter is not assignable. Any attempt
to assign a regulatory permit shall result in revocation of the permit.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.075 COMPLIANCE BY EXISTING BUSINESS.
   A person engaged in the business of selling, leasing, or otherwise
transferring any firearm or ammunition on the effective date of this Chapter
shall, within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date, comply with
this Chapter. However, any person whose business, on the effective date of this
Chapter, is located in any location that makes them ineligible to obtain a
Conditional Use Permit, or, any person whose business, on the effective date of
this Chapter, has legally operated continuously in the City beginning prior to
the date that a Conditional Use Permit was required by the City's Zoning Code,
is eligible to apply for a regulatory permit, provided that they comply with
all other applicable provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.080 LAW ENFORCEMENT INSPECTIONS.
   Permittees shall have their places of business open for inspection by
federal, state and local law enforcement during all hours of operation. The
Police Chief shall conduct periodic inspections of the Permittee's place of
business without notice to assess the Permittee's compliance with this Chapter.
The inspections shall be of the parts of the Permittee's place of business that
are used to store or sell firearms, ammunition, records, and/or documents. The
Police Chief shall conduct no more than two (2) inspections of a single place
of business during any six (6) month period; except that the Police Chief may
conduct follow-up inspections that exceed two (2) in a six (6) month period if
he or she has good cause to believe that a Permittee is violating this Chapter.
Permittees shall maintain all records, documents, firearms and ammunition in a
manner and place accessible for inspection by federal, state and local law
enforcement.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.085 POSTED WARNINGS.
   (A)   A Permittee shall comply with Cal. Penal Code § 26835 and post all
signs required by that section. A Permittee shall also post conspicuously the
following warnings in block letters not less than one (1) inch in height,
within the licensed premises:
      1.   "WITH FEW EXCEPTIONS, IT IS A CRIME TO SELL OR GIVE A FIREARM TO
SOMEONE WITHOUT COMPLETING A DEALER RECORD OF SALE FORM AT A LICENSED FIREARMS
DEALERSHIP."
      2.   "ACCESS TO A FIREARM SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASES THE RISK OF DEATH BY
SUICIDE, DOMESTIC DISPUTE, HOMICIDE, AND UNINTENTIONAL GUNSHOT."
      3.   "STORING YOUR GUNS LOCKED, UNLOADED, AND SEPARATE FROM AMMUNITION
CAN REDUCE THE RISK OF SELF-INFLICTED AND UNINTENTIONAL DEATH AND INJURY AMONG
CHILDREN AND TEENS."
   B.   Within the licensed premises, a Permittee shall post the suicide
prevention signage as required by § 13.03.225 of this Code.
   C.   At each entrance to the licensed premises a Permittee shall post:
"THESE PREMISES ARE UNDER VIDEO SURVEILLANCE. YOUR IMAGE MAY BE RECORDED."
   D.   If a Permittee sells, keeps or displays only firearms capable of being
concealed on the person, the Permittee shall post conspicuously at each
entrance to the premises, a sign stating: "FIREARMS ARE KEPT, DISPLAYED OR
OFFERED ON THE PREMISES, AND PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 ARE EXCLUDED UNLESS
ACCOMPANIED BY A PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN."
   E.   If a Permittee sells, keeps or displays firearms other than firearms
capable of being concealed on the person, the Permittee shall post
conspicuously at each entrance to the premises, a sign stating: "FIREARMS ARE
KEPT, DISPLAYED OR OFFERED ON THE PREMISES, AND PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 ARE
EXCLUDED UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY A PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN.
   F.   Where firearm sales activity is the primary business performed at the
business premises, the Permittee shall post conspicuously at each entrance to
the premises, a sign stating: "FIREARMS ARE KEPT, DISPLAYED OR OFFERED ON THE
PREMISES, AND PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM POSSESSING OR PURCHASING FIREARMS
PURSUANT TO FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAW ARE EXCLUDED."
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.090 VIOLATIONS.
   The Police Chief may revoke the permit of any Permittee found to be in
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. In addition to any other
penalty or remedy as set forth in this Code, the City Attorney may commence a
civil action to seek enforcement of these provisions.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.095 REPORT OF PERMIT REVOCATION TO FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES.
   In addition to any other penalty or remedy, the City Attorney shall report
any person or entity whose regulatory permit is revoked pursuant to this
Chapter to the Bureau of Firearms of the California Department of Justice and
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives within the U.S.
Department of Justice.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.100 HEARING FOR PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   A.   Within ten (10) days of the Police Chief mailing a written denial of an
application or mailing a written revocation of a permit, the Applicant may
appeal by requesting a hearing before the Police Chief. The request must be
made in writing, setting forth the specific grounds for appeal. If the
Applicant submits a timely request for an appeal, the Police Chief shall within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the request set a time and place for the
hearing.
   B.   Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and
discovery shall not apply. However, rules of privilege shall be applicable to
the extent they are permitted by law, and irrelevant, collateral, undue, and
repetitious testimony may be excluded.
   C.   The City bears the burden of proof to establish the grounds for denial,
nonrenewal, or revocation by a preponderance of evidence.
   D.   The Police Chief shall provide a written decision regarding the appeal
within fourteen (14) calendar days of the hearing. The decision of the Police
Chief is final and conclusive. The written final decision shall also contain
the following statement: "The decision of the Police Chief is final and
binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to the time limits set
forth in California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6."
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.19.105 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND OTHER LEGAL DUTIES.
   A.   The City Manager is authorized to establish any additional rules,
regulations and standards related to the application, issuance, denial or
renewal of the permits authorized under this Chapter, the ongoing operation and
City's oversight of retail firearms and ammunitions retail establishments, or
any other subject determined to be necessary to carry out the purposes of this
Chapter.
   B.   Any regulations promulgated by the City Manager pursuant to this
Section shall be provided to each firearms and ammunition retail establishment,
published on the City's website, and maintained and available to the public in
the Office of the City Clerk.
   C.   Regulations promulgated by the City Manager shall become effective upon
date of publication on the City's website. Firearms and ammunitions retail
establishments shall be required to comply with all state and local laws and
regulations, including but not limited to any rules, regulations or standards
adopted by the City Manager.
(Ord. No. 2022-010 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 11.20: TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
11.20.005   Purpose and intent
   
11.20.010   Affected telecommunications services
   
11.20.015   Effect of federal and state laws and regulations
   
11.20.020   Definitions
   
11.20.025   Application requirements
   
11.20.030   Franchise or encroachment permit required
   
11.20.035   Cable communications systems
   
11.20.040   Open video systems
   
11.20.045   Telephony telecommunications
   
11.20.050   Data telecommunications
   
11.20.055   Wireless data or video telecommunications
   
11.20.060   Pass through telecommunications system
   
11.20.065   Wireless facilities in public right-of-way
Cross-reference:
   Franchises, see Charter §
1700
§ 11.20.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   A.   The City Council finds and determines as follows:
      1.   The development of cable television, data transmission, telephony,
wireless and other telecommunications systems may provide significant benefits
for, and have substantial impacts upon, the residents and businesses of the
City.
      2.   Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated
with telecommunications services and systems, the public convenience, safety
and general welfare is best served by the City's exercise of its regulatory
powers.
      3.   This Chapter is intended to identify regulatory provisions that
authorize the City to regulate telecommunication services and systems to the
extent authorized by federal and state law, including but not limited to the
federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984, the federal Cable Television Consumer and Competition Act
of 1992 and the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations
and decisions of the Federal Communications Commission, and applicable
California statutes and regulations.
   B.   The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide for the attainment
of the following objectives:
      1.   To enable the City to discharge its public trusts in a manner
consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies,
industry competition, and technology development.
      2.   To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the City's public
right-of-way and public property for telecommunications purposes on a
competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis.
      3.   To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the City and its
residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way and
public property, which are recognized to be valuable public assets, held in
trust by the City.
      4.   To foster and to promote competition in telecommunications services,
minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications service providers,
and encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the broadest possible basis to local government and to the
businesses, institutions and residents of the City.
      5.   To establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for
the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunication service providers, including establishment and enforcement of
consumer service standards and technical standards.
      6.   To encourage the profitable deployment of advanced
telecommunications infrastructures that satisfy local needs, deliver enhanced
government services, and provide informed consumer choices in an evolving
telecommunication market.
(Ord. No. 2000-019, §1 (part))
§ 11.20.010 AFFECTED TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
   A.   The cable, video, and telecommunications services that are addressed in
this Chapter include services provided by cable television systems, open video
systems, master antenna television systems, satellite systems, multichannel
multipoint distribution systems, local multipoint distribution systems, data
transmission services, cable modem services, voice transmission services,
telephone services, wireless data transmissions, wireless video transmissions,
and any other providers of video, voice, or data services, no matter what means
of technology is deployed, and any other new technology subject to municipal
regulation.
   B.   Any provider holding a valid franchise or encroachment permit from the
City for a specific telecommunications service at the time of adoption of this
Chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of the Chapter except as
provided for in §
11.20.025(A) herein.
(Ord. No. 2000-019, § 1 (part))
§ 11.20.015 EFFECT OF FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   A.   This Chapter adopts provisions by which the City shall regulate cable,
video, telephony, data, and wireless telecommunications services to the extent
authorized by federal law, including but not limited to the federal Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, the federal Cable Television Consumer and
Competition Act of 1992, the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and
applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as they exist
at the time of adoption of this Chapter. Any change to a federal law or FCC
regulation, to the extent it may restrict or expand the City's authority and
requirements contained in this Chapter, shall be deemed applicable to this
Chapter at the time of its enactment.
   B.   This Chapter adopts provisions by which the City shall regulate
telephony and other telecommunications services to the extent authorized by the
laws of the State of California and regulations of the California Public
Utilities Commission. Any change to a state law or Public Utilities Commission
regulation, to the extent it may restrict or expand the City's authority and
requirements contained in this Chapter, shall be deemed applicable to this
Chapter at the time of its enactment.
(Ord. No. 2000-019, §1 (part))
§ 11.20.020 DEFINITIONS.
   A.   For the purpose of this Chapter, the words, terms, phrases, and their
derivatives set forth in this Section shall have the meanings set forth below.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the
singular include the plural number.
   ACCESS. The entrance into, upon, under, over or through the rights-of-way,
or the modification of facilities in the rights-of-way.
   AFFILIATE. When used in relation to any person, another person who owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control
with such person. For purposes of this definition, the term OWN means to own an
equity interest, or its equivalent, of ten percent (10%) or more.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to provide telecommunications
services within or through the City.
   APPLICATION. The form established by the City upon which an applicant shall
request consideration of a franchise, encroachment permit, or other
authorization from the City.
   CABLE SERVICES. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other
programming service. For the purposes of this definition, VIDEO PROGRAMMING
means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to the
programming provided by, a television broadcast station; OTHER PROGRAMMING
SERVICE means programming that a cable system operator makes available to all
subscribers generally.
   CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM. A
facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated
signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide
cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple
subscribers within a community. The term CABLE SYSTEM does not include:
      1.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      2.   A facility that serves subscribers without using, or connecting to a
facility that uses, any public right-of-way within the City;
      3.   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title ll of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, except
that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for purposes
specified in Section 621(c) of the 1984 Cable Act) to the extent such facility
is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers,
unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services;
      4.   An open video system that is certified by the Federal Communications
Commission; or
      5.   Any facility of an electric utility that is used solely for
operating its electric utility system.
   CABLE SYSTEMS OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons:
      1.   Who directly or through one or more affiliates provides cable
service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns
a significant interest in that cable system; or
      2.   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.
   CALIFORNIA PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION or CPUC. The Public Utilities
Commission of the State of California or any other authority succeeding to the
regulatory powers of the California Public Utilities Commission.
       CFR    . The Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation of "47 CFR
80.1" refers to Title 47, part 80, section 1 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
   CHANGE OF CONTROL. Any change in the makeup of ownership in a company,
corporation, limited partnership or other structure wherein more than twenty-
five percent (25%) of the ownership of stock or interest in the entity has
changed.
   CITY MANAGER. The CITY MANAGER for the City of Culver City appointed by the
City Council, or his/her designee.
   CITY. The City of Culver City as represented by its City Council or any
delegate acting within the scope of its delegated authority.
   CONSTRUCT, OPERATE or REPAIR. The named actions interpreted broadly,
encompassing, among other things, installation, extension, maintenance,
replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site
preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready, excavation and the management of a
system and its operations.
   COMMUNICATIONS ACT. The Communications Act of 1934 (48 Stat. 1064, enacted
June 19, 1934), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984
(Public Law No. 98-549, enacted October 30, 1984), the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act  of 1992 (Public Law No. 102-385,
enacted October 5, 1992), and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law
No. 104-104, enacted February 8, 1996), as amended from time to time.
   DATA TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission of information, regardless of
device, between two or more points.
   ENCROACHMENT PERMIT. A legal authorization from the City to install,
operate, and/or maintain a facility within the public rights-of-way.
   ENTRY. Any physical placement of equipment, materials, or facilities in, on,
above, through, or under any part of the rights-of-way.
   FACILITIES or TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Any pipe, pipeline, tube, main
service trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit,
wire, tower, electrolier, signpost, pole, post line, cross-arm or bracket,
anchor, junction box, transformer, equipment, structure, materials, or tangible
components or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned herein
which is or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in the
rights-of-way and to include physical elements used to provide services,
including but not limited to, all plant, whether inside or outside, works,
fiber strands, electronic equipment, amplification equipment, optic equipment,
transmission and distribution structures and antennas, lines, termination
equipment, mains, interducts, regenerators, repeaters, underground lines,
handholes, pull boxes, splice closures, and cables.
   FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC. The federal administrative agency,
created by the United States Communications Act of 1934, as amended, codified
at 47 USC Sec. 151 et seq., or any lawful successor, that is authorized to
regulate telecommunications services and telecommunication service providers on
a national level.
   FRANCHISE. An initial authorization, or the renewal of an authorization,
issued by the City Council, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract,  certificate, agreement, or
otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable,
telecommunications, telephony or data transmission system.
   FRANCHISE FEE. Any fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by state
or federal law to be imposed by the City on a Grantee of a franchise. The term
FRANCHISE FEE does not include:
      1.   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any
such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on utilities, cable, telecommunications
and data transmission operators or their services);
      2.   Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by
Grantee for public, educational or governmental access facilities;
      3.   Costs or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of
the franchise, including payment for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages;
      4.   Costs for reimbursement to City for direct and indirect costs
associated with the award, modification or enforcement of the franchise.
   GRANTEE. Any person who is awarded a franchise in accordance with this
Chapter, and that person's lawful successor, transferee, or assignee.
   MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR or VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR.
A person such as, but not limited to, a cable system operator, a multichannel
multipoint distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a
television receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available
multiple channels of video programming for purchase by subscribers or
customers.
   OPEN ACCESS. The ability of any data transmission operator or Internet
Service Provider (ISP) to access customers by utilization of a portion of a
data transmission device through lease or purchase of the transmission
capacity.
   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed
to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is provided to
multiple subscribers within the City, provided that the FCC has certified that
such system complies with 47 CFR §1500 et seq., entitled "Open Video Systems."
   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who provides
cable service over an open video system and directly or through one or more
affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise
controls or is responsible for the management and operation of that open video
system. For purposes of this chapter, SIGNIFICANT INTEREST means holding more
than ten percent (10%) in the shares or equity of the system.
   PASS THROUGH TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. Any system of wires, fiber or other
device that utilizes the public rights-of-way but which has no connections to
any residence, business or other telecommunications provider within the
corporate city boundaries.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation,
company, trust, joint stock company, banking institution, association,
governmental entity, or organization of any kind.
   TELEPHONY SERVICE PROVIDER. Any provider of telephony services licensed by
the CPUC.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. The transfer of full interest, control and possession
from one person to another person.
   U.S.C. The United States Code.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER. Any person or group of persons who has the right
under federal copyright laws to select and to contract for the carriage of
specific video programming on an open video system.
   VIDEO PROVIDER. Any person, company or service that provides one or more
channels of video programming to a business or residence, including a home,
condominium, apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that
service, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether
or not public rights-of-way are used in the delivery of that video programming.
A VIDEO PROVIDER includes, without limitation, providers of cable television
service, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct
broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services, and other providers of
video programming, whatever their technology.
   B.   Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases not
defined in this §
11.20.020 will be given their meaning as used in Title 47 of the United States
Code, as now existing or hereafter amended, and, if not defined in that Code,
their meaning as used in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(Ord. No. 2000-019 §1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 §22 (part))
§ 11.20.025 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   A telecommunications application to the Cityis required:
      1.   To install or place any telecommunications facility within the
public rights-of-way.
      2.   To provide a cable, telecommunications, telephony, wireless or data
transmission service to customers within the corporate boundaries of the City.
      3.   For any current telecommunications provider who is subject to a
franchise or encroachment permit renewal, change of control, or transfer of
ownership.
   B.   Applications shall be submitted on a form approved by the City Manager
or his or her designee(s) and provided by the City. The City shall provide an
estimate of the cost for review of the application in accordance with the fees
for telecommunications services as adopted by resolution from time to time by
the City Council. The application fee shall be paid prior to initiation of any
application review by the City.
   C.   Applications shall be reviewed by designees of the City Manager for
determination as to whether a franchise or an encroachment permit shall be
required.If it is determined that a franchise is needed, then the designees
shall make findings and recommendations to be used by the City Council as part
of the City Council review required by §
11.20.025.D.
   D.   All franchises required pursuant to this Chapter shall be approved,
approved with conditions, or denied by action of the City Council.
   E.   All encroachment permits required pursuant to this Chapter shall be
approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the Public Works Director/City
Engineer, subject to any appeal thereof.
(Ord. No. 2000-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part); Ord. No. 2019-001
§ 1)
§ 11.20.030 FRANCHISE OR ENCROACHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A.   All persons providing telecommunications services within the City or
utilizing the public rights-of-way for the purpose of installing and operating
telecommunications facilities through the City's jurisdiction shall be required
to first obtain either a franchise or an encroachment permit as provided for in
this chapter. No construction related permits shall be issued for access to the
rights-of-way unless the City has first approved either a franchise or
encroachment permit.
   B.   At the City's discretion more than one telecommunications service may
be included in a franchise agreement or an encroachment permit. Each franchise
agreement shall be deemed to incorporate any encroachment permit that may be
required for the telecommunications provider.
(Ord. No. 2000-019 §1 (part))
§ 11.20.035 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS.
   A.   The City Council finds that the development of cable television and
related video programming services may provide significant benefits for, and
have substantial impacts upon, the residents and the business community of the
City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with
cable service, the City Council further finds that the public convenience,
safety and general welfare can be best served by the City's exercise of its
regulatory powers. It is the intent of the City Council that any person
operating a cable communications system shall be regulated by the Rights-of-Way
Management Plan and Standards provided for in
§ 9.08.307 of this Code.
   B.   Each person proposing to provide multi-channel video programming
services to any individual, residence or business within the City over a cable
communications system shall be required to first obtain a franchise from the
City as provided for in
Chapter 11.30 of this Code. An application shall be required pursuant to §
11.20.025.
   C.   Each Grantee with a cable communications franchise issued by the City
at the effective date of this Chapter shall be required to submit an
application for a new franchise if:
      1.   The current franchise is subject to renewal, or
      2.   There is a change in control, or
      3.   There is a transfer of ownership, or
      4.   The City finds that the terms of the existing franchise have been
violated and the existing franchise has been revoked as provided for in the
franchise.
   D.   Any person granted a franchise or encroachment permit by the City for
the provision of telecommunications services other than cable service shall be
required to obtain a separate franchise for the provision of cable services
pursuant to
Chapter 11.30 of this Code before such service may be provided.
(Ord. No. 2000-019 §1 (part))
§ 11.20.040 OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS.
   A.   The City Council finds that the development of cable television and
related video programming services may provide significant benefits for, and
have substantial impacts upon, the residents and the business community of the
City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with
cable service, the City Council further finds that the public convenience,
safety and general welfare can be best served by the City's exercise of its
regulatory powers. It is the intent of the City Council that any person
operating an open video system shall be regulated by the Rights-of-Way
Management Plan and Standards provided for in §
9.08.307 of this Code.
   B.   Each person proposing to provide an open video system to any
individual, residence or business within the City that shall utilize the public
rights-of-way shall be required to first obtain a franchise from the City as
provided for in Chapter 11.22 of this Code. An application shall be required
pursuant to §
11.20.025.
   C.   Each Grantee with an open video system franchise issued by the City at
the effective date of this Chapter shall be required to submit an application
for a new franchise if:
      1.   The current franchise is subject to renewal, or
      2.   There is a change in control, or
      3.   There is a transfer of ownership, or
      4.   The City finds that the terms of the existing franchise have been
violated and the existing franchise has been revoked as provided for in the
franchise.
   D.   Any person granted a franchise or encroachment permit by the City for
the provision of telecommunications services other than an open video system
shall be required to obtain a separate franchise for the provision of an open
video system service pursuant to Chapter 11.22 of this Code before such service
may be provided.
(Ord. No. 2000-019, § 1 (part))
§ 11.20.045 TELEPHONY TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   A.   The City Council finds that the development of telephony and related
voice telecommunications services may provide significant benefits for, and
have substantial impacts upon, the residents and the business community of the
City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with
telephony service, the City Council further finds that the public convenience,
safety and general welfare can be best served by the City's exercise of its
police powers, including the authority to manage and control the public rights-
of-way. It is the intent of the City Council that the Rights-of-Way Management
Plan and Standards provided for in §
9.08.307 of this Code shall apply to any person operating a telephony
telecommunications system under the authority of the California Public
Utilities Commission.
   B.   Each person proposing to provide a telephony system to any individual,
residence or business within the City, under license from the California Public
Utilities Commission, that utilizes the public rights-of-way shall be required
to first obtain an encroachment permit from the City as provided for in Chapter
11.23 of this Code. An application shall be required pursuant to §
11.20.025.
   C.   Any person granted a franchise or encroachment permit by the City for
any telecommunications service other than telephony licensed by the Public
Utilities Code shall be required to first obtain an encroachment permit for the
telephony service pursuant to Chapter 11.23 of this Code before that service
may be provided.
(Ord. No. 2000-019, § 1 (part))
§ 11.20.050 DATA TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   A.   The City Council finds that the development of data telecommunications
services may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts
upon, the residents and the business community of the City. Because of the
complex and rapidly changing technology associated with data
telecommunications, the City Council further finds that the public convenience,
safety and general welfare can be best served by the City's exercise of its
authority to manage and control its public rights-of-way. It is the intent of
the City Council that the Rights-of-Way Management Plan and Standards provided
for in §
9.08.307 of this Code shall apply to any person operating a data
telecommunications system in the City.
   B.   Each person proposing to provide data telecommunications service over a
data telecommunications system to any individual, residence or business within
the City that utilizes the public rights-of-way shall be required to first
obtain a franchise or encroachment permit from the City as provided for in
Chapter 11.24 of this Code. An application shall be required pursuant to §
11.20.025.
   C.   Each Grantee with a data telecommunications franchise or encroachment
permit issued by the City at the effective date of this Chapter shall be
required to submit an application for a new franchise or encroachment permit
if:
      1.   The current franchise or encroachment permit is subject to renewal,
or
      2.   There is a change in control, or
      3.   There is a transfer of ownership, or
      4.   The City finds that the terms of the existing franchise or
encroachment permit have been violated and the existing franchise or
encroachment permit has been terminated as provided for in the franchise or
encroachment permit.
   D.   Any person granted a franchise or encroachment permit by the City for
any telecommunications service other than data telecommunications shall be
required to first obtain a separate franchise or encroachment permit for the
data telecommunications service pursuant to Chapter 11.24 of this Code before
that service may be provided.
   E.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to those data
telecommunications providers who, by nature of specific approval and inclusion
in a license approved by the California Public Utilities Commission, have been
authorized to provide data telecommunications. In said situations the provider
shall be required to obtain an encroachment permit only if currently not in
possession of one.
(Ord. No. 2000-019, § 1 (part))
§ 11.20.055 WIRELESS DATA OR VIDEO TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   A.   The City Council finds that the development of wireless data and video
services may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts
upon, the residents and the business community of the City. Because of the
complex and rapidly changing technology associated with wireless data and video
services, the City Council further finds that the public convenience, safety
and general welfare can be best served by the City's exercise of its regulatory
powers. It is the intent of the City Council that the Rights-of-Way Management
Plan and Standards provided for in §
9.08.307 of this Code shall apply to any person operating a wireless data or
video system that utilizes the public rights-of-way.
   B.   Each person proposing to provide a wireless data or video service to
any individual, residence or business within the City that utilizes the public
rights-of-way shall be required to first obtain a franchise from the City as
provided for in Chapter 11.25 of this Code. An application shall be required
pursuant to §
11.20.025.
   C.   Each Grantee with a wireless data or video telecommunications franchise
issued by the City at the effective date of this Chapter shall be required to
submit an application for a new franchise if:
      1.   The current franchise is subject to renewal, or
      2.   There is a change in control, or
      3.   There is a transfer of ownership, or
      4.   The City finds that the terms of the existing franchise have been
violated and the existing franchise has been terminated as provided for in the
franchise.
   D.   Any person granted a franchise or encroachment permit by the City for
any telecommunications service other than wireless data or video system shall
be required to first obtain a separate franchise for the wireless data or video
service pursuant to Chapter 11.25 of this Code before that service may be
provided.
   E.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to those wireless data
transmission or video service providers who, by nature of specific approval and
inclusion in a license approved by the California Public Utilities Commission,
have been authorized to provide wireless data or video telecommunications. In
said situations the provider shall be required to obtain a franchise only if
currently not in possession of one.
(Ord. No. 2000-019 § 1 (part))
§ 11.20.060 PASS THROUGH TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM.
   A.   The City Council finds that the development of telecommunications
services that serve only as transmissions of video, data or telephony over long
distances and do not serve any residence or business within the City impacts
the public rights-of-way. Because of the complex and rapidly expanding
technology and service associated with long-haul telecommunications services,
the City Council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general
welfare can be best served by the City's exercise of its regulatory powers. It
is the intent of the City Council that the Rights-of-Way Management Plan and
Standards provided for in
§ 9.08.307 of this Code shall apply to any person who constructs, operates or
maintains a pass-through telecommunications system in the public rights-of-way
with the City.
   B.   Each person proposing to install a pass through telecommunications
system in the City rights-of-way shall be required to first obtain an
encroachment permit as provided for in
Chapter 11.26 of this Code. An application shall be required pursuant to §
11.20.025.
   C.   At any time that a pass through provider proposes to lease, sell,
transfer or otherwise permit any element of its facilities within the City to
be utilized to provide any telecommunications service to customers within the
City, the provider shall notify the City in writing of such not more than
thirty (30) days after the effective date of that lease, sale, transfer or
other action with another service provider. The City shall determine if the
proposed service provider shall require a franchise or encroachment permit to
provide the proposed telecommunications service. Failure to provide said
written notice may be grounds for revocation of the encroachment permit
provided for in
Chapter 11.26.
(Ord. No. 2000-019 § 1 (part))
Cross-reference:
   Pass Through Telecommunications Systems, see
Ch. 11.26
§ 11.20.065 WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   A.   Purpose.
      1.   The purpose of this Section is to establish a process for managing,
and uniform standards for acting upon, requests for the placement of wireless
facilities within the public rights-of-way of the City consistent with the
City's obligation to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, to manage
the public rights-of-way, and to ensure that the public's use of the public
rights-of-way is not incommoded by the placement of wireless facilities. The
City recognizes the importance of wireless facilities to provide high-quality
communications service to the residents and businesses within the City, and the
City also recognizes its obligation to comply with applicable Federal and State
law regarding the placement of personal wireless services facilities in its
public rights-of-way. This Section shall be interpreted consistent with those
provisions.
   B.   Definitions. The terms used in this Section shall have the following
meanings:
      APPLICANT. A person filing an application for placement or modification
of a wireless facility in the rights-of-way.
      APPLICATION. A formal request that includes all required and requested
documentation and information, submitted by an applicant to the City for a
wireless encroachment permit.
      BASE STATION. Shall have the meaning as set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001
(b)(1), or any successor provision.
      ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. Shall have the meaning as set forth in 47
C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(3), or any successor provision.
      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission or its lawful successor.
      MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE. City-owned or controlled property structures,
objects, and equipment in the public rights-of-way, including, but not limited
to, street lights, traffic control structures, banners, street furniture, bus
stops, or other poles, lighting fixtures, or electroliers located within the
public rights-of-way.
      PERMITTEE. Any person or entity granted a wireless encroachment permit
pursuant to this Section.
      PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in
47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i) (as may be amended), which currently provides:
commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier
wireless exchange access services.
      PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITY. A wireless facility used for the
provision of personal wireless services.
      SMALL CELL FACILITY. Shall have the same meaning as SMALL WIRELESS
FACILITY in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(1) (or any successor provision), which is a
personal wireless services facility that meets the following conditions that,
solely for convenience, have been set forth below:
         a.   The facility:
            i.   Is mounted on a structure fifty (50) feet or less in height,
including antennas, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 1.1320(d);
            ii.   Are mounted on structures no more than 10% taller than other
adjacent structures; or
            iii.   Do not extend existing structures on which they are located
to a height of more than fifty (50) feet or by more than 10%, whichever is
greater;
         b.   Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated
antenna equipment (as defined in the definition of antenna in 47 C.F.R. §
1.1320(d)), is no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume;
         c.   All other wireless equipment associated with the structure,
including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-
existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than twenty-eight
(28) cubic feet in volume;
         d.   The facility does not require antenna structure registration
under 47 C.F.R. Part 17;
         e.   The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under 36
C.F.R. § 800.16(x); and
         f.   The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency
radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 C.F.R. §
1.1307(b).
      SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any structure capable of supporting a base station.
      TOWER. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting
any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities,
including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services
including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services,
as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as
microwave backhaul, and the associated site. This definition does not include
utility poles.
      UNDERGROUND AREAS. Those areas where there are no electrical facilities
or facilities of the incumbent local exchange carrier in the public rights-of-
way; or where the wires associated with the same are or are required to be
located underground; or where the same are scheduled to be converted from
overhead to underground. Electrical facilities are distribution facilities
owned by an electric utility and do not include transmission facilities used or
intended to be used to transmit electricity at nominal voltages in excess of
35,000 volts.
      UTILITY POLE. A structure in the public rights-of-way designed to support
electric, telephone, cable television and similar utility lines. A tower is not
a utility pole.
      WIRELESS ENCROACHMENT PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this Section
authorizing the placement or modification of a wireless facility of a design
specified in the permit at a particular location within the public rights-of-
way; and the modification of any existing support structure to which the
wireless facility is proposed to be attached.
      WIRELESS FACILITY or FACILITY. The radios, transmitters, antenna
structures, electric meters, batteries, conduit, fiber optic and coax cables,
and other types of installations used for the provision of wireless
transmissions at a fixed location, including, without limitation, any
associated tower(s), support structure(s), and base station(s).
      WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. A person that owns, controls, operates
or manages a wireless facility or portion thereof within the public rights-of-
way.
      WIRELESS REGULATIONS. Those regulations adopted pursuant to §
11.20.065 of this Code and implementing the provisions of this Chapter.
      WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity that provides personal wireless
services to end users.
   C.   Scope.
      1.   In general. A "wireless encroachment permit" shall be subject to all
of the same requirements as an encroachment permit would under
Chapter 11.20, in addition to all of the requirements of this Section. Unless
exempted, every person who desires to place a wireless facility in the public
rights-of-way or modify an existing wireless facility in the public rights-of-
way must obtain a wireless encroachment permit authorizing the placement or
modification in accordance with this Section. Except for small cell facilities,
facilities qualifying as eligible facilities requests, or any other type of
facility expressly allowed in the public rights-of-way by state or federal law,
no other wireless facilities shall be permitted pursuant to this Section.
      2.   Exemptions. This Section does not apply to:
         a.   The placement or modification of facilities by the City or by any
other agency of the state solely for public safety purposes.
         b.   Installation of a "cell on wheels," "cell on truck" or a similar
structure for a temporary period in connection with an emergency or event, but
no longer than required for the emergency or event, provided that installation
does not involve excavation, movement, or removal of existing facilities.
      3.   Other applicable requirements. In addition to the wireless
encroachment permit required herein, the placement of a wireless facility in
the public rights-of-way requires the persons who will own or control those
facilities to obtain all permits required by applicable law, and to comply with
applicable law, including, but not limited to, applicable law governing radio
frequency (RF) emissions.
      4.   Pre-existing facilities in the public rights-of-way. Any wireless
facility already lawfully existing in the public rights-of-way as of the date
of this Section's adoption shall remain, as long as the wireless facility
continues to comply with all conditions and requirements imposed upon its
original permitting. Upon expiration of any permit which pre-exists the
adoption of this Section, any renewal of such facility's permit shall have to
comply with this Section.
      5.   Public use. Except as otherwise provided by state law, any use of
the public rights-of-way authorized pursuant to this Section will be
subordinate to the City's use and use by the public.
   D.   Administration.
      1.   Public Works Director/City Engineer. Except as expressly provided in
this Section, the Public Works Director/City Engineer or their designee is
responsible for administering this Section. As part of the administration of
this Section, the Public Works Director/City Engineer may:
         a.   Interpret the provisions of this Section;
         b.   Develop and implement standards governing the placement and
modification of wireless facilities consistent with the requirements of this
Section, including regulations governing collocation and resolution of
conflicting applications for placement of wireless facilities;
         c.   Develop and implement acceptable designs and development
standards for wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way, taking into
account the zoning districts bounding the public rights-of-way;
         d.   Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications for
placement or modification of wireless facilities, and proposed changes to any
support structure consistent with this Section;
         e.   Collect, as a condition of the completeness of any application,
any fee established by this Section or by resolution of the City Council;
         f.   Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an
application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate and consistent
with State and Federal laws and regulations;
         g.   Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for information, or
conduct or commission such studies as may be required to determine whether a
permit should be issued;
         h.   Require, as part of, and as a condition of completeness of any
application, notice to members of the public that may be affected by the
placement or modification of the wireless facility and proposed changes to any
support structure;
         i.   Determine whether to approve, approve subject to conditions, or
deny an application, subject to appeal as provided herein;
         j.   Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon
applications for placement of wireless facilities, including issuing written
decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action
on an application; and
         k.   Refer applications proposing the installation of a new pole to
the City Council for review and decision, after the application is determined
to be complete by the Public Works Director/City Engineer.
      2.   City Manager. The City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall be
responsible for negotiating and entering into agreements for the attachment of
wireless facilities to municipal infrastructure required by this Section.
      3.   Appeals.
         a.   Any person adversely affected by the decision of the Public Works
Director/City Engineer pursuant to this Section may appeal the decision to the
City Council, which may decide the issues de novo, and whose written decision
will be the final decision of the City. Any appeal shall be conducted so that a
timely written decision may be issued in compliance with any legally-required
deadline.
         b.   All appeals must be filed within two (2) business days of the
written decision of the Public Works Director/City Engineer, unless the Public
Works Director/City Engineer extends the time therefore. An extension may not
be granted where extension would result in approval of the application by
operation of law.
         c.   An appeal by a wireless infrastructure provider must be taken
jointly with the wireless service provider that intends to use the personal
wireless services facility.
         d.   If the Public Works Director/City Engineer determines that an
application must be approved because a denial would result in a prohibition or
effective prohibition under applicable federal law, the Public Works Director/
City Engineer shall not render a decision on the application, but instead shall
refer the application directly to the City Council for review and decision,
whose review shall be conducted in accordance with division a. of this section.
   E.   General standards for wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way.
      1.   Generally. Wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way shall
meet the minimum requirements set forth in this section and the wireless
regulations, in addition to the requirements of any other applicable law.
      2.   Regulations. The wireless regulations and decisions regarding
applications for placement of wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way
shall, at a minimum, ensure that the requirements of this Section are
satisfied, unless it is determined that applicant has established that denial
of an application would, within the meaning of Federal law, prohibit or
effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, or otherwise
violate applicable laws or regulations. If that determination is made, the
requirements of this Section may be waived, but only to the minimum extent
required to avoid the prohibition or violation.
      3.   Minimum standards. Wireless facilities shall be installed and
modified in a manner that: minimizes risks to public safety; avoids placement
of aboveground facilities in underground areas; minimizes installation of new
support structures or equipment cabinets in the public rights-of-way; maintains
the integrity and character of the neighborhoods and corridors in which the
facilities are located; ensures that installations are subject to periodic
review to minimize the intrusion on the public rights-of-way; ensures that the
City bears no risk or liability as a result of the installations; does not
inconvenience the public; does not interfere with the primary uses of the
rights-of-way; and, does not hinder the ability of the City or other government
agencies to improve, modify, relocate, abandon, or vacate the public rights-of-
way or any portion thereof.
      4.   Additional standards. All wireless facilities proposed to be placed
in the public rights-of-way shall comply with the design and locational
standards established by City Council Resolution.
   F.   Applications.
      1.   Submission. Unless the wireless regulations provide otherwise, an
applicant shall submit an application, amendments, or supplements to an
application, or responses to requests for information regarding an application
on the forms and in compliance with the standards adopted by the Public Works
Director/City Engineer. All applicant submissions shall be made to the Public
Works Director/City Engineer, at City Hall, 9770 Culver Boulevard, Culver City,
California 90232.
      2.   Pre-application meeting. Prior to filing an application for a
wireless encroachment permit, an applicant is encouraged to schedule a pre-
application meeting with the Public Works Director/City Engineer to discuss the
proposed facility, the requirements of this Section, and any potential impacts
of the proposed facility.
      3.   Content.
         a.   An applicant shall submit an application on the form approved by
the Public Works Director/City Engineer, which may be updated from time-to-
time, but in any event shall require the submission of all required fee(s),
documents, information, and any other materials necessary to allow the Public
Works Director/City Engineer to make required findings and ensure that the
proposed facility will comply with applicable Federal and State law, this Code,
and will not endanger the public health, safety, or welfare. If no form has
been approved, applications must contain all information necessary to show that
the applicant is entitled to the wireless encroachment permit requested, and
must specify whether the applicant believes State or Federal law requires
action on the application within a specified time period.
         b.   An applicant shall provide written notice of its application to
all residents and businesses within 500 feet of any proposed facility. The
applicant shall provide a list of those residents and businesses so notified in
its application and attest that the notice required by this section has been
provided.
      4.   Fees. Application fee(s) shall be required to be submitted with any
application for a wireless encroachment permit. The City Council is hereby
authorized to determine, or cause to be determined, the amount, type, and other
terms of such fee(s) from time to time by means of resolution. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, no application fee shall be refundable, in whole or in part, to
an applicant for a wireless encroachment permit.
      5.   Waivers. Requests for waivers from any requirement of this Section
shall be made in writing to the Public Works Director/City Engineer or his or
her designee. The Public Works Director/City Engineer may grant or deny a
request for a waiver pursuant to this section. The Public Works Director/City
Engineer may grant a request for waiver if it is demonstrated that,
notwithstanding the issuance of a waiver, the City will be provided all
information necessary to understand the nature of the construction or other
activity to be conducted pursuant to the permit sought. All waivers approved
pursuant to this section shall be (i) granted only on a case-by-case basis, and
(ii) narrowly-tailored to minimize deviation from the requirements of this
Code.
      6.   Application incompleteness. For personal wireless facilities and
eligible facilities requests, applications will be processed, and notices of
incompleteness provided, in conformity with State, Local, and Federal law. If
such an application is incomplete, the Public Works Director/City Engineer may
notify the applicant and specify the material omitted from the application.
      7.   Applications denied without prejudice. To promote efficient review
and timely decisions, the City may deny an application without prejudice when
the applicant fails to tender a substantive response to the City within 180
calendar days after the City deems the application incomplete in a written
notice to the applicant. In the event the application is denied without
prejudice as provided herein and the applicant seeks to pursue an application
at the same location, the applicant shall be required to submit a new
application and applicable fee.
   G.   Findings; decisions; consultants.
      1.   Findings required for approval.
         a.   Except for eligible facilities requests, the Public Works
Director/City Engineer or City Council, as the case may be, shall approve an
application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence
provided in review thereof, it finds the following:
            i.   The facility is not detrimental to the public health, safety,
and welfare;
            ii.   The facility complies with this Section and all applicable
design and development standards; and
            iii.   The facility meets applicable requirements and standards of
State and Federal law.
         b.   For eligible facilities requests, the Public Works Director/City
Engineer or City Council, as the case may be, shall approve an application if,
on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in
review thereof, it finds the following:
            i.   That the application qualifies as an eligible facilities
request; and
            ii.   That the proposed facility will comply with all generally-
applicable laws.
      2.   Decisions. Decisions on an application by the Public Works Director/
City Engineer or City Council shall be in writing and include the reasons for
the decision. Decisions shall be sent by overnight mail, electronic mail or
other means to the applicant, appellant (if applicable) and to any person who
submitted written comments on the application.
      3.   Independent consultants. The Public Works Director/City Engineer or
City Council, as the case may be, is authorized, in its discretion, to select
and retain independent consultant(s) with expertise in telecommunications in
connection with the review of any application under this Section. Such
independent consultant review may be retained on any issue that involves
specialized or expert knowledge in connection with an application, including,
but not limited to, application completeness or accuracy, structural
engineering analysis, or compliance with FCC radio frequency emissions
standards.
   H.   Conditions of approval.
      1.   Adoption by resolution. The City Council shall adopt by resolution
standard conditions that shall apply to all wireless encroachment permits
approved under this Section. Such standard conditions shall also apply to any
wireless facility granted or approved by operation of law. The standard
conditions shall address, without limitation, the following: compliance with
this Code and applicable law; duration, renewal, and termination of wireless
encroachment permits; installation of facilities; commencement of operations;
as-built drawings; inspections; emergency procedures; maintaining updated
contact information of relevant persons; insurance, indemnification, and bond
requirements; minimizing impacts on adjacent properties; noninterference with
and relocation to accommodate other improvements or uses of the public rights-
of-way; no right, title, or interest (including possessory interest) created by
a permit; maintenance requirements; ongoing compliance with FCC radio frequency
emissions standards; facility access and testing; modifications to the
facility; requiring an agreement with the City for use of Municipal
Infrastructure; abandonment of facilities; records retention; attorney's fees;
and any additional conditions for eligible facility requests and small cell
facilities.
      2.   Modification. The approving authority (Public Works Director/City
Engineer or City Council, as the case may be) may impose additional conditions,
remove conditions, or otherwise modify the standard conditions applicable to a
wireless encroachment permit in its sole discretion on a case-by-case basis.
   I.   Breach; termination of permit.
      1.   For breach. A wireless encroachment permit may be revoked for
failure to comply with the conditions of the permit or applicable law. Upon
revocation, the wireless facility must be removed; provided that removal of a
support structure owned by the City, a utility, or another entity authorized to
maintain a support structure in the public rights-of-way need not be removed,
but must be restored to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted
by the City. All costs incurred by the City in connection with the revocation
and removal shall be paid by entities who own or control any part of the
wireless facility.
      2.   For installation without a permit. Any wireless facility installed
without a wireless encroachment permit (except for those exempted by this
Section) must be removed; provided that removal of support structure owned by
the City, a utility, or another entity authorized to maintain a support
structure in the public rights-of-way need not be removed, but must be restored
to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the City. All costs
incurred by the City in connection with the revocation and removal shall be
paid by entities who own or control any part of the wireless facility.
      3.   Municipal infraction. Any violation of this Section shall constitute
an infraction and shall be subject to the penalties and fines set forth in
Chapters
1.01 and
1.02 of this Code.
   J.   Infrastructure controlled by City.  The City, as a matter of policy,
will negotiate agreements for use of municipal infrastructure. The placement of
wireless facilities on those structures shall be subject to the agreement. The
agreement shall specify the compensation to the City for use of the structures.
The person seeking the agreement shall additionally reimburse the City for all
costs the City incurs in connection with its review of, and action upon the
person's request for, an agreement.
   K.   Nondiscrimination. In establishing the rights, obligations and
conditions set forth in this Section, it is the intent of the City to treat
each applicant or public rights-of-way user in a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory manner, to the extent required by law, and with
considerations that may be unique to the technologies, situation and legal
status of each particular applicant or request for use of the public rights-of-
way.
(Ord. No. 2019-002, § 2)
CHAPTER 11.21: CABLE SYSTEMS
Section
General
   
11.21.005   Purpose and intent
   
11.21.010   Defined terms and phrases
Provisions
   
11.21.100   Franchise required
   
11.21.105   Franchise application required
   
11.21.110   Initial cable franchise grants; requests for proposals
   
11.21.112   Franchise processing costs
   
11.21.115   Grant of franchise
   
11.21.120   Term of franchise
   
11.21.125   Franchise nontransferable
   
11.21.130   Franchise area; annexations
   
11.21.135   Contents of cable franchise agreements; relation to ordinance
   
11.21.140   Rate regulations
   
11.21.145   Franchise fees and in lieu fees
   
11.21.150   Bundled services
   
11.21.155   Open access service
   
11.21.160   Education and government access channels
   
11.21.165   Public access channel
   
11.21.170   General financial and insurance provisions
   
11.21.175   Indemnification
   
11.21.180   Insurance
   
11.21.185   Required approvals; submission of plans
   
11.21.190   Access to public rights-of-way
   
11.21.195   General conditions upon construction, operation and repair
   
11.21.200   Maintenance of and inspection of records
   
11.21.205   Reports
   
11.21.210   Inspection and testing of system
   
11.21.215   Copies of reports filed with other regulatory bodies
   
11.21.220   Failure to report
   
11.21.225   Other records required
   
11.21.230   Exemptions
   
11.21.235   Production of documents; due diligence
   
11.21.240   Penalties for noncompliance
   
11.21.245   Enforcement and remedies; revocation
   
11.21.250   Effect of termination or forfeiture
   
11.21.255   Remedies cumulative
Consumer Protection
   
11.21.300   Consumer protection standards; generally
   
11.21.305   Consumer protection standards; operations
   
11.21.310   Consumer protection standards; notices and billing
   
11.21.315   Protection of City and residents
Cable Franchise Renewals
   
11.21.400   Cable franchise renewals; procedure
   
11.21.410   Cable franchise transfers; applications
   
11.21.420   Cable franchise transfers; contents of application
   
11.21.430   Cable franchise transfers; City’s determination
   
11.21.440   Legal qualifications
   
11.21.450   Continuity of service
   
11.21.460   Technical standards
   
11.21.470   Transfers
Statewide Video Franchisees
   
11.21.480   Special provisions applicable to holders of state video franchises
Miscellaneous
   
11.21.500   Compliance with state and federal laws
   
11.21.510   Transition provisions
   
11.21.520   Notices
   
11.21.530   Severability
Cross-reference:
   Franchises, see Charter §
1700
GENERAL
§ 11.21.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   A.   The City Council finds and determines as follows:
      1.   The development of cable systems may provide significant benefits
for, and have substantial impacts upon, the residents and businesses of the
City.
      2.   The public streets, alleys, utility easements dedicated for
compatible uses, and other rights-of-way within the City used by cable systems:
         a.   Are critical to travel and commerce;
         b.   Are a unique and physically limited resource so that proper
management by the City is necessary to maximize the efficiency and to minimize
the costs to the taxpayers, and to prevent harm to the community; and
         c.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent.
      3.   Cable systems permanently occupy and extensively make use of scarce
and valuable public rights-of-way, in a manner different from the way in which
the general public uses them.
      4.   Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated
with cable systems, the public convenience, safety and general welfare is best
served by the City's exercise of its regulatory powers to establish procedures
through which cable systems may use and occupy public rights-of-way, and to
establish general conditions to govern the construction, operation and
installation of such systems.
      5.   This Chapter is intended to establish provisions for the franchising
arid regulation of cable systems. This Chapter is further intended to ensure
that all regulations are consistent with the federal Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984 (47 USC 521 et seq.), as amended by the federal Cable
Television Consumer and Competition Act of 1992 and the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission, and applicable California statutes and regulations.
   B.   The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide for the attainment
of the following objectives:
      1.   To enable the City to discharge its public trust in a manner
consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies,
industry competition, and technology development.
      2.   To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the use and occupancy
of valuable public assets by cable systems to provide cable service.
      3.   To foster and to promote competition in cable services, and
encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive cable services on the
broadest possible basis to businesses, residents, institutions and local
government of the City.
      4.   To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for
the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable
systems, including the establishment and enforcement of customer service
standards.
      5.   To provide opportunities to the public to obtain access to
communications facilities for the purpose of disseminating and receiving
information; to promote competitive cable rates and services; to take advantage
of opportunities presented by cable and open video systems to provide for more
open government; to enhance educational opportunities throughout the community
and provide opportunities for building a stronger community; and to allow
flexibility to respond to changes in technology, subscriber interests, and
competitive factors that will affect the health, welfare, and well-being of the
community.
      6.   To encourage the deployment of advanced cable communications systems
that satisfy local cable-related needs and interests, and which enable the
schools and the government to take advantage of cable technology to deliver
enhanced services.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.010 DEFINED TERMS AND PHRASES.
   ACCESS, PEG ACCESS or PEG USE. The availability of a cable system for
public, education or government use (including institutional network use) by
various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals,
including the City and its designated access providers, to acquire, create, and
distribute signals not under a grantee's editorial control.
   APPLICANT.  Any person who applies for a cable franchise.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. The lowest service tier that includes the
retransmission of local over-the-air television broadcast signals.
   BROADCAST SIGNAL.  A television or radio signal that is transmitted over-
the-air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a cable communications
system and retransmitted to its subscribers.
   BUNDLED SERVICES.  Two or more different services or service tiers,
including cable services and non-cable services, into a single price structure.
   CABLE. Open video systems (OVS) and cable systems.
   CABLE ACT. Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (48 Stat. 1064,
enacted June 19, 1934), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984 (Public Law No. 98-549, enacted October 30, 1984), amended by the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (Public Law No. 102-
385, enacted October 5, 1992), further amended by the Telecommunications Act of
1996 (Public Law No. 104-104, enacted February 8, 1996), as may be amended from
time to time.
   CABLE SERVICE.  The same meaning as in Title VI of Title 47 of the United
States Code, as amended from time to time.
   CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM.  A facility, consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
The term CABLE SYSTEM does not include:
      1.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      2.   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-
of-way;
      3.   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
except that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for
purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act) to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless
the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; or
      4.   Any facilities of an electrical utility that are used solely for
operating its electrical utility system.
   A reference to a CABLE SYSTEM refers to any part thereof, including, without
limitation, enclosures (such as equipment cabinets), amplifiers, power guards,
nodes, cables, fiber optics and other facilities and equipment appurtenant to
the cable system.
   CABLE SYSTEM OPERATOR. Any person who operates a cable system, as defined in
this Section.
   CFR.  The Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation of "47 CFR 80.1"
refers to Title 47, Part 80, Section 1 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
    CHANGE OF CONTROL. A change in actual working control, in whatever manner
exercised, over the affairs of a grantee or its direct or indirect parents.
Without limiting the foregoing, a change of control of a franchise, grantee, or
cable communications system will be deemed to have occurred whenever there is a
change, acquisition or transfer of control of more than a twenty-five percent
(25%) ownership in the grantee or its direct or indirect parents to any person,
or a group of persons acting in concert; or whenever there is any change in the
general partners of a grantee, or a transfer of the grantee to any subsidiary,
affiliate or other entity.
   CHANNEL.  Capacity on a cable communications system that can be used to
transit programming.
   CITY MANAGER. The CITY MANAGER for the City of Culver City appointed by the
City Council, or his or her designee.
   CITY.  The City of Culver City as represented by its City Council or any
person authorized to act on behalf of the City.
   CITY TREASURER.  The elected City Treasurer or his or her designee.
   COMMUNITY ACCESS CHANNEL or PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL.  Any channel or portion
of a channel utilized for programming by the general public.
   EDUCATION ACCESS or EDUCATION USE. Access where schools are the designated
programmers or users having editorial control over their communications.
   FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The federal administrative agency,
created by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, codified at 47 USC 151
et seq., or any lawful successor.
   FRANCHISE.  An authorization granted by the City to the operator of a cable
communications system giving the operator the non-exclusive right to occupy the
space, or use facilities upon, across, beneath, or over public rights-of-way in
the City, to provide specified services within a designated franchise area. A
construction or street use permit is not a franchise.
   FRANCHISE SERVICE AREA or SERVICE AREA. The entire geographic area of the
City as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless
otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise, or in
a franchise agreement.
   GOVERNMENT ACCESS or GOVERNMENT USE. Access where government institutions or
their designees are the designated programmers or users having editorial
control over their communications.
   GRANTEE. Any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this
Chapter, and that person's lawful and permitted successor, transferee, or
assignee; or any person holding a cable franchise as of the effective date of
this Chapter.
   GROSS REVENUES.  Any and all revenue, of any kind, nature or form, including
but not limited to revenues from equipment sales and rentals, services,
installation, late fees and other subscriber charges, fees for carriage of
programming, advertising, programming guides, and shopping services; the term
encompasses revenue sources existing as of the effective date of this ordinance
or revenue sources that may develop in the future. It shall also include
revenues collected by any affiliate of a grantee for services provided over the
cable system.
   OPEN ACCESS.  Allowing nondiscriminatory access by Internet service
providers to a cable system operator’s Internet delivery transport system.
   OPERATOR. A person:
      1.   Who directly or through one (1) or more affiliates provides cable
service over a cable communications system and who directly or through one (1)
or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such system; or
      2.   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a system.
   PERSON. Unless it otherwise appears from the context as used, means and
includes any person, individual, firm, partnership, sole proprietorship,
corporation, company, trust, limited liability company, association, joint
stock company, bank institution business or other trust, public agency, school
district, educational facility, the state, its political subdivisions and/or
instrumentalities, or any other legal entity, but not the City.
   PROGRAMMING. Signals containing information intended for use by recipients,
whether in the form of video signals, audio signals or data signals.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES or PEG ACCESS. The total
of the following:
      1.   Channel capacity designated for public, educational, or government
use; and
      2.   Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property owned or under the control of the City, other
than a right-of-way.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface and space in, on, above, through and below any
real property in which the City has an interest in law or equity, whether held
in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including,
but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane,
ally, court, sidewalk, curb, parkway, river, tunnel viaduct, bridge, park,
public easement, dedicated easement, or any other place, area, or real property
owned by or under the control of the City.
   SCHOOL. Any public charter school, primary and secondary schools or college
accredited by the state (which term includes all accredited post-secondary
institutions, including by way of example and not limitation, community
colleges, technical colleges and universities).
   SUBSCRIBER or CUSTOMER or CONSUMER. The City or any person within the City
who is lawfully receiving, for any purpose or reason, any cable service via a
cable communications system, whether or not a fee is paid for such service.
   USC. The United States Code.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
PROVISIONS
§ 11.21.100 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   No person may construct or operate a cable communications system within the
public rights-of-way of the City without a properly granted franchise awarded
pursuant to this Chapter, which franchise must be in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.105 FRANCHISE APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   A.   An application must be filed for an initial or renewal cable system
franchise, or for approval of a transfer or change of control. All applications
under these provisions of this Chapter, except as provided for in §
11.21.400, shall be in writing and shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk.
   B.   The City Manager shall specify the information that must be provided in
connection with an application, and the form in which the information shall be
provided.
   C.   At a minimum, but without limitation, each application must identify
the applicant, show that the applicant is financially, technically and legally
qualified to construct, maintain and operate the cable system, contain a pro
forma showing capital expenditures and expected income and expenses for the
first five (5) years the applicant is to hold the franchise, and show that the
applicant is willing to comply unconditionally with this Chapter and its
franchise obligations. A complete description of the applicant's corporate form
must be provided. A complete chain of ownership to applicant's ownership must
be provided, to the applicant's ultimate parents. In addition, any application
for an initial or renewal franchise must describe in detail the cable system
that the applicant proposes to build or maintain, show where it is or will be
located, set out the system construction or rebuild schedule, and show that the
applicant will provide adequate channels, facilities and other support for
public, educational and government use (including institutional network use) of
the cable system. To be accepted for filing, an original and six (6) copies of
a complete application must be submitted. All applications shall include the
names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant
with respect to the application.
   D.   The City may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such
supplementary, additional or other information, as the City may deem reasonably
necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. An
applicant (and the transferor and transferee, in the case of a transfer) shall
respond to any request for information from City, by the time specified by
City.
   E.   All application materials become the property of the City upon receipt.
   F.   An application may be rejected if it is incomplete, or if the response
to requests for information is not timely and complete.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.110 INITIAL CABLE FRANCHISE GRANTS; REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS.
   A.   This Section establishes additional provisions that apply to an
application for an initial franchise, or a renewal franchise.
   B.   Any person may apply for an initial or renewal franchise by submitting
an application therefore on that person's own initiative, or in response to a
request for proposals issued by City. If the City receives an unsolicited
application, it may choose to issue a request for additional proposals, and
require the applicant to amend its proposal to respond thereto. The City may
conduct such investigations as are necessary to act on an application.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.112 FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS.
   A.   Any application for either a new franchise grant, a franchise renewal,
a franchise transfer or a franchise change of control shall include an
application fee, based on amounts established by Council resolution, to cover
the cost of all direct and indirect administrative expenses and staff efforts,
including consultants and attorneys, necessary to adequately analyze the
application. In addition, the grantee shall reimburse the City for all out-of-
pocket processing costs, which shall include, but not be limited to, costs of
publications of notices, development and publication of relevant franchise
agreements and other agreements, travel expenses, and any other out-of-pocket
expenses not covered by the application fees, incurred by the City in its study
and evaluation of the application. The City may require a deposit to be paid by
the applicant in an amount determined by the City Manager to cover estimated
costs of the application.
   B.   No payment of said processing fees shall be offset against any
franchise or other fees payable to the City during the term of the franchise.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 §22 (part))
§ 11.21.115 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   A.   The City may grant non-exclusive cable communications system franchises
pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   Before taking final action on an application, the City Council shall
conduct public hearings before itself, or before other boards and commissions
of the City, in accordance with applicable state, federal or local law. In
determining whether to grant a franchise, City may consider:
      1.   The extent to which an applicant for renewal has substantially
complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable
franchise ordinance;
      2.   Whether an applicant for renewal's quality of service under its
existing franchise; including signal quality; response to customer complaints,
billing practices, and the like has been reasonable in light of the needs of
the community;
      3.   Where the applicant has not previously held a cable system franchise
in City, whether the applicant's record in other communities indicates that it
can be relied upon to provide high quality service throughout any franchise
term;
      4.   Whether the applicant has the financial, legal, and technical
ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in an
application, and to satisfy any minimum requirements established by the City;
      5.   Whether the applicant's application is reasonable to meet the future
cable-related needs and interests of the City, taking into account the cost of
meeting such needs and interests;
      6.   Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on public rights-of-way, public
property, and private property that will be used by the applicant's cable
system;
      7.   Whether the applicant has proposed to provide adequate facilities,
equipment, channels and other support for PEG use of the cable system;
      8.   Such other matters as the City is authorized or required to
consider.
   C.   If the City determines that issuance of a franchise would be in the
public interest considering the factors described in this Section, and the
applicant is willing to enter into an appropriate franchise agreement, the City
may award a franchise to the applicant.
   D.   The grant of a franchise shall not be effective unless the franchise is
unconditionally accepted by a grantee, and grantee enters into a franchise
agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the franchise may
be exercised, and the franchise has been approved by City Council.
   E.   A franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall authorize and permit
a grantee to construct, operate and repair a cable system, pursuant to the
terms of its franchise agreement and this Chapter to provide cable service in
the City, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace,
reconstruct, maintain facilities appurtenant to such system in, on, over,
under, upon, across, and along those rights-of-way in the grantee's franchise
area.
   F.   A franchise shall not convey rights other than as expressly specified
in this Chapter or in the franchise; no rights shall pass by implication.
   G.   A franchise shall not include or be a substitute for:
      1.   Complying with requirements of general applicability for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City;
      2.   Complying with requirements for the privilege of using or occupying
the rights-of-way to construct, operate or repair facilities in connection with
the provision of non-cable services;
      3.   Any permits or other authorizations required under the City code in
connection with activities on or in rights-of-way or other property, including
by way of example and not limitation, street cut permits;
      4.   Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the
City or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by the
franchise.
   H.   Neither the franchise nor the franchise agreement relieves a grantee of
its duty to comply with all City ordinances, resolutions, written policies, and
regulations, and every grantee must comply with the same. The grantee's
exercise of the rights under the same is subject to the exercise of police and
other powers the City now has or may later obtain, including but not limited to
the power of eminent domain.
   I.   A franchise does not convey title, equitable or legal, in the public
rights-of-way or public property. Any right granted to grantee shall not be
subdivided or subleased to any other person, including but not limited to, an
affiliate.
   J.   Every franchise shall be nonexclusive, and nothing in this Section or
any franchise agreement shall be read to provide a cable operator or applicant
the right to object to the grant of a franchise, or other authorization to
provide cable services on the same or different terms.
   K.   Unless a franchise agreement or this Chapter specifically provides
otherwise, any act that a cable communications system operator is required to
perform shall be performed at the operator's expense, and with no charge to the
City.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.120 TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   A franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be for the term specified
in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance
or resolution adopted by the Council that authorizes the franchise.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.125 FRANCHISE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   A.   A grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of,
in whole or in part, by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale,
contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the cable communications system, the
franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted; nor may a change
of control occur without the prior consent of the City Council by resolution
and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the City
Council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Such
transactions are referred to in this Chapter collectively, as "transfers."
Transfer without the City's prior written approval will be considered to impair
the City's assurance of due performance, and shall be considered a material
breach of the franchise.
   B.   Prior consent is not required for grants of a security interest or
mortgage of any assets of the grantee to secure the construction, operation or
repair of the cable communications system. However, a mortgage or security
interest is not permitted:
      1.   If it would prevent the grantee or any successor from complying with
its franchise and applicable law;
      2.   If it permits a third party to succeed to the interest of grantee,
or to own or control the system, without the City's prior consent; and
      3.   Unless it is subject and subordinate to the rights of the City under
the cable franchise and applicable law.
   C.   Grantee must notify the City in writing of any foreclosure or judicial
sale of all or a substantial part of the grantee's franchise property, or upon
the termination of any lease or other interest covering all or a substantial
part of that franchise property. That notification will be considered by the
City as a notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has
taken place, and the provisions of this Chapter that required the prior consent
of the Council to that change in control of ownership will apply.
   D.   A sale of a portion of the cable communications system in the ordinary
course of business where the portion sold is removed (such as the sale of old
electronics) will not be deemed a transfer for the purposes of this subsection.
   E.   If specifically provided for in the franchise, a cable franchise
agreement may except transfers to an affiliate or categories of affiliates of a
cable system operator from the requirements of this Section where:
      1.   The transferor notifies the City of the transfer at least one
hundred twenty (120) days before it occurs, describes the nature of the
transfer, and submits complete information describing who will have direct and
indirect ownership and control of the cable system after the transfer, and
submits proof of financial capability;
      2.   The transferor submits an application for transfer deemed complete
by the City, along with payment of all applicable fees;
      3.   The transferee warrants that it has read, accepts, and agrees to be
bound by each and every term of the franchise, the franchise agreement and
related amendments, regulations, ordinances, and resolutions then in effect;
      4.   The transferee agrees to assume all responsibility for all
liabilities, acts, and omissions known and unknown of its predecessor grantees
for all purposes, including renewal;
      5.   The transferee agrees that the transfer will not permit it to take
any position or exercise any right that could not have been exercised by its
predecessor grantees;
      6.   The transferee warrants that the transfer will not substantially
increase the financial burdens upon or substantially diminish the financial
resources available to the transferee (the warranty to be based on comparing
the burdens upon and resources that will be available to the transferee
compared to its predecessors), or otherwise adversely affect the ability of the
transferee to perform;
      7.   Both the transferor and transferee warrant that the transfer shall
not in any way adversely affect the City or subscribers (including by
increasing rates);
      8.   The transferor shall notify the City that the transfer is complete
within thirty (30) business days of the date the transfer is complete;
      9.   The transferee agrees that the transfer does not affect any
evaluation of its legal, financial, or technical qualifications that may occur
under the cable franchise or applicable law after the transfer, and does not
directly or indirectly authorize any additional transfers; and
      10.   Said transfer is approved by the City Council through ordinance or
resolution prior to the effective date of the transfer.
   F.   Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee's assets to
secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise
property has the right to notify the City that it, or a designee satisfactory
to the City, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon
grantee's default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial
institution must also submit a plan for such operation within ninety (90) days
after assuming control. The plan must insure continued service and compliance
with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial
institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution
may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding eighteen (18)
months unless specifically authorized by the City, in its sole discretion and
during that period of time it will have the right to petition the City to
transfer the franchise to another grantee.
   G.   Any change of control or other transfer of ownership by the grantee
without prior written City approval shall constitute a material breach of the
franchise.
   H.   Approval by the City of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a
waiver or release of any of the rights of the City, whether arising before or
after the date of the transfer.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.130 FRANCHISE AREA; ANNEXATIONS.
   A.   Territory annexed to the City that is already covered by an existing
franchise or license granted by another public entity but where the grantee of
such franchise or license has not commenced installation of a cable system in
the area of such annexed territory shall be deemed not to be served by a
franchise or license, and all rights acquired under said franchise or license
in the area of such annexed territory shall terminate by operation of law as of
the effective date of the annexation.
   B.   Territory annexed to the City that is already served by a franchise or
license issued by another public entity, may continue to be served by the
grantee under said franchise or license for the balance of the term of said
franchise or license, subject to the provisions of said franchise or license
and the provisions of this Chapter, and provided the franchise fees adopted by
the City are paid to the City.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.135 CONTENTS OF CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS; RELATION TO ORDINANCE.
   A.   If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a
franchise agreement authorized by the City Council and provisions of this
Chapter as of the effective date of the franchise agreement, the provisions of
this Chapter shall control except where a provision of the franchise agreement
expressly states otherwise.
   B.   Each cable system grantee will offer all of its cable services to any
person in its franchise area. A grantee may not require a person to subscribe
to non-cable services as a condition of receiving any cable service.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.140 RATE REGULATION.
   A.   Regulation.  The City shall regulate any operator's rates and charges,
except to the extent it is prohibited from doing so by law. The City will
regulate rates in accordance with FCC rules and regulations, where applicable.
Except to the extent FCC rules provide otherwise, all rates and charges that
are subject to regulation, and changes in those rates or charges most be
approved by the City in advance. The City Manager may take any required steps
to file complaints, toll rates, issue accounting orders or take any other steps
required to comply with FCC regulations. The City Council shall be responsible
for issuing orders that establish rates or order refunds. A grantee must comply
with all rate orders issued by the City Council pending appeals by the grantee
unless a stay order has been issued by the FCC.
   B.   Rate non-discrimination. A grantee may not unduly discriminate in
rates, charges or service conditions among subscribers to cable services and
subscribers to cable services and other services on the basis of race, color,
religion, gender, disability, age, national origin, ancestry, marital status,
medical condition, or sexual orientation.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part)))
§ 11.21.145 FRANCHISE FEE AND IN LIEU FEES.
   A.   Each cable system grantee shall pay the City a franchise fee in an
amount equal to five percent (5%) of gross revenues (including franchise fees
collected) derived by the grantee or its cable operator from the operation of
the cable system to provide cable services, or such percentage amount as
provided by law.
      1.   Each bill remitted to subscribers shall specifically indicate the
amount of the franchise fee charged pursuant to this Section.
   B.   Except as a franchise may otherwise specifically provide, where a
grantee sells cable services and non-cable services as bundled services, for
purposes of franchise fee calculations the cable services will be presumed to
generate the same revenues as would have been generated had the subscriber
purchased cable services only.
   C.   Each person required by this Chapter to remit a City tax or other in
lieu fee shall file a return with the City Treasurer on forms approved by the
City Treasurer on or before the due date. The City Treasurer is authorized to
require such further information as he or she deems necessary to properly
determine if the tax here imposed is being levied and collected in accordance
with this Subchapter.
   D.   To prevent evasion of franchise fees, City tax, or in lieu fees,
revenues of affiliates derived from the operation of the cable system to
provide cable service will be treated as the revenue of the operator; but
nothing herein shall be read to permit the City to charge a fee on affiliate
revenues where the revenues were also included in the calculation of the
revenues of the grantee.
   E.   Persons who provide cable services or other communications services to
subscribers for a fee via a cable system and whose revenues are not included in
the franchise fees specified above may be charged a fee by the City equal to
five percent (5%) of the gross revenues of such person derived from the
provision of such other service over the cable system, unless prohibited by
state or federal law.
   F.   The fact that a fee is paid based on revenues derived from one type of
service provided over a cable system, does not excuse an operator from its duty
to pay fees and taxes imposed by the City on other types of services provided
over that facility. As an example, and not as a limitation of the foregoing, a
cable operator who pays a franchise fee on revenues derived from the provision
of cable services must pay the fees imposed upon non-cable service providers to
the extent that it provides such services.
   G.   General rules for payment of fees.
      1.   Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, franchise fees
and in lieu fees shall be paid to the City and delivered to the City Treasurer
quarterly, and not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the end of each
calendar quarter.
      2.   Each payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the manner
in which the fee was calculated.
      3.   No acceptance by the City of any fee shall be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance
of such payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for
additional sums payable.
      4.   The franchise fee or in lieu fee payment is not a payment in lieu of
any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in this
Chapter, or as required by the Municipal Code or other applicable law.
      5.   Within ninety (90) calendar days following the end of the calendar
year, each person required to pay a fee based upon gross revenues shall submit
a statement, attested to by a certified public accountant or the chief
financial officer of such person, setting forth gross revenues of the cable
system, by category, and describing what revenues were included and what
revenues, if any, were excluded in the fee calculation, and any adjustments
made to gross revenues.
      6.   If payments are delinquent, in addition to paying any applicable
penalties or damages, the person owing the fee shall pay a fifteen percent
(15%) penalty and interest on the amount owed at the rate of one and one-half
percent (1½%) per month. In addition where the underpayment exceeded three
percent (3%) of the amount due for the audit period, or $10,000, whichever is
less, grantee shall pay the cost of any audit performed that identified the
underpayment.
      7.   The City may, upon five (5) business days advance written notice,
inspect and examine any and all books and records it deems necessary to the
determination of whether fees have been accurately computed and paid. Revenue
records shall be maintained for at least five (5) years.
      8.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event a person obligated to
pay a fee ceases to provide service for any reason (including as a result of a
transfer), such person shall make a final payment of any amounts owed to the
City within ninety (90) calendar days of the date its operations in the City
cease, and shall provide a statement of gross revenues for the calendar year
through the date operations ceased, which statement shall contain the
information and certification required by this Section.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.150 BUNDLED SERVICES.
   If the grantee offers subscribers cable service in conjunction with other
telecommunications or other services in bundled packages, it shall also offer
subscribers the various individual cable services in an unbundled format.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.155 OPEN ACCESS SERVICE.
   Pursuant to any authority granted to local governments by federal law or
regulations, if the grantee offers data transmission services operating on the
same infrastructure as a cable video system pursuant to this Chapter, the
grantee shall provide open access to Internet service providers for all
subscribers in the City.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.160 EDUCATION AND GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS.
   A.   The grantee shall provide separate channel capacity for educational and
governmental programming, which shall be exclusive to the City, and for local
origination programming, as specified in the franchise agreement. The channel
number(s) to be used for the education and the government access shall be
designated by the City and shall be common among all franchise holders within
the City. The channel shall be included in all basic subscriber packages.
   B.   The grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over educational
and governmental channels provided pursuant to this Chapter.
   C.   The grantee shall provide an annual contribution to the cost of
operating the education-government channel in a manner prescribed in the
franchise agreement.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.165 PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL.
   A.   The grantee shall provide a public access channel that is available for
use to the general public. The grantee shall provide studio space and technical
assistance free of charge to any member of the public to produce and broadcast
video productions of an original nature, as may be specified in the franchise
agreement.
   B.   The studios shall be located so as to be convenient to residents of the
City and shall be available to the public at reasonable hours of the day and on
weekends.
   C.   The grantee may regulate the use and content of the public access
channel to the extent permitted by federal law and FCC regulations.
   D.   The City may place other requirements on public access as shall be
negotiated with the grantee and included in the franchise agreement.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.170 GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS.
   A.   Every operator of a cable communications system shall obtain and
maintain a performance bond to ensure the faithful performance of its
responsibilities under this Chapter and any franchise. The amount of the
performance bonds shall be set by the City Manager or may be set in a franchise
agreement in light of the nature of the work to be performed pursuant to or
under the franchise, but initially shall not be less than ten percent (10%) of
the estimated cost of constructing or (in the case of existing systems)
upgrading the cable communications system. The bond is not in lieu of any
additional construction or other bonds that may be required through any
permitting process. The bond shall be in a form acceptable to the City
Attorney. Bonds must be obtained prior to the effective date of any franchise,
transfer or franchise renewal, unless a franchise ordinance specifically
provides otherwise.
   B.   The City Manager may permit a cable communications system operator to
eliminate or reduce the amount of the bond upon successful completion of the
required construction and after the system performs as promised for one year
after completion, if the City Manager determines that (i) the operator has
substantially complied with its obligations under its franchise and applicable
law; and (ii) the letter of credit maintained by the operator, plus any
remaining amount of the bond will be adequate to ensure performance.
   C.   Letter of credit or cash security fund.
      1.   Every cable communications system operator shall establish and
maintain a cash security fund or provide the City an irrevocable letter of
credit in an amount specified in the franchise agreement, except as provided
below. The letter of credit will remain in effect for the full term of the
franchise plus an additional six (6) months thereafter.
      2.   The letter of credit or security fund shall secure the payment of
franchise fees, secure any other performance required under this Chapter or a
franchise, and secure the payment of other taxes, fees, charges or liens to the
City. The letter of credit shall be in a form and with an institution
acceptable to the City Treasurer and in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.
      3.   Neither the filing of a letter of credit or security fund with the
City, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the City thereunder, will be
construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability
of the grantee under the terms of its franchise for damages, either to the full
amount of the letter of credit or security fund, or otherwise.
      4.   The rights reserved to the City with respect to the letter of credit
or security fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether
reserved by applicable law or the franchise, and no action, proceeding, or
exercise of a right with respect to such security fund or letter of credit will
affect any other right the City may have.
      5.   If a grantee fails to timely perform a requirement under this
Chapter or a franchise, or fails to pay a franchise fee, or any tax, fee, lien
or other amount owed to the City when due, the City may withdraw from a
grantee's security fund or letter of credit the amount that the grantee owes,
with interest and penalties, upon ten (10) days written notice to grantee. If,
in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the City is required
to perform construction or other work to rectify grantee's failure to perform,
the City may withdraw from grantee's security fund or letter of credit the
amount to cover the work performed by City. The City may not be prevented from
drawing upon the letter of credit or security fund even if the amount owed, or
whether an amount is owed, is in dispute. If it is determined that the City
improperly drew upon the letter of credit or security fund, the City shall
return the funds withdrawn plus interest, if any, owed by grantee to the person
providing the letter of credit.
      6.   The City will notify grantee immediately if it draws upon the letter
of credit or security fund, and explain the act or omission which it claims
justified the withdrawal. Should the City withdraw from the letter of credit or
security fund, grantee will then have fourteen (14) days to restore the letter
of credit or security fund to its full required amount, and must do so unless a
court of competent jurisdiction rules otherwise.
      7.   The City may from time to time, upon reasonable notice and after
affected grantees have had an opportunity to respond thereto, increase the
amount of the required letter of credit or security fund to reflect increased
risks to the City and to the public.
      8.   The cash security fund or letter of credit must be obtained prior to
the effective date of any franchise, transfer, or franchise renewal, unless a
franchise agreement specifically provides otherwise.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.175 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A.   No franchise shall be valid or effective until and unless the City
obtains an adequate indemnity from the grantee. To the extent permitted by law,
the indemnity must:
      1.   Release the City from and against any and all liability and
responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation, repair or
maintenance of the cable communications system; and
      2.   Indemnify and hold harmless the City, its elected and appointed
officials, agents, and employees, from and against any and all claims, demands,
or causes of action of any kind or nature, and the resulting losses, costs,
expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, liabilities, damages (including
consequential damages), orders, judgments, or decrees sustained by the City or
any indemnified party rising out of, or by reason of, or resulting from or
arising out of the acts, errors, or omissions of the cable communications
system operator, or its agents, independent contractors or employees related to
the construction, operation and/or repair of the system.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.180 INSURANCE.
   A.   A grantee, at its sole cost and expense, shall purchase and maintain
not less than the commercial general liability insurance, business vehicle
liability insurance, and workers compensation insurance required by this
Chapter, and each franchise agreement shall require each grantee to satisfy
insurance requirements that the City may establish from time to time.
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance: policy limits shall be no
less than five (5) million dollars per occurrence for all coverages and ten
(10) million dollars general aggregate. The City and its elected and appointed
officials, employees, agents and volunteers shall be added as additional
insured. Coverage shall apply on a primary non-contributing basis in relation
to any other insurance or self-insurance, primary or excess, available to the
City or any officer, employee, agent or volunteer of the City.
         a.   Coverage shall not be limited to the vicarious liability or
supervisory role of any additional insured. There shall be no cross liability
exclusion and no contractor limitation endorsement. In addition, there shall be
no endorsement or modification limiting the scope of coverage for liability
arising from pollution, explosion, collapse, underground property damage or
employment-related practices.
         b.   Any umbrella liability insurance over primary provided to meet
primary insurance limits shall apply to bodily injury, other personal injury or
property damage at a minimum, and shall include a "drop down" provision
providing primary coverage for liability not covered by primary policies but
covered by the umbrella policy. Coverage shall be as broad as any underlying
coverage. Coverage shall be provided with defense costs payable in addition to
policy limits. Policy limits shall be not less than five (5) million dollars
per occurrence and in the aggregate above any limits required in the underlying
policies.
      2.   Business vehicle coverage shall be no less than one (1) million
dollars per accident and in the aggregate. The policy shall be scheduled as
underlying insurance to any umbrella policy required above for a total limit of
no less than one (1) million dollars each accident.
      3.   The grantee shall provide workers' compensation statutory benefits
as required by law. Employer's liability limits shall be no less than one (1)
million dollars per accident or disease. Employer's liability coverage shall be
scheduled under any primary or umbrella policy described above. Unless
otherwise agreed, this policy shall be endorsed to waive any right to
subrogation as respects the City or any of City's elected or appointed
officials, employees, agents or volunteers.
   B.   Additional insurance requirements:
      1.   All insurance shall be submitted in a form approved by the City
Attorney.
      2.   Grantee's insurance shall be written by insurers authorized to do
business in the State, with a minimum "Best's Insurance Guide" rating of AA.
      3.   Coverage shall not be limited to the specific location or individual
or entity designated as the address of the project.
      4.   Each grantee shall ensure that coverage provided to meet these
requirements is applicable separately to each insured, and that there will be
no cross liability exclusions that preclude coverage for suits between grantee
and the City, between the City and any other named insured or additional
insured under the policy, or between the City and any party associated with the
City or the City's officers, employees, agents or volunteers.
      5.   The grantee will provide written proof to the satisfaction of the
City Attorney that policies of insurance required herein expiring during the
term of its franchise have been renewed or replaced with other policies
providing at least the same coverage, and satisfying any other insurance
requirements that may be applicable. Such written proof shall be furnished at
least thirty (30) days before expiration or termination of coverage.
      6.   No general or auto liability insurance coverage provided in
connection with the grantee's franchise shall prohibit grantee, and grantee's
employees or agents, from waiving the right of subrogation prior to a loss.
      7.   A grantee shall provide immediate notice to the City of any claim or
loss against grantee that includes the City as a defendant. The City assumes no
obligation or liability by such notice, but has the right (but not the duty) to
monitor the handling of any such claim or claims if they are likely to involve
the City.
   C.   A grantee shall file the required original certificate of insurance
with endorsements or other satisfactory proof of insurance prior to the
effective date of its franchise; the certificate shall be subject to approval
by the City Attorney's office. In the case of franchises in effect as of the
effective date of this Chapter, certificates of insurance shall be provided
within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Chapter, unless the
franchise limits amounts and proofs of insurance to those specified in that
existing franchise.
   D.   The grantee shall require all subcontrators operating in the City under
its direction or authority to maintain at all times the insurance requirements
contained in this Section. The subcontractor shall provide proof of such
insurance coverage to the City prior to commencement of any work.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.185 REQUIRED APPROVALS; SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   The City Engineer shall approve all construction within the public rights-
of-way. In addition to providing maps and plans as required by this Chapter and
by any franchise agreement, a grantee shall submit final as-built plans to the
City Engineer pursuant and in compliance City Code §
9.08.307.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.190 ACCESS TO PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Grantee shall be subject to and shall comply with all provisions of the
City's Rights-of-Way Management Plan and Standards and other requirements of
the municipal code, including all future modifications thereto.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.195 GENERAL CONDITIONS UPON CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND REPAIR.
   A.   A grantee and other persons engaged in the construction, operation or
repair of cable communications system shall satisfy all applicable laws,
ordinances, resolutions, departmental rules, regulations, written policies, and
practices affecting the use of private and public property by the cable
communications system, including by way of example and not limitation, the
City's building and zoning codes, as well as satisfying the requirements of
this Chapter and any additional requirements included in a franchise agreement.
   B.   A franchise is required before a permit may be issued for work
associated with the construction, operation or repair of a cable communications
system. Any permit issued for such work to a person who does not hold a
franchise shall vest no rights in the permittee and shall be void as if never
issued, at the sole option of City. Any such putative permittee shall remove
all facilities installed under the permit upon and in full compliance with
City's demand.
   C.   Each grantee shall locate and maintain the portions of its cable system
on rights-of-way and other public property, in such manner as to cause no
unreasonable interference with the use of said property by any person and in
accordance with standards set by the City Engineer.
   D.   Each grantee shall use existing poles and conduit where possible.
Additional poles may not be installed in the public rights-of-way without the
prior written approval of the City Engineer.
   E.   Any damage caused to the rights-of-way or public or private property by
grantee or those performing work on a grantee's behalf shall be promptly
repaired or replaced by grantee to the satisfaction of the property owner, or
the City. Each grantee will restore public property and public rights-of-way by
a time and in a manner directed by the City.
   F.   Grantee, at its sole expense, shall remove and/or relocate the cable
system in connection with public projects as set forth in the City municipal
code, under the direction of the City Engineer, including relocating to an
underground location.
      1.   The City shall provide written notice describing where the public
work is to be performed and a deadline for completing the work at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the deadline by which a cable communications system operator
must protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its
facilities. The cable communications system operator may seek an extension of
the time to perform the work where it cannot be performed by the deadline even
with the exercise of due diligence, and such request for an extension will not
be unreasonably denied. Provided that, in an emergency, or where a cable
communications system creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to
health, safety, or property, the City may protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, remove, or relocate any or all parts of the cable communications
system without prior notice, and charge the cable communications system
operator for reasonable costs incurred.
   G.   Installation of systems by others authorized to use public rights-of-
way or public property.
      1.   To accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the
facilities of another person authorized to use the public rights-of-way or
public property, a grantee shall, by a time specified by such person, protect,
support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its facilities. The grantee
shall be given written notice describing where the construction, operation or
repair is to be performed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the time by which
its work must be completed. Unless the matter is governed by a valid contract
or a state or federal law or regulation, or unless the cable communications
system that is being requested to move was not properly installed, the
reasonable cost of the same shall be borne by the person requesting the
protection, support, temporary disconnection, removal, or relocation and at no
charge to the City, even if the City makes the request for such action. In
cases where the requesting person is required under this Section to bear the
cost of relaying, relocation or temporary removal, a grantee may require the
person to agree, before the work is performed, to pay the reasonable actual
cost of the work. If the grantee does so, it must provide an estimate of the
cost of the work and support for that estimate.
   H.   At the request of any person holding a valid permit issued by a
governmental authority, a cable communications system operator shall
temporarily raise or lower its wires by a time specified to permit the moving
of buildings or other objects. A cable communications system operator shall be
given not less than fifteen (15) days advance notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes. The cable communications system operator, as a
condition of complying with such request, may require the requesting person to
pay the reasonable materials and labor expense of such temporary removal or
raising or lowering of wires, provided that the operator provides an estimate
of the cost of the work and support for that estimate. In cases where the
requesting person is required under this Section to bear the cost of raising or
lowering wires, the operator may require payment of the estimated expense in
advance.
   I.   Abandonment.
      1.   A cable communications system operator may abandon any property in
place in the public rights-of-way or upon public property upon written notice
to the City and separate notice to the City Engineer. However, if, within
ninety (90) days of the receipt of written notice of abandonment, the City
determines that the safety, appearance, functioning or use of the public right-
of-way or public property and facilities in the public right-of-way or on
public property will be adversely affected, the property must be removed by a
date reasonably specified by City in light of the amount of work to be
performed. No property shall be abandoned within the ninety (90) day period for
City review.
      2.   A cable communications system operator that abandons its property
must, upon request, transfer ownership of the property to the City at no cost,
and execute necessary quitclaim deeds; provided that nothing in the preceding
sentence prevents a cable communications system operator from bringing an
action in a court of competent jurisdiction if it believes that the cable
communications system was not abandoned. Whether or not ownership is
transferred, the operator must indemnify City against future costs associated
with mitigating or eliminating any hazard associated with the abandoned
property.
   J.   If a cable communications system operator fails to perform work on
public property or the public rights-of-way (including restoration work)
required by this Chapter, a franchise agreement or any other provision of law
by the time it is required to be performed, the City may perform the work and
bill the cable communications operator for the costs incurred by City, plus
administrative charges, or a draw down on the letter of credit.
   K.   Any amount billed to a cable communications operator pursuant to this
Section must be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the bill.
   L.   Upon request of City, every cable communications system shall be
required to interconnect with every other cable communications system within
City on fair and reasonable terms for purposes of providing PEG and
Institutional Network services. In the event of a dispute, the City may issue
an order establishing the terms and conditions under which interconnection
shall occur, and any grantee shall comply with the order.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.200 MAINTENANCE OF AND INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   A.   The City shall have the right to inspect and copy books and records:
related in whole or in part to the construction, operation or repair of the
cable communications system; that City deems relevant to monitoring compliance
with the terms of this ordinance, a franchise or applicable law; or that the
City deems relevant to the exercise of any right or duty of the City under the
same. Each cable communications system operator is responsible for maintaining
control over such books and records whether created by grantee, or by those
acting on its behalf. It is responsible for producing these records upon City's
request, for City's inspection and copying. The records that grantee may be
required to produce shall include, but are not limited to revenue records, and
other records related to compliance with any provision of this Chapter or a
franchise ordinance. Books and records must be maintained for a period of five
(5) years. The phrase "books and records" shall be read expansively to include
information in whatever format stored.
   B.   Books and records requested shall be produced to the City by a time and
at a location in City designated by the City Treasurer or City Manager, or
designated in a franchise ordinance. However, if the requested books and
records are too voluminous, or for security reasons cannot be copied and moved,
or if the requested books and records contain trade secrets, then the grantee
may request that the inspection take place at some other location mutually
agreeable to the City and the grantee, and the City will not unreasonably deny
the request, provided that (i) the grantee makes necessary arrangements for
copying documents selected by City after its review; and (ii) the grantee pays
all travel and additional copying expenses incurred by City (above those that
would have been incurred had the documents been produced in City, including
those incurred by any outside auditors, consultants or attorneys retained by
the City to review the franchise) in inspecting those documents or having those
documents inspected by its designee.
   C.   Any proprietary information received by City from a grantee must be
clearly marked as proprietary information that the grantee asserts is not
required to be disclosed pursuant to the California Public Records Act. If a
third party seeks release of a privileged document held by City, City will
notify the grantee so that the grantee may seek court protection against the
release of the document.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.205 REPORTS.
   A.   The City Manager may from time to time direct a grantee to prepare
reports regarding its cable communication system and its operations within or
affecting the City, and to submit those reports by a date certain, in a format
prescribed by the City Manager, in addition to those required by this Chapter
or a franchise agreement.
   B.   Unless an exemption is granted by the City Manager, no later than
ninety (90) days after the end of its fiscal year, a grantee shall submit the
following information, except that the information on grantee's officers,
members of its boards of directors, other principals, stockholders or equity
investors holding five percent (5%) or more of the voting interest, need only
be provided where there has been a change from the preceding year:
      1.   A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial
report year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable
communications system, including but not limited to, services begun or
discontinued during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each
class of service.
      2.   A fully audited report by an independent, certified public
accountant, of gross revenues from the previous calendar year for the cable
communications systems attributable to the franchise area, and a certified
statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the
franchise fee for the preceding year and a detailed explanation of the method
of computation showing (i) gross revenues by category (e.g., basic, pay, pay-
per-view, advertising, installation, equipment, late charges, franchise
collections, miscellaneous, other), with specific listings of new revenue
sources added during the year; (ii) what, if any, deductions were made from
gross revenues in calculating the franchise fee (e.g., bad debt, credits and
refunds), and the amount of each deduction; (iii) in the case of revenues
allocated to the system, the total revenues, the allocation methodology used,
and the resulting revenues allocated to the system, and (iv) a list of
subsidiaries added during the year.
   C.   When requested by the City Manager, within forty-five (45) days of the
end of each calendar quarter, a grantee shall submit a report to City
containing the following information:
      1.   The number of service calls (calls requiring a truck roll) received
by type, by quarter, and the percentage of service calls compared to the
subscriber base by type of complaint.
      2.   The number and type of outages known by the grantee by quarter,
identifying separately the following:
         a.   Each planned outage, the time it occurred, its duration, and the
estimated area and number of subscribers affected;
         b.   Each known unplanned outage, the time it occurred, its estimated
duration and the estimated area and the number of subscribers affected, and if
known, the cause;
         c.   The total estimated hours of known outages as a percentage of
total hours of system operation by quarter. The term "outage" means any event
affecting five (5) or more subscribers and resulting in a loss of sound or
video or, or a substantial deterioration of the signal on any channel.
      3.   A report showing, for each applicable customer service standard, the
grantee's performance with respect to that standard for each quarter of the
preceding year. In each case where grantee concludes it did not comply fully,
the grantee will describe the corrective actions it is taking to assure future
compliance. In addition, the report should identify the number and nature of
the customer service complaints received and an explanation of their
dispositions.
      4.   A summary of the system indicating miles and dwelling units passed.
      5.   A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two (2)
years.
      6.   Annual proof of performance tests, in sufficient detail to enable
the City to ascertain that the technical standards of the franchise are
achieved and maintained.
   D.   Within ten (10) days of their receipt or (in the case of documents
created by the cable communications system operator or a person acting on its
behalf) filing, a grantee shall provide the City:
      1.   Notices of deficiency or forfeiture from a state or federal agency
or court of competent jurisdiction related to the operation of the cable
communications system other than notices of deficiency or forfeiture from the
City; and
      2.   Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment
related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the grantee or by any partnership or
corporation that owns or controls the grantee directly or indirectly.
   E.   Copies of all reports materially adversely affecting the franchise that
are submitted by the grantee to the FCC or any other federal or state agency
shall be submitted to the City simultaneously with the filing of such reports
with said agencies. The grantee's routine public correspondence to said
agencies need not be automatically submitted to the City, but shall be made
available to the City upon written request.
   F.   Grantees shall submit to the City such other information or reports in
such forms and at such times as the City may reasonably request or require,
provided such information or reports are reasonably related to the grantee's
compliance with its obligations under the franchise.
   G.   All reports and records required under this or any other Section shall
be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.210 INSPECTION AND TESTING OF SYSTEM.
   A.   Except to the extent prohibited by law, every cable communications
system shall be subject to inspection and testing by the City. Except in
emergencies, the City will provide reasonable advance written notice to a
grantee when a city inspection will require the grantee's cable communications
system to be moved or when a device is attached to any portion of the grantee's
cable communications system located more than twelve (12) inches outside a
subscriber's premises. Inspections will be conducted to not unreasonably
interfere with cable communications system operations. Each operator must
timely and fully respond to requests for information regarding its system and
plans for the system as the City may from time to time issue, including
requests for information regarding its plans for construction, operation and
repair and the purposes for which the plant is being constructed, operated, or
repaired.
   B.   Except insofar as federal law preempts this requirement, upon request
of the City, a grantee shall perform all tests necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of the franchise agreement and other technical
and performance standards established by applicable law. Unless a franchise
agreement or applicable law provides otherwise, all tests shall be conducted in
accordance with federal rules and in accordance with the most recent edition of
National Cable Television Association's "Recommended Practices for Measurements
on Cable Television Systems," or such other manual as may be directed under FCC
regulations. A written report of any test results shall be filed with the City
within seven (7) calendar days of completion of the tests. If a location fails
to meet technical or performance specifications, the grantee, without
requirement of additional notice or request from the City, shall promptly take
corrective action, and retest the locations.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.215 COPIES OF REPORTS FILED WITH OTHER REGULATORY BODIES.
   Upon request, a grantee will file with the City any and all reports filed
with the FCC or any other regulatory body having jurisdiction over any aspects
of the operations of the grantee or its direct and indirect parents related in
any way to the cable communications system, or a of systems of which the cable
communications group system in the City is a part. This Section does not waive
the City's right to service or filing under federal or state laws or
regulations, and each grantee must provide copies of documents as required
under the same.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.220 FAILURE TO REPORT.
   A.   The refusal, failure, or neglect of a grantee to file any of the
reports, perform the tests or to provide access to books and records or to its
system as required under this Chapter, where such refusal, failure or neglect
is not be remedied following due notice and an opportunity to cure; or the
repeated refusal, failure or neglect to comply, even if individual failures are
corrected after notice and opportunity to cure; or the inclusion of any
materially false or misleading statement or representation in any report, shall
be deemed a material breach of the franchise.
   B.   For purposes of this Section, notice is sufficient if the City Manager
(or the City Treasurer with respect to financial reports) notifies the grantee
in writing that grantee has failed to provide a requested report, perform a
test, or provide access to books and records or to its plant. A grantee will be
deemed to have failed to cure unless it provides the requested reports,
performs the tests or provides the access to books and records and to its plant
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice, or such longer period as
the City Manager may specify in the notice.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.225 OTHER RECORDS REQUIRED.
   Unless the City Manager specifically waives the requirement in writing, a
grantee shall at all times maintain:
   A.   Records of all complaints received within the prior five (5) years,
their nature and resolution. The term "complaints" refers to complaints about
any aspect of the grantee's construction, operation or repair activities;
   B.   Records of outages known to the grantee, their cause and duration;
   C.   Records of service calls for repair and maintenance indicating the
nature of the call for service, the date and time service was requested, the
date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it was
scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the
date and time the problem was solved;
   D.   Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service
extension, indicating date of request, date of acknowledgment, and the date and
time service was extended; and
   E.   Records sufficient to show whether the grantee has complied with each
customer service standard that applies to it.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.230   EXEMPTIONS.
   At the sole discretion of the City Manager, the City Manager may temporarily
exempt any grantee from its obligations under §§
11.21.210,
11.21.215 and
11.21.225 if the City Manager determines that the requirement would be unduly
burdensome or unnecessary; and that the City and subscriber interests may be
adequately protected in some other manner.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.235 PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS; DUE DILIGENCE.
   A grantee shall take all reasonable steps required so that it is able to
provide reports, books and records to the City, including by providing
appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Each grantee shall be responsible for
redacting data that applicable law prevents it from providing to the City.
Nothing in this Section shall be read to require a grantee to violate state or
federal subscriber privacy laws.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.240 PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   A.   The purpose of this Section is to authorize the imposition of penalties
for the violation of the consumer service standards established in §§
11.21.300,
11.21.305,
11.21.310 and
11.21.315, in accordance with the Video Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 53088 et seq.). These penalties are in addition to any other remedies
provided by this Chapter, the franchise agreement, or any other law, and the
City has the sole discretion to elect the remedy that it will apply. The
imposition of penalties authorized by this Section will not prevent the City or
any other affected party for exercising any other remedy to the extent
permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial remedy as provided
below.
   B.   The City Manager is authorized to administer this Section. Decisions by
the City Manager to assess penalties against the grantee must be in writing and
must contain findings supporting the decision. Decisions by the City Manager
are final, unless appealed to the City Council.
      1.   If the grantee or any interested person is aggrieved by a decision
of the City Manager, the aggrieved party may, within ten (10) days of the
written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the City Council through
the City Clerk's office. The fee established by the City Council for processing
the appeal must accompany the appeal letter. The City Council may affirm,
modify, or reverse the decisions of the City Manager.
      2.   The following schedule of monetary penalties may be assessed against
the grantee for the material breach of the provisions of the consumer service
standards set forth above, provided that the breach is within the reasonable
control of the grantee.
         a.   The maximum penalty is two hundred dollars ($200) for each day of
material breach, but not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600) for each
occurrence of the material breach.
         b.   For a second material breach of the same nature within a twelve
(12) month period for which the City has provided notice and a penalty has been
assessed, the maximum penalty is four hundred dollars ($400) for each day of
the material breach, but not to exceed one thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200) for each occurrence of the material breach.
         c.   For a third material breach of the same nature within a twelve
(12) month period for which the City has provided notice and a penalty has been
assessed, the maximum penalty is one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each day of
the material breach, but not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000) for each
occurrence of the material breach.
      3.   The maximum penalties referenced above shall be increased by any
additional amount authorized by state law.
   C.   This Section does not preclude any affected party from pursuing any
judicial remedy available to that party without regard to this Section.
   D.   Any penalty assessed under this Section will be reduced dollar for
dollar to the extent any liquidated damage provision of a franchise imposes a
monetary obligation on a franchisee for the same customer service failures, and
no other monetary damages may be assessed. A citation may be served on the
franchisee by providing a copy to the person to whom notices are to be sent
under the franchise. Penalties will be imposed pursuant to procedures set forth
in the municipal code, applied in a manner consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code §
53088(2)(q) and (r).
   E.   Notwithstanding any other penalties or remedies provided by this
Section, the franchise agreement, or any other law, the grantee must provide
the following months of free service to subscribers affected by the grantee's
failure to comply with the specified consumer protection and service standards:
      1.   One month free service. The grantee will provide one month of free
service to each subscriber affected by the failure of the grantee to timely and
satisfactorily comply with any of the following requirements:
         a.   The pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment within
fourteen (14) days after subscriber request is received.
         b.   Forty-eight (48) hour notice of service interruption.
         c.   Response time for system outages.
         d.   Resolution of cable system related problems within three (3)
business days. One additional month of free service will be provided for each
seven (7) day period that the problem remains unresolved.
         e.   Written response to billing complaints.
         f.   Credits and refunds.
         g.   Provisions of all required information to subscribers.
         h.   Notification of rate, service, or channel changes.
         i.   Completion of termination or downgrade of service.
         j.   Provision of parental control devices.
         k.   Provisions of customer privacy rights.
      2.   Three months free service.  The grantee will provide three (3)
months of free service to each subscriber affected by the grantee's
disconnection of subscriber service without just cause, provided that the
grantee fails to restore service within four (4) hours after the disconnect.
      3.   Definition of free service. The free service required by this
Section relates to the service tier subscribed to by the affected subscriber at
the time of the failure to comply.
   F.   Each franchise agreement shall contain a provision specifying
liquidated damages payable to the City in the event of a significant material
breach of a franchise obligation where damages are otherwise difficult to
ascertain. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the addition of liquidated
damages to the penalties otherwise contained herein.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.245 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES; REVOCATION.
   A.   The City Council may revoke a franchise or reduce the term of a
franchise if it finds, after a hearing, that a cable communications system
operator has violated any provision of this Chapter or applicable law,
committed a substantial breach of material terms of its franchise or repeatedly
failed to comply with its franchise; has defrauded or attempted to defraud the
City or subscribers; or has attempted to evade the requirements of this Chapter
or its franchise.
      1.   Such a breach includes, but not be limited to:
         a.   If the grantee practices, or attempts to practice, any fraud or
deceit upon the City.
         b.   If the grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or upon listing of an order for relief in favor of grantee in a
bankruptcy proceeding.
         c.   If the grantee materially fails to meet the consumer service
standards established in the franchise consistently over a three (3) month
period of time.
         d.   If the grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and
effect, the liability and indemnification coverage, letter of credit or bonds
required by the franchise.
         e.   If the grantee willfully violates any orders or rulings of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the franchise,
provided that the grantee may contest any such orders or rulings by appropriate
proceedings conducted in good faith, in which case no breach of the franchise
shall be deemed to have occurred if the notice of violation is overturned.
         f.   If the grantee ceases to provide all cable service over all or a
substantial portion of its cable system for a period of five (5) days or more,
for any reason within the control of the grantee.
         g.   If the grantee willfully fails to make any payments required
under the franchise and/or refuses to provide the City with required
information, reports and/or test results in a timely manner as provided in the
franchise.
         h.   If the grantee fails to initiate scheduled system construction or
reconstruction more than one (1) year after construction is to be begin for any
reason within the control of the grantee.
         i.   If delays in completion of scheduled system construction or
reconstruction exceed six (6) months for any reason within the control of the
grantee.
         j.   Any other act or omission by the grantee which materially
violates the terms, conditions or requirements of the franchise or any order,
directive, rule or regulation issued thereunder and which is not corrected or
remedied within the time set forth in the written notice of the violation or,
if the grantee cannot reasonably correct or remedy the breach within the time
set forth in such notice, if the grantee should fail to commence to correct or
remedy such violation within the time set forth in such notice and diligently
effect such correction or remedy thereafter.
   B.   Before conducting a hearing to revoke a franchise, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter: (i) the City Manager must have given notice of a
claimed violation, breach, default or failure; and (ii) the grantee must have
been given thirty (30) days to cure the claimed default, except as provided
herein, provided that the cure period for failure to remit franchise fees is
fifteen (15) days. An opportunity to cure is not required where the City finds
that the defect in performance is due to willful misconduct, is an adjudicated
violation of criminal law, or is part of a pattern of violations where the
grantee has already had notice and opportunity to cure. The grantee will be
given at least twenty (20) days notice of the hearing date, and will be
provided an opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
   C.   The City may declare a franchise forfeited without opportunity to cure
where (i) a grantee abandons its cable communications system; or (ii) a
transfer subject to the City's prior consent occurs without the prior consent
of City.
   D.   The cable communications system or a part thereof, will be deemed
abandoned if (i) the cable communications system operator notifies the City of
its intent to abandon; (ii) the cable communications system operator willfully
ceases providing cable service in accordance with its franchise; or (iii) the
cable communications system operator does not provide cable service over the
cable communications system or a part of the system for ninety-six (96)
consecutive hours, and is not restoring service with all due diligence.
   E.   A franchise will terminate automatically by force of law one hundred
twenty (120) calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or
the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the
grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for
the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding. However, the franchise
may be reinstated within that one hundred twenty (120) day period, if: (i) such
assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or (ii) such
assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions
of this Chapter and the franchise, and has executed an agreement, approved by
any court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms
and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise.
   F.   In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the
facilities, equipment or property of a grantee, the City may revoke the
franchise by serving notice upon the grantee and the successful bidder at the
sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges thereunder
will be revoked and will terminate thirty (30) calendar days after serving such
notice, unless: (i) the City has approved the transfer of the franchise to the
successful bidder; and (ii) the successful bidder has covenanted and agreed
with the City to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the
franchise and this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.250 EFFECT OF TERMINATION OR FORFEITURE.
   A.   Upon termination or forfeiture of a franchise, whether by action of the
City as provided in §
11.21.245, or by passage of time, the City may do one or a combination of the
following:
      1.   The grantee must, as the City so directs, stop using the cable
communications system for the purposes authorized by the franchise.
      2.   The grantee must, as the City directs, continue providing service
pursuant to the terms of its franchise agreement for such reasonable period as
may be required to arrange for another cable communications system to provide
service.
      3.   The City may require the former grantee to remove all or a portion
of its facilities and equipment at the former grantee's expense, subject to
grantee's right to abandon property in place. In removing its cable
communications system, grantee shall restore affected property to comply with
all then-applicable codes, and to as good or better condition as existed prior
to removal. If the former grantee fails to do so within a reasonable period of
time, the City may have the removal done at the former grantee's and/or
surety's expense.
      4.   The City, by resolution of the City Council, may acquire ownership
or effect a transfer of all or a portion of the cable communications system at
an equitable price if termination or forfeiture is for cause, or if termination
or forfeiture is not for cause, at fair market value, not including the value
of the franchise.
      5.   If a cable communications system or any part thereof is abandoned by
the grantee, the City may require the grantee to transfer title to the all or
some of the abandoned portions to it, as the City may direct, at no charge,
free and clear of encumbrances, and the same will become the City's property
and the City may keep, sell, assign, or transfer all or part of the assets of
the cable communications system, or otherwise dispose of those assets as it
sees fit. The cable communications system or a part thereof will be deemed
abandoned if:
         a.   The cable communications system operator notifies the City of its
intent to abandon;
         b.   The cable communications system operator willfully ceases
providing cable service in accordance with its franchise;
         c.   The facility or equipment is not used or useful in the provision
of then-existing or planned cable services; or
         d.   The cable communications system operator does not provide cable
service over the cable communications system or a part of the system for
ninety-six (96) consecutive hours, and is not restoring service with all due
diligence.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may not, pursuant to this
section, issue an order that violates 47 USC 541(b)(3)(c).
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.255 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies provided for under this Chapter, or under a franchise
ordinance, shall be cumulative and are in addition to all other remedies which
may be available at law or equity, including but not limited to the California
False Claims Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 12650 et seq.), provided, however, that
the City is not entitled to recover damages for the same act or omission under
multiple remedies where doing so would result in a double recovery of damages
by the City for the same harm. Recovery by the City of any amounts under
insurance, the performance bond, the security fund or letter of credit, or
otherwise does not limit in any way a grantee's duty to indemnify the City nor
shall such recovery relieve a grantee of its franchise obligations, limit the
amounts owed to the City, or in any respect prevent the City from exercising
any other right or remedy it may have.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
CONSUMER PROTECTION
§ 11.21.300 CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS; GENERALLY.
   A.   Each cable operator shall comply with consumer protection standards
adopted by the City from time to time by ordinance or by resolution; FCC
customer service standards; and any customer service standards that may be
specified in a franchise agreement. Each cable operator shall comply with state
consumer protection laws and regulations. In the event of a conflict among
standards, the stricter standard shall apply.
   B.   For good cause shown, the City Manager may grant a temporary waiver of
any City customer service standard where the City Manager determines:
      1.   Because of particular circumstances involved, enforcement of the
standard is not necessary to protect consumers; and
      2.   Granting the waiver is in the public interest, considering the
potential benefits to the grantee and consumers.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.305 CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS; OPERATIONS.
   A.   Staffing.  The failure of the grantee to hire sufficient staff or to
properly train its staff will not justify a grantee failure to comply with any
provision of this Section.
   B.   Office availability. 
      1.   Each cable system operator will maintain at least one office at a
convenient location within the City that will be open for walk-in traffic at
least ten (10) hours per day (except legal holidays) Monday through Friday,
with some evening hours, and at least four (4) hours on Saturday to allow
persons to purchase, terminate or modify service, register complaints, pay
bills, drop off equipment and to pick up equipment.
      2.   Each office must be accessible to all persons, including the elderly
and persons with disabilities. Adequate parking must be provided within
reasonable proximity of the office.
      3.   The City may temporarily waive a cable system operator's obligation
to allow drop-off and pick-up of equipment if the cable system operator offers
free pick-up and delivery of equipment in a manner and at times convenient to
customers.
   C.   Service call hours. Each cable system operator will perform service
calls, installations, and disconnects at least nine (9) hours per day Monday
through Saturday, except legal holidays. In addition, a cable system operator
must respond to service interruptions affecting two (2) or more subscribers
served from the same node twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
   D.   Telephones.
      1.   General. Each cable system operator must have a publicly listed
focal telephone number under the name by which cable system operator is doing
business in the City. Customer service representatives must answer the phone
twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, for the purposes of
receiving and responding to requests for service, inquiries, reports of service
problems, and complaints; except that, the company may use an automated
response unit or outsourced answering service during the period 10:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m., so long as the system is set up so that the company can satisfy its
obligation to respond to service interruptions.
      2.   Telephone answering time.
         a.   Telephone answering time will not exceed thirty (30) seconds; and
         b.   The time to transfer the call to a customer service
representative (including hold time) will not exceed an additional thirty (30)
seconds.
         c.   Under normal operating conditions, the standards set out in this
division (D) of this section must be met ninety percent (90%) of the time,
measured quarterly. The phrase "of the time" refers to the percentage of calls
to a cable system operator during normal operating conditions, so that if 1,000
calls are received by a cable system operator during normal operating
conditions, 900 of those calls must be answered within the time limits
specified in this Section.
      3.   Under normal operating conditions, customers will receive a busy
signal less than three percent (3%) of the time, measured quarterly. The phrase
"of the time" refers to the percentage of calls to a cable system operator
during normal operating conditions. Thus if 1,000 persons call a cable system
operator, fewer than 30 callers should receive a busy signal.
   E.   Scheduling work.
      1.   A cable system operator may schedule appointments for service,
installation, or disconnection for a specific time, a time block or, solely at
the discretion of the person requesting service, installation or disconnection,
"all day." Time blocks may not exceed four (4) consecutive hours in length. A
cable system operator may also, upon request, schedule appointments outside
normal business hours, for the express convenience of the customer. These
options shall be clearly explained to the customer at the time of scheduling.
      2.   The cable system operator will attempt to call the person who
scheduled the appointment between the hours of 5:30 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on the
day prior to any appointment as a reminder of scheduled work. If the call is
not answered, cable system operator shall attempt to make the reminder call the
next morning, prior to the scheduled appointment time.
      3.   If an installer or technician anticipates that he or she will be
late for an appointment, an attempt to contact the customer will be made
immediately and the appointment rescheduled at a time convenient to the
customer, if rescheduling is necessary.
      4.   A cable system operator may not reschedule or cancel a service or
installation appointment with a customer after the close of business, on the
business day preceding the scheduled appointment.
      5.   Under normal operating conditions, an operator must satisfy each of
the standards set forth in §
11.21.305(D)(2)-(3) of this Chapter, at least ninety-five percent (95%) of the
time, measured quarterly. The phrase "of the time" refers to the number of
appointments.
      6.   If the cable system operator misses an appointment, it will describe
and offer the customer a choice of the following:
         a.   The installation or service call free of charge, if the
appointment was for an installation or service call for which a fee was to be
charged; or one (1) month of the two most widely subscribed to service tiers
free of charge for other appointments; or
         b.   An opportunity to elect remedies under Cal. Civil Code § 1722 as
may be amended, if applicable.
   F.   Service standards.
      1.   Requests for service, repair, and maintenance must be acknowledged
by a trained customer service representative within twenty-four (24) hours, or
before the end of the next business day, whichever is earlier.
      2.   A cable system operator will respond to all other inquiries
(including billing inquiries) within five (5) business days of the receipt of
the inquiry or complaint.
      3.   Repairs and maintenance for service interruptions, system outages
and/or substandard reception quality must be completed within twenty-four (24)
hours after the outage or interruption becomes known to a cable system operator
where the cable system operator has adequate access to facilities to which it
must have access in order to remedy the problem.
      4.   Work to correct all other service problems must be begun by the next
business day after notification of the service problem, and must be completed
within five (5) business days from the date of the initial request.
      5.   Except as a franchise agreement may otherwise provide, service must
be extended upon request to any prospective subscriber in a cable system
operator's franchise area.
   G.   Subscribers with disabilities.  With regard to subscribers with
disabilities, upon subscriber request, each cable system operator will arrange
for pickup and/or replacement of converters or other cable system operator
equipment at the subscriber's address or by a satisfactory equivalent (such as
the provision of a postage-prepaid mailer), without a special charge.
   H.   Disconnection and downgrades; voluntary.
      1.   A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any time.
      2.   A cable system operator will disconnect from the cable system
operator cable system or downgrade any subscriber who so requests within seven
(7) business days. No period of notice before voluntary termination or
downgrade of cable service may be required of subscribers by any cable system
system operator. There will be no charge for disconnection, and any downgrade
charges will conform to applicable law. This Section does not apply to
promotional contracts where a subscriber received an actual discount from
standard service rates for a multi-month contract, so long as (i) the
disconnect fee plus the amount paid by the customer is no higher than the
amount the customer would have paid for service actually received before the
disconnect request at the cable system operator's prevailing rates for the
service; (ii) the disconnect fee was stated prominently and in writing, and
provided to the customer before the customer began taking service; and (iii)
the subscriber was given the option of disconnecting without a disconnect fee
within the first fifteen (15) days after subscriber began receiving the
discounted service.
      3.   Any security deposit and/or other funds, including interest, due a
subscriber that disconnects or downgrades service will be returned to the
subscriber within thirty (30) days from the date disconnection or downgrade was
requested except in cases where the subscriber does not permit the cable system
operator to recover its equipment, in which case the amounts owed will be paid
to subscribers within thirty (30) days of the date the equipment was recovered.
   I.   Involuntary disconnection for non-payment.
      1.   A cable system operator may not disconnect a subscriber's cable
service for non-payment unless:
         a.   The subscriber is delinquent in payment for cable service for
more than sixty (60) days.
         b.   A separate, written notice of impending disconnection, postage
prepaid, has been sent to the subscriber at least twenty (20) days before the
date on which service may be disconnected, at the premises where the subscriber
requests billing, which notice must identify the names and address of the
subscriber whose account is delinquent, state the date by which disconnection
may occur if payment is not made, and the amount the subscriber must pay to
avoid disconnection, and a telephone number of a representative of the cable
system operator who can provide additional information concerning and handle
complaints or initiate an investigation concerning the services and charges in
question.
         c.   The subscriber fails to pay the amounts owed to avoid
disconnection by the date of disconnection.
         d.   No pending inquiry exists regarding the bill to which the cable
system operator has not responded in writing.
      2.   If the subscriber pays all amounts due, including late charges and
the City's utility users tax, before the time scheduled for disconnection, the
cable system operator shall not disconnect service. Service may only be
terminated on days in which the customer can reach a representative of the
cable system operator either in person or by telephone.
      3.   After disconnection (except as noted below), upon payment by the
subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of the
reconnection charge and the City's utility users tax, if any, the cable system
operator will promptly reinstate service.
   J.   Immediate disconnection.
      1.   A cable system operator may immediately disconnect a subscriber if:
         a.   The subscriber is damaging, destroying, or unlawfully tampering
with or has damaged or destroyed or unlawfully tampered with the cable system
operator's cable system;
         b.   The subscriber is not authorized to receive a service and is
receiving it and/or is facilitating, aiding or abetting the unauthorized
receipt of service by others; or
         c.   Subscriber-installed or attached equipment is resulting in signal
leakage that is in violation of FCC rules.
      2.   After disconnection, the cable system operator will restore service
after the subscriber provides adequate assurance that it has ceased the
practices that led to disconnection, and paid all proper fees and charges,
including any reconnect fees and all amounts owed the cable system operator for
damage to its cable system. Provided that, no reconnection fee may be imposed
on a subscriber disconnected pursuant to this Section if the disconnect was the
result of the cable system operator's acts or omissions; or in any case unless
the cable system operator notifies the subscriber of the leakage at least three
(3) business days in advance of disconnection, and the subscriber has failed to
correct the leakage within that time.
   K.   Each cable system operator must have sufficient trucks, tools, testing
equipment, monitoring devices and other equipment and facilities and the
trained and skilled personnel required so that cable system operator complies
with each and every requirement of applicable law, including applicable
customer service requirements, technical standards, maintenance standards and
requirements for responding to system outages. This includes the facilities,
equipment and staff required to:
      1.   Properly test the system and conduct an ongoing and active program
of preventive maintenance and quality control;
      2.   Quickly respond to customer complaints and resolve system problems.
   L.   Each cable system operator must install and maintain equipment
necessary to measure its performance with applicable customer services
standards that the City may adopt from time to time after providing cable
system operator opportunity to comment; except that cable system operator may
obtain relief temporarily from this requirement if it shows that (i) it has a
high level of subscriber satisfaction; (ii) there are alternative, adequate
ways to review its performance; or (iii) for other good cause shown.
   M.   Knowledgeable, qualified representatives shall be available to respond
to customer telephone inquiries, including multi-lingual representatives,
during the hours the office is required to be open. Any automated answering
equipment will provide multi-lingual alternatives. After hours, if the cable
system operator uses persons to answer the phone, it will use its best efforts
to provide multi-lingual alternatives. When service calls are scheduled by a
non-English speaking customer, cable system operator shall offer to have the
service call made by a multi-lingual representative.
   N.   The term "normal operating conditions" shall have the meaning specified
in FCC rules provided that, in the event that a cable system operator provides
customer service via a center that serves multiple communities, and an events,
such as an outage, occurs in the other communities but not in the City,
conditions will be deemed to be "normal operating conditions" for purposes of
determining compliance with this ordinance. It is the cable system operator
burden to prove that a period was not one where "normal operating conditions"
existed. Absent proof satisfactory to the City, each period will be deemed to
be a period where "normal operating conditions" apply. Each cable system
operator must maintain records sufficient to show that a particular period was
not a period where "normal operating conditions" existed in the City.
   O.   The term "service interruption" means the loss of picture or sound or
any other significant part of a signal on one or more cable channels.
   P.   Changes in service. Except as otherwise provided by federal law,
subscribers shall not be required to pay any additional fee or charge, other
than the regular service fee, in order to receive the services selected (such
as upgrade or downgrade charges). No charge may be imposed for any service or
product that the subscriber has not affirmatively selected. Payment of the
regular monthly bill shall not by itself constitute an affirmative selection by
a subscriber.
   Q.   Deposits. The grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory
deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Such deposits must be placed on
an interest-bearing account. The interest earned may not be less than that paid
for commercial saving accounts. The deposit must be returned, with interest
earned to the date of repayment, within thirty (30) days after the equipment is
returned to the grantee, or the subscriber's next regular billing cycle,
whichever is sooner.
   R.   Parental control option. The grantee must provide parental control
devices to all subscribers who desire to block the video or audio portion of
any programming that the subscriber finds objectionable. Such devices will be
provided at no charge to the subscriber, unless otherwise required by federal
law or unless a converter box is required to be installed for the purpose of
providing the parental control device. If a converter box is required, only a
deposit fee and installation fee may be charged.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.310 CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS; NOTICES AND BILLING.
   A.   Identification of employees and work.
      1.   Each grantee shall require any person working on its behalf to wear
a picture identification badge indicating that they are working on behalf of
grantee. This badge shall be clearly visible to the public. All company
vehicles shall prominently display the name under which the grantee is doing
business, and logo, if any, in a manner clearly visible to the public.
Contractor vehicles shall prominently display the contractor name, contractor
license number, if applicable, and prominently display the grantee name. There
must be a listed local telephone number for the names displayed.
      2.   The telephone number posted must be a local number. The phone must
connect to persons trained to receive, and respond to calls regarding
employees; construction and problems (including repair problems) associated
with construction.
   B.   General subscriber notices. A grantee will provide each subscriber at
the time service is installed, at least once annually thereafter, and at any
time upon request, clear and accurate written information regarding:
      1.   How to use cable service;
      2.   How to place a service call, file a complaint, or request an
adjustment (including when a subscriber is entitled to refunds for outages and
how to obtain them);
      3.   The telephone number of the City office responsible for
administering the cable franchise;
      4.   A schedule of rates and charges, channel positions, services
provided, a copy of the service contract, delinquent subscriber disconnect and
reconnect procedures; notifying subscribers of the availability of parental
control devices, and the conditions under which they will be provided and the
cost (if any) charged;
      5.   Any discounts offered (other than discounts offered under bulk
contracts), and description of conditions that must be met to qualify for
discounts;
      6.   Where and how payments can be made, and description of late charge
practices.
      7.   Any other grantee policies in connection with its subscribers,
including but not limited to its privacy policies; and
      8.   A description of any services or specialized equipment available to
subscribers with disabilities, explaining how to obtain and use them.
   C.   Notices in bills.
      1.   Each bill shall prominently display the number to be called for
billing and for other complaints, and for refunds and rebates, and must
identify the address to which bills should be mailed, and the local addresses
for in-person bill payments.
      2.   Each bill shall prominently display the name of the City office
responsible for regulating cable on the bill. The information shall be placed
and described so as to clearly distinguish it from information regarding the
grantee.
   D.   Each grantee will provide the City at least sixty (60) days written
notice, and all subscribers at least thirty (30) days written notice of any
material changes in the information required to be provided under this Section
except that, if federal law establishes a shorter notice period and preempts
this requirement, the federal requirement will apply. If federal law preempts
the requirement for written notice in certain cases, this provision will
require that the grantee use another reasonable method for providing notice to
the extent the written notice requirement is preempted. To be reasonable,
grantee must be able to demonstrate that each subscriber responsible for making
pertinent decisions had actual knowledge as to the means by which notice would
be given, and that the grantee had some valid, empirical basis for concluding
that notices so given were being received and understood by subscribers.
   E.   A grantee shall notify the City Manager immediately if a service
interruption affects fifty (50) or more subscribers for a time period greater
than three (3) hours. The City Manager shall establish appropriate methods for
the notification required herein, including any procedures for notification
after normal business hours.
   F.   A grantee shall provide the City with copies of all notices provided to
its subscribers. If notice is given by some means other than in writing, the
City must be provided a copy of the notice, as given. For example, if notice
was given via the cable system, a tape of the notice must be provided to the
City. Further, the City must be advised precisely how and when the notice was
provided. If notice was provided on particular channels, the City must be told
what channels were used.
   G.   A grantee must take appropriate steps to ensure that all written
grantee promotional materials, announcements, and advertising of cable service
to subscribers and the general public, where price information is listed in any
manner, clearly and accurately discloses price terms. In the case of telephone
orders, a grantee will take appropriate steps to ensure that price terms are
clearly and accurately disclosed to potential customers in advance of taking
the order.
   H.   A grantee shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment
that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. A subscriber's
failure to refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such service or
equipment is not an affirmative request for service or equipment. A
subscriber's affirmative request may be made orally or in writing, but it is
the grantee burden to show that the affirmative request was made, and to retain
records sufficient to prove that the affirmative request was made. This Section
shall be read to require affirmative subscriber consent to take service
whenever there is a change in the nature of an existing service or tier of
service being received by a subscriber.
   I.   Each grantee will maintain a file, available for public inspection
during the hours its office is open to the public, containing all notices
provided to subscribers under these customer service standards, as well as all
promotional offers made to subscribers. The notices and offers will be kept in
the file for at least one (1) year from the date of such notice or promotional
offer.
   J.   Billing credits.
      1.   All first billing statements after a new installation or service
change will be prorated as appropriate and will reflect any security deposit.
      2.   All billing statements must be clear, concise, and understandable;
must itemize each category of service and equipment provided to the subscriber;
and must state clearly the charges therefor.
   K.   A grantee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date not
earlier than the later of:
      1.   Fifteen (15) days after the date the statement is mailed; or
      2.   The tenth (10th) day of the service period for which the bill is
rendered.
   L.   A late fee or administrative fee (collectively referred to below as a
"late fee") may not be imposed for payments earlier than thirty (30) days after
the due date specified in the bill.
   M.   A grantee must permit a subscriber to remit payment by mail or in
person at the grantee's local office. Subscribers may not be charged a late fee
or otherwise penalized for any failure by a grantee, including failure to
timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the
subscriber for a payment timely made. Payments will be considered timely if
received by mail by 6:00 p.m. on or before the date the late fee would
otherwise be due and if payment is made in person at any time up to the time
the local office is closed on or before the date the late fee would otherwise
be due.
   N.   Credit for service impairment.
      1.   A subscriber's account will be credited a prorated share of the
monthly charge for the service upon request if a subscriber is without service
or if service is substantially impaired for any reason for a period equal to or
exceeding three (3) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period; or
automatically if the loss of service or impairment is for twenty-four (24)
hours or longer.
      2.   A subscriber shall be deemed to have requested a credit if the
subscriber requests a credit or complains about a service interruption within
sixty (60) days of the outage.
      3.   A grantee need not credit subscriber where it establishes that a
subscriber would obtain a credit for a loss of service or impairment caused by
the subscriber or by subscriber-owned equipment (not including, for purposes of
this Section, in-home wiring installed by the grantee). The grantee bears the
burden of proving that the subscriber caused the service loss or impairment.
      4.   Refunds and/or credits for service will be issued no later than the
next billing cycle of the customer following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
   O.   A grantee may require a reasonable, non-discriminatory deposit on
equipment provided to subscribers. When deposits are placed in an interest-
bearing account, grantee will return the deposit, plus interest earned to the
date the deposit is returned to the subscriber, less any amount the grantee can
demonstrate should be deducted for damage to such equipment. The deposit must
be returned within thirty (30) days of the date the equipment is returned, or
the next billing cycle, whichever is sooner.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.21.315 PROTECTION OF CITY AND RESIDENTS.
   A.   Privacy rights of subscribers.
      1.   As used in this Section, "valid authorization" means written
approval from the subscriber.
      2.   Each grantee shall strictly observe and protect the rights of
privacy and of property of subscribers and users at all times. Information on
individual subscribers, individual subscriber preferences of any kind, viewing
habits, political, social or economic philosophies, beliefs, creeds, religions
or names, addresses or telephone numbers shall not be revealed to any person,
governmental unit, private agency or company, unless upon the authority of a
court of competent jurisdiction, by statute, or upon valid authorization of the
subscriber. The authorization shall be contained in a separate document with a
prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full
knowledge of its provisions. The statement shall be in print size not less than
twelve (12) points in height, and must specifically state the right of the
subscriber not to grant such permission without penalty. Such authorization
shall not in any event be required as a condition of receiving service.
      3.   The grantee may release the number of its subscribers only as a
total number, as a percentage of the potential subscribers throughout its
franchise area, or as a number of viewers of individual channels. When
indicating the number of subscribers viewing a particular channel at a
particular time, a grantee shall indicate only the total number of subscribers
viewing during the relevant time and the percentage of all subscribers that
they represent, but never the identity of a particular subscriber.
      4.   A grantee may obtain and/or maintain only such information relating
to subscribers as is necessary to conduct legitimate business activity related
to cable service, or any other service the grantee shall provide to
subscribers.
      5.   A subscriber may, at any time, revoke any valid authorization
previously made, by delivering to the grantee in writing, by mail or otherwise,
his or her decision to so revoke. Any such revocation shall be effective upon
receipt by grantee.
      6.   No monitoring of any subscriber terminal shall take place without
specific prior written authorization by the user of the terminal in question;
provided, however, a grantee may conduct system-wide or individually addressed
"sweeps" for the purpose of verifying system integrity, security monitoring,
and/or addressable premium service implementation or verification. In no event
shall residential aural or visual monitoring of any kind take place without a
clear indication to the subscriber that such monitoring is taking place.
      7.   A grantee may, without prior subscriber approval, monitor those
subscriber terminals that are connected to utility monitoring devices that
measure utility usage and which have been first approved by the City Council.
      8.   Prior to the implementation of any interactive subscriber response
mechanism, a grantee shall first demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City
Manager that such a mechanism can provide effective protection against invasion
of privacy.
      9.   A grantee shall not tabulate any test results, nor permit the use of
the cable communications system for such tabulation, in a manner that would
reveal the commercial product preferences of opinions of subscribers without
valid authorization.
      10.   Each compilation, publication, tabulation or other dissemination of
information made or permitted to be made in violation of this Section with
respect to a single occurrence or series of related occurrences may result in
the imposition of liquidated damages, pursuant to the franchise agreement.
      11.   The rights accorded subscribers pursuant to this Section are in
addition to any other privacy right accorded subscribers pursuant to federal or
state law.
      12.   The grantee shall not market mailing lists with the names and
addresses of subscribers unless the subscribers have been provided the
opportunity to prohibit or limit such disclosure. The grantee shall provide a
form that permits the subscriber to check a box and mail in the form to delete
his or her name from the mailing list. Said form shall be provided to all
subscribers upon initiation of service.
      13.   Notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, nothing
herein shall prohibit a grantee from using its cable communications system to
collect and disclose such information necessary to render, or conduct a
legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other cable service
provided by the operator to the subscriber. This right shall not extend to any
parent company, owner, partner or affiliate of the grantee.
   B.   No exclusivity; tenant rights.
      1.   A grantee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or
manager to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or
continuing service.
      2.   It is the City's intent that tenants not be discriminated against in
the ability to subscribe to cable services. Each grantee shall be required to
provide service to tenants in individual units of a multiple housing facility
with all services offered to other dwelling units within the franchise area, so
long as the owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by the
grantee, to provide access to the building, and permit the operator to provide
cable services for the reasonable period required to recoup the cost of any
wiring required within the building, but outside the demarcation point for each
individual apartment as defined by FCC regulations.
   C.   Discrimination prohibited. A cable communications system operator shall
comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing equal
employment opportunities, and hiring practices, as the same may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
CABLE FRANCHISE RENEWALS
§ 11.21.400 CABLE FRANCHISE RENEWALS; PROCEDURE.
   A.   If the provisions of 47 USC 546(a)-(g) are properly invoked, the City
may:
      1.   Conduct a proceeding to review the grantee's past performance and
identify future cable-related community needs and interests;
      2.   Issue an Request for Proposal (RFP);
      3.   Establish deadlines, which deadlines will not be less than forty-
five (45) days after issuing the RFP, and procedures for responding to the RFP;
      4.   Provide public notice and opportunity to comment after grantee
submits a renewal proposal;
      5.   Seek additional information from the grantee, related to the City's
evaluation of the proposal given the standards for review of that proposal
under applicable law;
      6.   Establish deadlines, which deadlines will not be less than twenty
(20) days after issuing the request, for submitting additional information; and
      7.   After receiving the application responding to the RFP, and any
additional information required, the City Council may determine, by resolution,
that the cable franchise should be renewed, or make a preliminary assessment
that the cable franchise should not be renewed.
   B.   If the City Council preliminarily decides that the cable franchise
should not be renewed, and the grantee notifies the City, either in its RFP
response or within thirty (30) business days of the preliminary decision, that
it wishes to pursue any rights to an administrative proceeding it has under the
Cable Act, then the City will commence an administrative proceeding after
providing prompt public notice thereof, in accordance with the Cable Act.
   C.   If, following negotiations, the City Council preliminarily decides to
grant renewal:
      1.   The City will prepare a proposed franchise agreement that
incorporates, as appropriate, the commitments made by the grantee in the
application.
      2.   If the grantee concurs in the proposed agreement, it will be
agendized for additional City Council action. If adopted by the City Council,
the cable franchise will be renewed and approved by Council resolution.
      3.   If the cable franchise grant is not accepted and ratified within the
time limits established by 47 USC 546(c)(1), then renewal is deemed
preliminarily denied, and an administrative proceeding will be commenced if the
grantee requests it within thirty (30) business days of the expiration of the
time limit established by 47 USC 546(c)(1), unless the time limit is extended
by mutual agreement of the City and the grantee.
   D.   If an administrative hearing is commenced pursuant to 47 USC 546(c),
the grantee's application will be evaluated considering such matters as may be
considered consistent with applicable law.
   E.   The grantee is not prohibited from submitting an informal renewal
application pursuant to 47 USC 546(h), which application may be granted or
denied in accordance with the provisions of 47 USC 546(h).
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.410 CABLE FRANCHISE TRANSFERS; APPLICATIONS.
   A.   Grantee will promptly notify the City of any proposed transfer. If any
transfer should take place without prior notice to the City, the grantee will
promptly notify the City that such a transfer has occurred.
   B.   At least one hundred twenty (120) calendar days before the contemplated
effective date of a transfer, the grantee will submit to the City an
application for approving the transfer. Such application will provide complete
information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal,
financial, technical, and other qualifications of the transferee.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.420 CABLE FRANCHISE TRANSFERS; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   A.   The following information must be included in the application:
      1.   All information required in this Chapter for applications;
      2.   All information and forms required under applicable law;
      3.   A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity
organization and management structure of the proposed transferee, together with
an explanation of how decisions regarding the cable system will be made if the
proposed transaction is approved;
      4.   Any contracts or other documents that relate to the proposed
transaction, including all documents, schedules, exhibits, or the like referred
to therein and all material facts concerning the effect of the transfer on the
financial position of the cable system and the grantee;
      5.   Any shareholder reports or filings with the Securities and Exchange
Commission ("SEC") that discuss the transaction;
      6.   Complete information regarding any potential impact of the transfer
on subscriber rates and service;
      7.   The City may require the grantee, or any prospective transferee, to
provide additional information as it may deem necessary to determine whether
the transfer is in the public interest and should be approved, denied, or
conditioned. The grantee and any prospective transferees will assist the City
in any such inquiry and provide information requested. Failure to do so may
result in the request for transfer being denied.
   B.   The applicant shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the City in
reviewing and evaluating the application.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.430    CABLE FRANCHISE TRANSFERS; CITY’S DETERMINATION.
   A.   In determining whether to grant, deny, or grant subject to conditions
an application for a transfer of a cable franchise, the City may consider:
      1.   The legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee
to operate the cable system;
      2.   Any potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates or
services;
      3.   Whether the incumbent grantee is in compliance with ifs cable
franchise and applicable law and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment
to cure such noncompliance;
      4.   Whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in
the City, and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the City; and
      5.   Whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer
would adversely affect subscribers, the public, or the City's interest under
the cable franchise, or applicable law.
   B.   Requests for approval of a transfer will not be unreasonably denied.
   C.   No application shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing
that it will abide by and accept all terms of this Chapter and the franchise
agreement, and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and
responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous
grantee for all purposes.
   D.   The proposed transferee shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by City
in reviewing and evaluating the applications.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.440 LEGAL QUALIFICATIONS.
   A.   In order to be legally qualified:
      1.   The applicant must not have had any cable system franchise revoked
by the City within three (3) years preceding the submission of the application.
If franchisee challenges a revocation, it may not apply while the appeal is
pending, or for three (3) years after the final resolution of the appeal if the
revocation is valid.
      2.   The applicant may not have had an application to City for an initial
or renewal cable system franchise denied on the ground that the applicant
failed to propose a cable system meeting the cable related needs and interests
of the community, or as to which any challenges to such franchising decision
were finally resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the applicant,
within three (3) years preceding the submission of the application; and may not
have had an application for an initial or renewal franchise denied on any
ground within three (3) years of the application.
      3.   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during
the ten (10) years preceding the submission of the application, applicant was
convicted of fraud, racketeering, anti-competitive actions, unfair trade
practices or other conduct of such character that the applicant cannot be
relied upon to deal truthfully with the City and the subscribers, or to
substantially comply with its obligations.
      4.    Applicant must have the necessary authority under state and federal
law to operate a cable system, or show that it is in a position to obtain that
authority.
      5.   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially
misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
      6.   For purposes of §
11.21.440(A)(1)-(4), the term applicant includes any affiliate of applicant.
   B.   Notwithstanding §
11.21.440(A), an applicant shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to show
that a franchise should be issued even if the requirements of §
11.21.440(A)(2)-(4) are not satisfied, by virtue of the circumstances
surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms
flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of a
cable system.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.450 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
   Each cable franchise grant, during the term of the cable franchise, will
ensure that subscribers are able to receive continuous service and that, in the
event the cable franchise is revoked or terminated, the grantee may be
obligated to continue to provide service for a reasonable period to assure an
orderly transition of service from the grantee to another entity.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.460   TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   Except insofar as this requirement is preempted by federal law, any cable
system within the City will meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in
47 CFR 76(K) and prevailing applicable technical standards.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.470 TRANSFERS.
   A.   A cable grantee shall promptly notify the City of any proposed
transfer, and submit an application for its approval at least one hundred
twenty (120) calendar days in advance of the proposed and anticipated transfer
date.
   B.   The City Manager may specify information that must be provided in
connection with a transfer application. At a minimum, an application must:
describe the persons involved in the transaction and the person that will hold
the franchise; describe the chain of ownership before and after the proposed
transaction; show that the person that will hold the franchise will be legally,
financially, and technically qualified to do so; attach complete information on
the proposed transaction, including the contracts or other documents that
relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or
the like referred to therein; and attach any shareholder reports or filings
with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") that discuss the
transaction.
   C.   For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer,
the City or its agents may inquire into all qualifications of the prospective
transferee and such other matters as the City may deem necessary to determine
whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be approved, denied,
or conditioned. If the transferee or grantee refuse to provide information, or
provide incomplete information, the request for transfer may be denied.
   D.   Consideration of application.
      1.   In deciding whether a transfer application should be granted, denied
or granted subject to conditions, the City may consider the legal, financial,
and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system;
whether the incumbent operator is in compliance with its franchise agreement
and this Chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such
noncompliance; whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system
in the City, and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the City; and whether operation
by the transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect
subscribers, the public, or the City's interest under this Chapter, the
franchise agreement, or other applicable law.
      2.   Requests for approval of a transfer will not be unreasonably denied.
      3.   No application shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in
writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this Chapter and the
franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and
responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous
grantee for all purposes. The proposed transferee shall pay all reasonable
costs incurred by the City in reviewing and evaluating the applications.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
STATEWIDE VIDEO FRANCHISEES
§ 11.21.480 SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO HOLDERS OF STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES.
   A.   Fee for support of local cable usage. The City Council reserves its
right under Cal. Public Utilities Code §5870(n) to establish a fee for the
support of public, educational and governmental access facilities and
activities within the City, which fee shall be paid by state video franchise
holders operating within the City. Unless a higher percentage is authorized by
applicable state or federal law, this fee when adopted shall not exceed one
percent (1%) of a state video holder's gross revenue, as defined in Cal. Public
Utilities Code §5860.
   B.   Franchise fee. A state video franchise holder operating in the City
shall pay the City a franchise fee that is equal to five percent (5%) of the
gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term GROSS REVENUES
shall be defined as set forth in Cal. Public Utilities Code §5860.
   C.   Audit authority. Not more than once annually, the City may examine and
perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video
franchise, to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations
related to the computation and payment of franchise fees.
   D.   Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
      1.   The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all
applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards
pertaining to the provision of video service.
      2.   The City shall enforce a state video franchise holder's compliance
with state and federal customer service and protection standards. The City will
provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of any material
breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will
allow the state video franchise holder 30 days from receipt of the notice to
remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within
this 30-day time period will be subject to the following monetary penalties to
be imposed by the City in accordance with state law:
         a.   For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of
$500 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to
exceed $1,500 for each violation.
         b.   For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a
monetary penalty of $1,000 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains
in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each violation.
         c.   For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12
months, a monetary penalty of $2,500 shall be imposed for each day the
violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each violation.
      3.   A state video franchise holder may appeal a monetary penalty within
60 days after it is assessed by the City. After relevant evidence and testimony
is received, and staff reports are submitted, the City Council will vote to
either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The City Council's decision on
the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final.
   E.   City response to state video franchise applications. 
      1.   Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the
City must concurrently provide to the City complete copies of any application
or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities
Commission. One complete copy must be provided to the City Manager.
      2.   The City will provide any appropriate comments to the California
Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an
application for a state video franchise.
   F.   PEG channel capacity. Unless otherwise required by law, a state video
franchise holder shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable
the carriage of at least three public, educational or governmental (PEG) access
channels.
      1.   PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the City or
its designees to provide public, educational or governmental programming.
      2.   Advertising, underwriting or sponsorship recognition may be carried
on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related activities.
      3.   The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier.
      4.   To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be
separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier,
and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel
numbers used by the incumbent cable operator, unless prohibited by federal law.
      5.   After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the
channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the
City, unless the change is required by federal law.
      6.   Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National
Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal.
   G.   Interconnection.  Where technically feasible, a state video franchise
holder and incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to
interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel
programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave
link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video
franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection
of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions, and may not
withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an
incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection
agreement, the City may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state
video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent's network
at a technically feasible point on the holder's network as identified by the
holder. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the
state video franchise holder shall make an interconnection available to the
channel originator, and shall provide the facilities necessary for the
interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state
video franchise holder requesting the interconnection, unless otherwise agreed
to by the parties.
   H.   Emergency Alert System and emergency overrides. A state video franchise
holder must comply with the Emergency Alert System requirements of the Federal
Communications Commission, in order that emergency messages may be distributed
over the holder's network. Provisions in City-issued franchises authorizing the
City to provide local emergency notifications shall remain in effect, and shall
apply to all state video franchise holders in the City for the duration of the
City-issued franchise, or until the term of the franchise would have expired
had it not been terminated pursuant to Cal. Public Utilities Code §5840(m), or
until January 1, 2009, whichever is later.
   I.   Encroachment permit applications and appeal procedures. 
      1.   As used in this Subsection I., the term ENCROACHMENT PERMIT means
any permit issued by the City relating to construction or operation of
facilities in public rights-of-way by the holder of a state video franchise.
      2.   The City shall either approve or deny an application from a holder
of a state video franchise for an encroachment permit within 60 days of
receiving a completed application, unless that 60-day period is extended by
agreement of the City and the applicant.
      3.   If the City denies an application for an encroachment permit, the
City shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of the denial, furnish to
the applicant written notice of the reason for the denial. An applicant may
appeal the City's denial of an encroachment permit application to the City
Council, in accordance with the following procedures:
         a.   No notice of appeal will be processed unless filed within ten
days after service of written notice of the decision from which the appeal is
taken; provided that, if written notice of the decision has not been served,
the appellant may, within ten days after being apprised of that decision,
demand service of written notice, and will have ten days following that service
in which to file the notice of appeal.
         b.   The notice of appeal must specify the specific decision from
which the appeal is taken, the specific grounds for the appeal, and the relief
or action requested from the City Council.
         c.   The notice of appeal must be accompanied by such fee as have been
established by resolution of the City Council.
         d.   Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in proper form, the
City Clerk will schedule the matter for hearing by the City Council at a
regular meeting, but not later than 45 days after receipt of the notice of
appeal. The City Clerk will cause the notice of hearing to be given to the
appellant not less than ten days prior to the hearing, unless that notice is
waived in writing by the appellant. The City Clerk will also cause a copy of
the notice of appeal and the hearing to be transmitted to the city official or
body whose decision is being appealed.
         e.   At the time of consideration of the appeal by the City Council,
the appellant will be limited to a presentation on the specific grounds of
appeal and related matters set forth in its notice of appeal. The appellant
will have the burden of persuading the City Council that the decision appealed
from should be reversed or modified.
         f.   The City Council may continue the hearing on the appeal from time
to time as may be deemed necessary. The City Council may, by resolution,
affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the decision appealed from, and
may take any action that might have been taken in the first instance by the
city official or body from whose decision the appeal has been taken.
         g.   The decision of the City Council will be deemed final and
conclusive upon adoption of the resolution. A copy of the resolution adopted by
the City Council will be served upon the appellant by placement in the United
States mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant's last known address.
(Ord. No. 2007-010 § 1)
MISCELLANEOUS
§ 11.21.500 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.
   Each grantee shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the
state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.510 TRANSITION PROVISIONS.
   A.   The operator of any cable communications system installed as of the
effective date of this Chapter, for which a franchise is required under this
Chapter, shall have three (3) months from the effective date of this Chapter to
file one (1) or more applications for a franchise. Any operator timely filing
such an application under this Section shall not be subject to a penalty for
failure to have such a franchise so long as said application remains pending;
provided, however, nothing herein shall relieve any cable communications system
operator of any liability for its failure to obtain any permit or other
authorization required under other provisions of the City Municipal Code, and
nothing herein shall prevent the City from requiring removal of any facilities
installed in violation of the City Municipal Code.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person holding an existing franchise
for a cable communications system may continue to operate under the existing
franchise to the conclusion of its present term (but not any renewal or
extension thereof) with respect to those activities expressly authorized by the
franchise; and provided further that, such person shall be subject to the other
provisions of this Chapter to the extent permitted by law.
   C.   A person with a pending application shall have thirty (30) days from
the effective date of this Chapter to submit additional information to comply
with the requirements of this Chapter governing applications.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.520 NOTICES.
   Grantee shall maintain an address for service of notices by mail within Los
Angeles County, California through the term of the franchise, and as shall be
more specifically indicated in the franchise agreement.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
§ 11.21.530 SEVERABILITY.
    If any provisions of this Chapter is determined by any court of competent
jurisdiction, or by any federal or state agency having jurisdiction over its
subject matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount federal or
state law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that
court or agency to require modification in order to conform to the requirements
of that paramount law or regulation, then that part of this Chapter will be
ineffective, and such determination will not affect the validity and
enforceability of any other provisions. If that paramount federal or state law
or regulation is subsequently repealed or amended so that the provisions of
this Chapter determined to be invalid or subject to modification is no longer
in conflict with that law or regulation, then that provisions will again become
effective and will thereafter be binding on any affected grantee.
(Ord. No. 2001-014 § 2)
CHAPTER 11.26: PASS THROUGH TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
Section
   
11.26.005   Purpose and intent
   
11.26.010   Definitions
   
11.26.020   Application requirements
   
11.26.025   Application processing costs
   
11.26.030   Application review
   
11.26.035   Encroachment permit agreement approval
   
11.26.040   Conditions applicable to encroachment permit agreements
   
11.26.045   Conversion of pass through agreement
   
11.26.050   Rights reserved to the City
§ 11.26.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   A.   The City Council has adopted the City municipal code
Chapter 11.20 "Telecommunications Regulatory Requirements," which establishes
general regulatory requirements for telecommunications- related systems
operating in the City or utilizing the public rights-of-way.
   B.   The provisions of §
11.20.060 provides that any person proposing to install a Pass Through
Telecommunications System which includes any system of wires, fiber or other
devices that utilizes the public rights-of-way, but which has no connection to
any residence, business or other telecommunications provider within the
corporate city boundaries, shall first be required to enter into an
encroachment permit agreement from the City.
   C.   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide detailed requirements
applicable to Pass Through Telecommunications Systems with respect to the
application for an encroachment permit agreement and the conditions under which
the applicant for such a permit agreement shall agree to operate.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1)
§ 11.26.010 DEFINITIONS.
   A.   The definitions of §
11.20.020 in this code shall apply to this Chapter unless otherwise specified.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "Pass Through Telecommunications Systems"
shall specifically include, but not limited to, cable systems and systems of
conduit or other infrastructure that are installed for use by cable systems,
telecommunications systems or other communications systems.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1)
§ 11.26.020 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person may apply to obtain a Pass Through Telecommunications System by
completing an application form provided by the City and submitted to the City
Clerk. An application must include, but not limited to:
   A.   Identification of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the
name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a
corporation, the application also shall state the names and addresses of its
directors, principal offices, major stockholders and associates owning ten
percent (10%) of equity interest, and the names and addresses of parent and
subsidiary companies.
   B.   A detailed description and location maps of the public rights-of-way or
other public places within which applicant proposes or seeks authority to
place, construct, own, control, operate, manage, or use any facilities; a
detailed description and location maps of the facilities to be installed in the
public rights-of-way and any adjacent public or private facilities, equipment
or property; and a detailed description of the proposed traffic control plans
and street repairs.
   C.   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities on utility-
owned poles, evidence that the affected utility pole owner has consented to the
installation, or that the applicant has a right to attach to the pole.
   D.   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts
or conduits within the public rights-of-way, information in sufficient detail
to identify:
      1.   Whether the applicant has considered the use of duct and/or pipeline
capacity owned by the City;
      2.   The excess capacity currently available in ducts or conduits to be
used, before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
      3.   The excess capacity, if any, as defined by the Rights-of-Way
Management Plan and Standards, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's facilities along the proposed route.
   E.   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be installed in the public rights-of-way, information in
sufficient detail to identify:
      1.   The location of the proposed new ducts or conduits;
      2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
   F.   Financial statements prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles ("GAAP") demonstrating the applicant's financial ability
to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the telecommunications
facilities. If the applicant is a 7901-telephone corporation authorized under
the California Public Utilities Company, a copy of the financial reports
submitted to the CPUC may be substituted.
   G.   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the Pass Through
Telecommunications System described in the application. If the applicant is
seeking the agreement as a holder of a Certificate of Public Convenience and
Necessity, the applicant may satisfy this requirement by showing that the CPUC
has found it technically qualified to perform the proposed work.
   H.   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities
including copies of all licenses, permits, franchises, petitions, or
applications received or submitted by the applicant to the Federal
Communications Commission, the California Public Utilities Commission, the
Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory
commission or agency having jurisdiction concerning any matters affecting the
applicant's activities or facilities under the proposed encroachment permit
agreement. Specifically any CPCN application and related environmental
documents shall be submitted with the application.
   I.   If the applicant claims that any of the facilities it is installing are
telephone lines within the meaning of Cal. Public Utility Code § 7901, the
applicant shall identify which facilities it claims are telephone lines, and
provide proof that it is a telephone corporation within the meaning of Cal.
Public Utility Code § 7901.
   J.   If any certificate or authorization received from any government entity
requires applicant to take any steps in connection with or prior to
construction or installation of its facilities, the requirements shall be
clearly identified and applicant shall state what it has done to fulfill the
requirements.
   K.   If the information required by §
11.26.020 (F) and (G) is not available at the time of application, the
applicant may submit such relevant information in response to the requirements
of those Sections as available. However, no encroachment permit agreement shall
be presented to the City Council consideration until all information has been
provided and reviewed by the City.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1)
§ 11.26.025 APPLICATION PROCESSING COSTS.
   A.   Any application for a Pass Through Telecommunications System shall
include an application fee as determined by the City Manager or his or her
designee, and based on amounts established by City Council resolution, to cover
the cost of all direct and indirect administrative expenses and staff efforts,
including consultants and attorneys, necessary to adequately analyze the
application. In addition, the applicant shall reimburse the City for all out-
of-pocket processing costs, which shall include, but not be limited to, costs
of publications of notices, development and publication of relevant agreements,
travel expenses, and any other out-of-pocket expenses not covered by the
application fees, incurred by the City in its study and evaluation of the
application. Should it be determined that the actual cost of processing the
application exceeds the amount of the fee paid, the City Manager shall require
an additional amount to be paid by the applicant before the application
processing continues.
   B.   Said application fee shall be separate from and in addition to any fees
for engineering or other plan reviews, and the costs of construction and/or
building permits. No portion of the fee shall be considered a tax or any
portion of compensation or revenue due to the City under this Chapter, or any
other local, state or federal law for use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.26.030 APPLICATION REVIEW.
   Within ninety (90) days after receipt of an accepted as complete
application, containing all information listed in §
11.26.020, the City's City Manager, or his or her designee, shall issue written
findings recommending the granting or denying of the application in whole or in
part. If the application is denied, the findings shall include the reasons for
denial. In reviewing the application, the City shall consider the following:
   A.   The financial and technical capability of the applicant.
   B.   The capacity of the public rights-of-way along the proposed route to
accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
   C.   The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate future utility,
cable and telecommunications facilities if the permit agreement is granted.
   D.   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, aesthetics, services, travel or landscaping if the permit
agreement is granted.
   F.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public rights-of-way.
   F.   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the 1
permit agreement is granted.
   G.   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
telecommunications facilities.
   H.   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
   I.   Any and all convictions or findings by any governmental authority that
the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance (including any
environmental laws, regulations or ordinances) or license agreement or
franchise agreement.
   J.   Compliance with applicable environmental laws and regulations
established by federal, state or local governments.
   K.   Compliance with all other related municipal laws and regulations.
   L.    Such other factors as may demonstrate that the permit agreement to use
the streets and public rights-of-way will not serve the community interest. The
City Manager may recommend such reasonable conditions on the proposed permit
agreement for the purpose of protecting the public's health, safety and general
welfare.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 11.26.035 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT AGREEMENT APPROVAL.
   A.   All encroachment permit agreements for Pass Through Telecommunications
Systems shall require the approval of the City Council by resolution. The City
Council may impose such conditions on the permit agreement as it deems
reasonably necessary to protect the public's health, safety and general
welfare.
   B.   Any amendment to an encroachment permit agreement issued by the City
shall require approval of the City Council by resolution.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1)
§ 11.26.040 CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO ENCROACHMENT PERMIT AGREEMENTS.
   A.   The applicant shall be required to comply with all aspects of the
City's Rights-of-Way Management Plan and Standards, as may be amended from time
to time, and all other City requirements pertaining to constructing and
maintaining facilities within the public rights-of-way. Applications pursuant
to the Rights-of-Way Management Plan and Standards shall be separate from the
requirements of §
11.26.020 herein.
   B.   No encroachment permit agreement granted under this Chapter shall
confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use
the public rights-of-way for the delivery of any services within the City,
whether delivered by the applicant or any other entity using the facilities of
the applicant pursuant to the requirements of Division E. of this Section.
   C.   Any encroachment permit agreement granted shall become effective only
after the City and the applicant have executed a written agreement setting
forth the particular terms and conditions under which the applicant will occupy
and utilize the public rights-of-way, including the period of time for which
the permit is granted. No construction may begin within the public rights-of-
way prior to the full execution of said written agreement.
   D.   Each encroachment permit agreement shall require the permitted to pay
such fees as the City may establish from time to time to recover costs
associated with the use of the rights-of-way. In addition, each encroachment
permit agreement shall require a permittee to pay for the use and occupancy for
the rights-of-way, except to the extent and for the period of time established
that a permittee is exempt from such fee under Cal. Public Utilities Code §
7901. The amount of the fees will be established in each permit agreement,
based on the nature of the work proposed, its location, and the amount of
public property used.
   E.   The applicant's facilities shall be placed, constructed, owned,
controlled, operated, managed, and used solely and exclusively for the purpose
(s) and use(s) expressly set forth in the public encroachment permit agreement
of §
11.26.040(C).
   F.   Any encroachment permit agreement granted under this Chapter shall be
for the nonexclusive use of the public rights-of-way. By executing an
encroachment permit agreement, the City does not agree to restrict the number
of permit agreements to be executed that cover ail or any part of the City for
any person in the same business, a competing business, or a related business to
the applicant.
   G.   Any encroachment permit agreement only authorizes the use of the public
rights-of-way and the use of any other public property, whether located within
or outside a public rights-of-way, is strictly prohibited unless authorized by
a separate lease or license agreement with the City.
   H.   Any privilege claimed by the recipient of an encroachment permit
agreement ire any public rights-of-way shall be subordinate to any prior lawful
occupancy of the public rights-of-way, and subordinate to any uses by the City.
   I.   To the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, a permit agreement
permittee shall at all times, defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless and
exempt the City, the City Council, its officers, agents, servants, attorneys
and employees, from any, and all, penalty, damage or charges arising out of
claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages whether
compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in
equity, which arise out of, or are caused by, the construction, erection,
location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation,
replacement, removal or restoration of telecommunications facilities within the
City based upon any act or omission of the permit recipient, its agents or
employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or
representatives. Reasonable attorney's fees, consultants' fees, and expert
witness fees are included as those costs that shall be recovered by the City
from the permit recipient.
   J.   A permit agreement permittee shall secure and maintain, public
liability, property damage insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the
following amounts:
      1.   Public liability. Five million dollars ($5,000,000) per person per
occurrence;
      2.   Property damage. Five million dollars ($5,000,000) per any one
claim;
      3.   Umbrella liability. Ten million dollars ($10,000,000).
   The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall
specifically include the City, the City Council, the City's employees and
agents as additional insured, and shall be issued by an agent or representative
of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and which has one
of the three highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company. The
public liability and property damage insurance policies shall contain an
endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the City with at least
thirty (30) days written notice in advance of the cancellation of the policy.
   Evidence of self-insurance in the amounts required herein may be substituted
for the insurance policy. Thirty (30) day notification of any changes in self-
insurance status shall be required.
   K.   Prior to issuance of any encroachment permit agreement, applicant shall
furnish proof of the posting of a faithful performance bond in favor of the
City, with corporate surety approved by the City in the sum specified in the
permit, and conditioned that the applicant shall well and truly observe,
fulfill, and perform each term and condition of the permit; provided, however,
that such bond shall not be required after certification by the City of the
completion of construction. During the course of construction, the amount of
the bond may, from time to time, be reduced as provided in the permit.
   L.   Upon written request, any permit recipient shall provide to the City,
in a format specified by the City, on a computer disk or other data storage
device requested by the City, the details of all the permittee's equipment and
facilities and their geographic location in the City. The permittee shall
maintain a complete and up-to-date set of as-built maps and drawings upon
completion of construction or reconstruction.
   M.   In addition to all other rights and power retained by the City, the
City shall have the right to revoke any encroachment permit agreement granted
and to terminate all rights and privileges of the permit in the event of a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of said permit, or of any rule
or regulation of the City. A substantial breach shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Violation of any material provision of this Chapter or any permit
granted or renewed pursuant thereto;
      2.   Any attempt to evade any material provision of the permit agreement
or to practice any fraud or deceit or deception upon the City;
      3.   The failure to begin or complete construction as provided under this
Chapter and under the permit agreement;
      4.   Material misrepresentation of fact in the application or negotiation
of the permit agreement;
      5.   Conviction of any director, officer, employee, or agent of a
permittee of the offense of bribery or fraud connected with or resulting from
the awarding of the permit agreement;
      6.   Failure to pay an permit fee or other payment required by this
Chapter, or required by any permit grated pursuant to this Chapter, to the City
when due. Failure to pay said fee shall also require the permittee to pay
interest on any past-due fee or compensation to the City at the rate of one and
one-half percent (1.5%) per month compounded on the unpaid amount.
      7.   The revocation of any federal or state authorization upon which the
grant of the encroachment permit agreement was based.
   N.   By accepting any permit agreement issued pursuant to this Chapter, the
permittee acknowledges that notice is and was given pursuant to Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code § 107.6 that use or occupancy of any public property may
cause certain taxes to be levied upon such interest. The permittee shall be
solely liable for, and shall pay and discharge prior to delinquency, any and
all possessory interest taxes or other taxes levied against its right to
possession, occupancy or use of the public rights-of-way or public property
pursuant to any right of possession, occupancy or use created by any permit
agreement.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1)
§ 11.26.045 CONVERSION OF PASS THROUGH AGREEMENT.
   A.   A pass through encroachment permit agreement shall only authorize the
permittee to place facilities along the specific routes identified in the
agreement, and does not authorize the permittee or others to provide services
or capacity to any entity within the City, or to interconnect to any
communications facility within the City.
   B.   An permittee must obtain authorization from the City in accordance with
the municipal code if it intends to alter the facilities so that it or any
other person by sale, lease, assignment or transfer may provide any service or
capacity to any entity within the City; if it intends to provide or allow its
facilities to be used by a person who intends to provide services or capacity
to any person within the City; or if it proposed to interconnect to any other
communications facility within the City. Any breach of this requirement shall
subject the encroachment permit agreement to immediate revocation.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1)
§ 11.26.050 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY.
   A.   Nothing in this Chapter shall contract away, modify, abridge, impair,
or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire any
facility located in the public rights-of-way through the exercise of the right
of eminent domain.
   B.   There is reserved to the City every right and power which is required
to be reserved or provided by any ordinance of the City. Every person subject
to this Chapter by its use of the public rights-of-way agrees to be bound
thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its
exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted established.
   C.   Neither the execution of encroachment permit agreement nor any
provision of this Chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of
any governmental right or power of the City, including the City's authority to
make any proper public use of the public rights-of-way.
   D.   The City shall have the right to supervise all construction or
installation work performed subject to the provisions of this Chapter and make
such inspections as the City finds necessary to ensure compliance with the
terms of this Chapter, an encroachment permit agreement, or any other local,
state or federal law, regulation, permit or standard.
   E.   Any permittee granted an encroachment permit agreement shall at the
permittee's expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or
remove from any public rights-of-way, any facility when required by the City by
reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street
construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers,
drains, water pipes, undergrounding of power lines, signal lines, and tracks,
or any other public use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. No. 2001-007 § 1)
CHAPTER 11.30: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
General Provisions
   
11.30.005   Purpose
   
11.30.010   Definitions
Franchise Procedures and Requirements
   
11.30.100   Grant of franchise
   
11.30.105   Franchise required
   
11.30.110   Authority to establish requirements
   
11.30.115   Authority to grant franchise
   
11.30.120   Approval for necessary constructions
   
11.30.125   Duration
   
11.30.130   Franchise nonexclusive
   
11.30.135   Franchise applications
   
11.30.140   Grant procedure
   
11.30.145   Transfer of ownership or control
   
11.30.150   Franchise renewal
   
11.30.155   Police powers
   
11.30.160   Franchise fee
   
11.30.165   Forfeiture or revocation
   
11.30.170   Procedures in the event of termination or expiration
   
11.30.175   Franchise processing costs
Regulation of Franchise
   
11.30.300   Regulatory authority
   
11.30.305   Regulatory responsibility
   
11.30.310   Public usage of the system
   
11.30.315   PEG access facility management
   
11.30.320   Reservation by grantor
   
11.30.325   Rates
   
11.30.330   Annual review of performance and quality of service
   
11.30.335   System and services review
Financial and Insurance Requirements
   
11.30.400   Construction bond
   
11.30.405   Performance bond
   
11.30.410   Security
   
11.30.415   Indemnification
   
11.30.420   Insurance
Design and Construction
   
11.30.500   System design
   
11.30.505   Geographical coverage
   
11.30.510   Cablecasting facilities
   
11.30.515   System construction schedule
   
11.30.520   Remedies for delay in construction
   
11.30.525   Provision of service
   
11.30.530   Undergrounding of cable
   
11.30.535   New development undergrounding
   
11.30.540   Underground at multiple dwelling units
   
11.30.545   Street occupancy
   
11.30.550   Construction and technical standards
   
11.30.555   Tests and compliance procedure
   
11.30.560   Areawide interconnection
Service Provisions; Consumer Protection
   
11.30.700   Categories of services
   
11.30.705   Consumer service standards
   
11.30.710   Requests for cable service repairs
   
11.30.715   Verification of standards
   
11.30.720   Noncompliance with standards
   
11.30.725   Complaint procedure
   
11.30.735   Quality of service
   
11.30.740   Tenant rights
   
11.30.745   Grantee authority to make rules and regulations
   
11.30.750   Rights of individuals
   
11.30.755   Continuity of service mandatory
   
11.30.760   Identification of employees
Administration and Enforcement
   
11.30.900   Open books and records management policy; records required
   
11.30.905   Rights reserved to the grantor
   
11.30.910   Rights reserved to the grantee
   
11.30.915   Franchise violations
   
11.30.920   Reports
   
11.30.925   Compliance with state and federal laws
   
11.30.930   Separability of nonmaterial and material provisions
   
11.30.935   Service of notice
   
11.30.940   No recourse against grantor
   
11.30.945   Nonenforcement by grantor
Cross-reference:
   Franchises, see Charter §
1700
Editor's note:
   For provisions regarding the transfer and renewal of a cable television
system franchise from CommuniCom Cable TV to American Cablesystems of
California, Inc., see Ordinance No. 87-020, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11.30.005 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds the development of cable television and
communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact
upon the residents and businesses of Culver City. Because of the complex and
rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City Council
further finds the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be
served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the City
Council or such persons as the City shall designate. It is the purpose of this
Chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to
attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters
and any franchise issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to include
this finding as an integral part thereof.
('65 Code, § 35B-1) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   AGENCY SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in a government or
public agency, school, or non-profit corporation.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals.
   BASIC RADIO SERVICE. The provision to subscribers of audio programs provided
to subscribers at a monthly rate.
   BROADCAST SIGNAL. A television or radio signal transmitted over the air to a
wide geographic audience and is received by a Cable Communications System off-
the-air by microwave.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, SYSTEM, CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM,
CATV SYSTEMS,  or  COMMUNITY ANTENNA TV SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set
of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment, designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community,
but such term does not include:
      1.   A facility that only retransmits the television signals on one or
more television broadcast stations;
      2.   A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility
uses any public right-of-way;
      3.   A facility of common carrier; provided, that such facility shall be
considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
      4.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
   CABLECAST SIGNAL. A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the Cable Communications System.
   CABLE-MILE. A linear mile of strand-bearing cable as measured on the street
or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.
   CABLE SERVICE. The total of the following:
      1.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service; and
      2.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
of such video programming or other programming service.
   CHANNEL  or  CABLE CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency
spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a
television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
   COMMENCE CONSTRUCTION. That time and date when construction of the Cable
Communications System is considered to have commenced, which shall be when the
first connection is physically made to a utility pole, or undergrounding of
cables is initiated, after preliminary engineering (strand mapping) and after
all necessary permits and authorizations have been obtained.
   COMMENCE OPERATION. The time and date when operation of the Cable
Communications System is considered to have commenced which shall be when
sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the
offering of full services to a dwelling unit located within the franchise area
and such services are actually subscribed to by a resident of the franchise
area.
   COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in a place of
business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a business,
trade, or profession.
   COMMERCIAL USE CHANNEL. The channel capacity designated for commercial use
as defined and required by Federal Law.
   COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION. That point in time when all distribution
facilities specified in the Franchise Agreement have been installed by the
Grantee so as to permit the offering of cable service to all of the potential
subscribers in the franchise area, as well as the provision, in an operational
state, of any facilities required by the Franchise Agreement.
   CONVERTER. An electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form
to another.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor.
   FRANCHISE. An initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued by a
franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise,
permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise,
which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. A franchise award ordinance, or a contractual
agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted,
including referenced specifications, franchise applications, franchise
requirements ordinances and other related materials.
   FRANCHISE AREA. The entire geographic area within the City designated in a
Franchise Agreement to receive cable service.
   FRANCHISE FEES. Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a
franchising authority or other government entity on a Grantee or cable
subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term FRANCHISE
FEE does not include:
      1.   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability including any
such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services but not including, a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against the Grantee or cable subscribers;
      2.   Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by
the Grantee for public educational or governmental access facilities;
      3.   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of
the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
      4.   Any fee imposed under 17 USC 101 et seq.
   GRANTEE. Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to the Charter and this
Chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful
successor, transferee or assignee.
   GRANTOR. The City of Culver City.
   GROSS ANNUAL RECEIPTS. The annual gross revenues received by the Grantee
from all sources of operations of the Cable Communications System, excluding
refundable deposits, except that any sales, excise or other taxes collected for
directed pass-through to local, State or Federal government shall not be
included.
   INITIAL SERVICE AREA. The area of the City which will receive service
initially, as set forth in the Franchise Agreement.
   INSTALLATION. The connection of the System from feeder cable to subscribers'
terminals, and the provision of service.
   LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL. Any channel where the Grantee or its designated
agent is the primary programmer, and provides video programs to subscribers.
   NONBROADCAST SIGNAL. A signal transmitted by a Cable Communications System
that is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast transmission path.
   OPEN CHANNEL. Any channel that can be received by all subscribers, without
the necessity for special equipment.
   PAY-CABLE, PAY-TELEVISION  or PAY-PER-VIEW. The delivery to subscribers,
over the Cable Communications System, of television signals for a fee or charge
to subscribers over and above the charge for Basic Cable Service, on a per
program, per channel, or other subscription basis.
   PENETRATION. The result expressed in the percentage obtained by dividing the
total number of potential subscribers in the franchise area into the number of
subscribers receiving service.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association joint stock company, trust,
corporation, or organizational entity.
   PRIVATE CHANNEL,  or  CLOSED CIRCUIT CHANNEL. Any channel which is available
only to subscribers who are provided with special converter or terminal
equipment to receive signals on that channel.
   PROGRAMMER. A person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides
program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital, or
other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to
subscribers, by means of the Cable Communications System.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL or  GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES  or  PEG ACCESS
FACILITIES. The total of the following:
      1.   Channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental
use; and
      2.   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
   RESIDENT. Any person residing in the City as otherwise defined by applicable
law.
   RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in an individual
dwelling unit, where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a
business, trade, or profession.
   SALE. Any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.
   SCHOOL. Any accredited non-profit educational institution including primary
and secondary schools, college and universities, both public and private.
   SERVICE TIER. A category of cable service or other services provided by a
Grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the Grantee.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STREET. Each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or
hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority by
others and located within the City limits: streets, roadways, highways,
avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public
property and areas that the Grantor shall permit to be included within the
definition of street from time to time.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person, or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to,
for any purpose, a service provided by the Grantee by means of or in connection
with the Cable Communications System.
('65 Code, § 35B-2) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
FRANCHISE PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 11.30.100 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   A.   In the event the Grantor shall grant to a Grantee a nonexclusive,
revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct, a Cable
Communications System within the franchise area, or a renewal of an existing
franchise, the franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to
provide the services of a Cable Communications System as required by the
provisions of this Chapter and the Franchise Agreement. The Franchise Agreement
shall include those provisions of the Grantee's "Application for Franchise" or
"Franchise Proposal" that are finally negotiated and accepted by the Grantor
and Grantee.
   B.   Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained herein
shall be consistent with applicable Federal Laws and regulations, with
applicable State laws and regulations, and with applicable local laws and
regulations. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the
franchise and the terms and conditions on which the Grantor can grant a
franchise, the law and regulations shall, without exception, control.
   C.   Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of
the other codes and ordinances of the Grantor regarding permits, fees to be
paid or manner of construction, now in effect or hereafter adopted.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(a)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.105 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   No Cable Communications System shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets
in the franchise area or be allowed to operate without a franchise in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter and Chapter.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(b)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.110 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH REQUIREMENTS.
   The Grantor may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises or
franchise renewals, and may modify these requirements from time to time to
reflect changing conditions and state of art in the cable industry. Such
requirement shall not be retroactive to franchises then in effect, except as
set forth in §
11.30.155, but shall become applicable when the franchise is renewed.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(c)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.115 AUTHORITY TO GRANT FRANCHISE.
   The Grantor may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the
City. The service area shall be the entire area defined in the Franchise
Agreement. The initial service area shall be that portion of the franchise area
scheduled to receive initial service, as stated in the Franchise Agreement.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(d)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.120 APPROVAL FOR NECESSARY CONSTRUCTIONS.
   For the purpose of operating and maintaining a Cable Communications System
in the franchise area, and subject to the provisions of §
11.30.545 herein, the Grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace,
reconstruct, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along the public
streets and ways within the franchise area such wires, cables, conductors,
ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals,
attachments, towers, antennas and other property and equipment as are necessary
and appurtenant to the operation of the Cable Communications System. Prior to
construction or alteration, however, the Grantee shall in each case file plans
with the appropriate Grantor agencies and local utility companies, and receive
written approval before proceeding. The Grantee shall in any event comply with
all applicable Grantor construction codes and procedures.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(e)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.125 DURATION.
   The term of any new franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and
restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as established in the Franchise
Agreement, unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(f)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.130 FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE.
   Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The Grantor specifically
reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a
Cable Communications System as it deems appropriate, provided, however, that
such additional grants shall not operate to the material detriment or to
materially modify any rights previously granted to any Grantee.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(g)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.135 FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.
   Applicants for a franchise shall submit to the Grantor written applications
utilizing the standardized format provided by the Grantor, at the time and
place designated by the Grantor for accepting applications, and including the
application fees designated by the Grantor.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(h)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.140 GRANT PROCEDURE.
   All franchise applications when filed shall be available for public
inspection at places designated by the Grantor. No later than ninety (90) days
after the final date for filing applications, one (1) or more public hearings
shall he held on the applications. A decision shall be made by the Grantor not
later than ninety (90) days after the conclusion of all such public hearings
based upon evaluation of the application(s), the hearings, and other
information that the Grantor may deem relevant. Grantor may grant one or more
franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(i)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.145 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.
   A.   Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a
privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. The franchise cannot in any
event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including but not
limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership,
or other means without the prior written consent of the Grantor, and then only
under such reasonable conditions as the Grantor may establish. Such consent as
required by the Grantor shall be given or denied no later than ninety (90) days
following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   B.   Hypothecation.
      1.   Notwithstanding Subsection A. of this Section, the issue and
outstanding shares of stock of the Grantee may be hypothecated and the system
assets may be hypothecated, without the prior approval of the Grantor, where
such shares and assets are hypothecated in connection with securing an
indebtedness of the company which includes, but may not be limited to,
indebtedness for this system.
      2.   In the instance of a hypothecation of the shares or assets of the
Grantee, the sale or transfer of the stock or assets of the Grantee, the sale
or transfer of the stock or assets by the lender shall be subject to the prior
approval by the Grantor as established by a Resolution.
   C.   Ownership or control.
      1.   The Grantee shall promptly notify in writing the Grantor of any
proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of,
control of the Grantee or its parent. The word "control" as used herein is not
limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever
manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has
occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or transfer by any person or group of
persons of twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the beneficial ownership
interest of the Grantee or its parent. Every change, transfer, or acquisition
of control of the Grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation
unless and until the Grantor shall have consented in writing thereto, which
consent shall be given or denied no later than ninety (90) days following any
request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld.
      2.   The provisions of this Subchapter shall not apply to any transfer,
assignment or other disposition, direct or indirect, between or among commonly
controlled corporations or partnerships, or their common parent. For the
purposes of the foregoing, common control shall mean eighty percent (80%)
direct or indirect ownership of the common equity entitled to vote generally or
of the general partnership interest, as the case may be, of the subject
entities by a common parent, and a common parent shall mean a person directly
or indirectly owning eighty percent (80%) or more of the common equity entitled
to vote generally or of the general partnership interest, as the case may be,
in the subject entities. In those instances where City approval is not
required, notice of any ownership change greater than five percent (5%) of the
aggregate common equity in the company shall be provided to the Grantor upon
reasonable request by the Grantor.
      3.   For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such
change, transfer or acquisition of control, the Grantor may inquire into the
qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the Grantee shall
assist the Grantor in any such inquiry.
      4.   In seeking the Grantor's consent to any change in ownership or
control, the Grantee shall have the responsibility:
         a.   To show to the satisfaction of the Grantor whether the proposed
purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the "proposed transferee"), which in the
case of a corporation, shall include all directors and all persons having a
legal or equitable interest in five percent (5%) or more of its voting stock:
            (1)   Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving
moral turpitude including, but not limited to any violation of Federal, State
or local law or regulations, or is presently under an indictment, investigation
or complaint charging such acts;
            (2)   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of
competent jurisdiction;
            (3)   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative
proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system.
         b.   To establish, to the satisfaction of the Grantor, the financial
solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data
for the proposed transferee which the Grantee has required to submit in its
franchise application, and such other data as the Grantor may request.
Financial statements shall be audited, certified and qualified by a Certified
Public Accountant.
         c.   To establish to the satisfaction of the Grantor the financial
technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to
maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise
under the existing franchise terms.
         d.   Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its
assets for the advancement of money for the construction or operation of the
franchise shall have the right to notify the Grantor it, or its designee
satisfactory to the Grantor, shall take control and operate the Cable
Communications System, in the event the Grantee defaults in its financial
obligations. Further, the financial institution shall also submit a plan for
such operation that will insure continued service and compliance with all
franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises
control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control
over the system for a period exceeding one (1) year unless extended by the
Grantor in its discretion and during this period of time it shall have the
right to petition the Grantor to transfer the franchise to another Grantee. If
the Grantor finds such transfer after considering the legal, financial,
character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant are
satisfactory, the Grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations
of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the Grantor to such
transfer shall be given or denied no less than ninety (90) days after any
request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld.
         e.   The consent or approval of the Grantor to any transfer by the
Grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the Grantor
in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly
subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise.
         f.   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Grantor shall
not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of
initial construction of the cable system.
         g.   In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved
without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to the Franchise
Agreement.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(j)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.150 FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
   Franchise renewal shall be as prescribed by applicable law.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(k)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.155 POLICE POWERS.
   A.   In accepting a franchise, the Grantee acknowledges its rights hereunder
are subject to the police powers of the Grantor to adopt and enforce laws and
regulations necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to
comply with all applicable laws and regulations enacted by the Grantor pursuant
to such power.
   B.   Any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and any other
present or future lawful exercise of the Grantors police powers shall be
resolved in favor of the latter; provided that, any such exercise that is not
of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to any Cable
Communications System franchise which contains provisions inconsistent with
this Chapter shall prevail only if upon such exercise the Grantor finds any
emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general
welfare or such exercise is mandated by law.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(l)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.160 FRANCHISE FEE.
   A.   Annual franchise payment. A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay
to the Grantor an annual fee in an amount as designated in the Franchise
Agreement. Such payment shall commence as of the effective date of the
franchise or any renewal date. The Grantor, on an annual basis, shall be
furnished a statement within sixty (60) days of the close of the calendar year,
either audited and certified by an independent Certified Public Accountant or
certified by a financial officer of the Grantee, reflecting the total amounts
of gross receipts and all payments, deductions and computations for the period
covered by the payment. Upon ten (10) days prior written notice, the Grantor
shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the Grantee's records,
in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Procedures, and if such audit
indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent (2%) or more, the Grantee
shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit.
   B.   Acceptance by grantor. No acceptance of any payment by the Grantor
shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim
the Grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee
under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the
Grantee.
      1.   An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate
equal to the average rate of return on invested funds of the City during the
period for which payment was due.
      2.   If the payment is late by forty-five (45) days or more, a sum of
money equal to five percent (5%) of the amount due in order to defray those
additional expenses and costs incurred by the Grantor by reason of delinquent
payment.
   C.   Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule
indicated in the Franchise Agreement.
   D.   Any Grantee "pass through" or itemization of franchise fee costs on
subscribers' bills shall be in accordance with Federal law.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(m)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.165 FORFEITURE OR REVOCATION.
   A.   Grounds for revocation. If the Grantee has been given due notice and a
reasonable opportunity to cure, the Grantor reserves the right to revoke any
franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated
with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall
represent a default under this Chapter and a material breach of the franchise:
      1.   If the Grantee shall default in the performance of any of its
material obligations under this Chapter or under such documents, agreements and
other terms and provisions entered into by and between the Grantor and the
Grantee, subject to the provisions of §
11.30.915;
      2.   If the Grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect, the liability and indemnification coverages or the security fund or
bonds as required herein;
      3.   If any court of competent jurisdiction, or any Federal or State
regulatory body by rules, decisions or other action determines that any
material provision of the franchise documents, including this Chapter, the
Franchise Agreement and Grantee's proposal is invalid or unenforceable prior to
the commencement of initial system construction;
      4.   If the Grantee ceases to provide all services for any reason within
the control of the Grantee over the Cable Communications System;
      5.   If the Grantee willfully violates any of the material provisions of
this Chapter or the Franchise Agreement or attempts to practice any fraud or
deceit upon the Grantor.
      6.   If the Grantee becomes insolvent, or upon listing of an order for
relief in favor of Grantee in a bankruptcy proceeding.
   B.   Procedure prior to revocation.
      1.   Upon a finding pursuant to Subsection
11.30.915 C. a violation has occurred, the Grantor may make written demand the
Grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or
regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. In the event the
stated violation is not reasonably curable within ninety (90) days, the
franchise shall not be terminated or revoked, or damages assessed, if the
Grantee provides within these ninety (90) days a plan, satisfactory to the
Grantor, to remedy the violation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the
Grantee continues for a period exceeding ninety (90) days following receipt of
such written demand by the Grantee, the Grantor may place its request for
termination of the franchise upon a regular Council meeting agenda. The Grantor
shall cause notice to be served upon the Grantee, at least twenty (20) days
prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of its intent to terminate,
and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at
least once, ten (10) days before such meeting in a newspaper of general
circulation within the franchise area.
      2.   The Grantor shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall
determine, within ninety (90) days, based upon the preponderance of the
evidence, whether the Grantee has committed a material breach of this Chapter
or the Franchise Agreement, and, if so, whether such breach was willful.
      3.   If the Grantor determines that the Grantee has willfully committed a
material breach, then the Grantor may, by resolution, declare the franchise
terminated and security fund and bonds forfeited, or the Grantor may, at its
option and if the material breach is capable of being cured by the Grantee,
direct the Grantee to take appropriate remedial action within such time and
manner and upon such terms and conditions as the Grantor shall determine are
reasonable under the circumstances.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(n)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.170 PROCEDURES IN THE EVENT OF TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION.
   A.   Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise expires, is
revoked, or otherwise terminated, the Grantor may order the removal of the
above-ground system facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable
period of time as determined by the Grantor or require the original Grantee to
maintain and operate its cable system for a period not to exceed twenty-four
(24) months as indicated in Subsection D. below.
   B.   Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures, and
equipment, the Grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to the Grantee's removal of its equipment
without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments. The
liability, indemnity and insurance, and the security fund and bonds provided
shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until
full compliance by the Grantee with the terms and conditions of this Section.
   C.   Restoration by grantor, reimbursement of costs. In the event of a
failure by the Grantee to complete any work required by Subsections A. or B.
above, or any other work required by the Grantor by law or regulation, within
ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice, and to the satisfaction of
the Grantor, the Grantor may cause such work to be done and the Grantee shall
reimburse the Grantor the cost thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of
an itemized list of such costs or the Grantor may recover such costs through
the security fund or bonds provided by the Grantee. The Grantor shall be
permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this
Subchapter. Except as to the payment by the Franchise to the City of such
itemized amounts, the City shall indemnify and hold the Franchisee harmless
from and against any and all claims, liabilities, losses, damages and expenses
arising from or related to any gross negligence in the performance by the City
of such work.
   D.   Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or revocation of a
franchise, the Grantor may require the Grantee to continue to operate the Cable
Communications System for a defined period of time not to exceed twenty-four
(24) months from the date of such expiration or revocation. The Grantee shall,
as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the Cable
Communications System under the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the
Franchise Agreement and to provide the regular cable service and any of the
other services that may be provided at that time. The Grantor shall be
permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this
Subchapter.
   E.   Grantor's right not affected. The termination and forfeiture of any
franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the Grantor under any
provision of law.
   F.   Receivership and foreclosure.
      1.   Any franchise granted shall, at the option of the Grantor, cease and
terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or
receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the
Grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action
or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, unless:
         a.   Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty
(120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the
terms and provisions of this Chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto,
and the receivers or trustees within these one hundred twenty (120) days shall
have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and
         b.   Such receivers or trustees shall, within these one hundred twenty
(120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the Court having jurisdiction
on the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be
bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the Franchise
Agreement.
      2.   In the case of a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the plant,
property and equipment of the Grantee, or any part thereof, the Grantor may
serve notice of termination upon the Grantee and to the purchaser at such sale,
in which event the franchise, and all rights and privileges of the Grantee
hereunder, shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such
notice, unless:
         a.   The Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as
provided in this Chapter; and
         b.   Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with
the Grantor to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the
Franchise Agreement.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(o)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.175 FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS.
   A.   For either a new franchise award or a franchise transfer, the Grantor's
processing costs for such award/transfer shall be borne by the Grantee that
receives the new franchise award, or transfer.
   B.   These franchise processing costs are over and above the construction
inspection and permit fees specified in §
11.30.550 A.1. and the franchise fee specified in §
11.30.160 of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 35B-3(p)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
REGULATION OF FRANCHISE
§ 11.30.300 REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
   The Grantor shall exercise regulatory authority under the provisions of this
Chapter and applicable law. If the franchise area served by the Cable
Communications System also serves other contiguous or neighboring communities,
the Grantor may, at its sole option, participate in a joint regulatory agency,
with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related communications.
('65 Code, § 35B-4(a)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.305 REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY.
   The Grantor, acting alone or acting jointly with other Grantors, may
exercise or delegate the following regulatory responsibility:
   A.   Administering and enforcing the provisions of a Cable Communications
System franchise.
   B.   Coordination of the Operation of Public, Educational and Government
(PEG) Access channel and facilities.
   C.   Providing technical, programming and operational support to public
agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care
institutions.
   D.   Establishing jointly with the Grantee, or as otherwise specified in the
Franchise Agreement, procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated to
public use and sharing of public facilities, if provided for in any Franchise
Agreement.
   E.   Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services.
   F.   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, State or national telecommunications networks.
   G.   Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policy.
('65 Code, § 35B-4(b)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.310 PUBLIC USAGE OF THE SYSTEM.
   If so specified in the Franchise Agreement, the Grantor may require the
Grantee to designate a portion of the Cable Communications System capacity, and
associated facilities and equipment, for public, education or governmental use,
to develop and provide noncommercial cable services that will be in the public
interest. In furtherance of this purpose, the Grantor may establish a
commission, public corporation, or other entity to receive and allocate
facilities, support funds and otherconsiderations provided by the Grantor, the
Grantee, and/or others. Such entity, if established, may be delegated the
following responsibilities:
   A.   To receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization, channel capacity,
facilities, funding and other support provided specifically for public usage of
the Cable Communications System.
   B.   To review the status and progress of each service developed for public
benefit.
   C.   To reallocate resources jointly with the Grantee on a periodic basis to
conform with changing priorities and public needs.
   D.   To report to the Grantor and the Grantee annually on the utilization of
resources, the net public services developed and the benefits achieved for the
Grantor and its residents.
('65 Code, § 35B-4(c)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.315 PEG ACCESS FACILITY MANAGEMENT.
   A.   Intent. It is the intent of the Grantor to insure PEG Access Facilities
provided for in any Franchise Agreement shall be managed in the best public
interest so such facilities will be open to all residents, and available for
all forms of public expression, community information and debate of public
issues. Pursuant to these objectives, the Grantor may delegate the
responsibility for PEG Access Facility management to a nonprofit entity which
may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
      1.   A nonprofit public corporation.
      2.   A PEG Access Facility management commission or committee, appointed
by Grantor, and representing a broad spectrum of the community.
      3.   An established nonprofit entity with special cablecasting
capability, such as a local or regional community college.
   B.   Functions. The entity designated to manage the PEG Access Facilities
shall have the following functions:
      1.   Responsibility for program production for and management of the
Public Access Facilities as may in the Franchise Agreement be designated for
community-based programming. Community channels may include Public, Educational
and Government Access channels, as designated in the Franchise Agreement.
      2.   To assure the PEG Access Facilities are made available to all
residents of the franchise area on a nondiscriminatory, first-come, first-
served basis.
      3.   To assure no censorship or control over program content of the PEG
Access Facilities exists except as necessary to comply with all applicable laws
and regulations.
      4.   To devise, establish, and administer all rules, regulations, and
procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the PEG Access Facilities.
      5.   To prepare, in conjunction with the Grantee, such regular or special
reports as may be required or desirable.
      6.   To hire and supervise staff.
      7.   To make all purchases of materials and equipment required.
      8.   To develop sources of funding, such as foundation or Federal or
State grants, to further community programming.
      9.   To perform such other functions relevant to the PEG Access
Facilities as may be appropriate.
      10.   Establishment of budgets on an annual basis, and utilization of
funds and resources received from the Grantor or the public usage entity
designated in §
11.30.310 for the purpose of PEG Access programming.
   C.   Access rules. The PEG Access Facility management entity shall complete
a set of rules for the use of the PEG Access facilities which shall be promptly
forwarded to the Grantor. The rules shall be prepared in cooperation with the
Grantee, and confirmed by agreement between the PEG Access Facility Management
entity and the Grantee. The rules shall, at a minimum, provide for:
      1.   Access on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis for
all residents of the franchise area.
      2.   Prohibition of commercial use by public access programming
producers.
      3.   Prohibition of any presentation of obscene material.
      4.   Public inspection of the log of producers, which shall be retained
by the PEG Access Facility management entity for a period of four (4) years.
      5.   Procedures by which individuals or groups who violate any rule may
be prevented from further access to the facilities.
      6.   Free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time, cablecasting
facilities, and technical support as are provided for in the agreement between
the PEG Access Facility management entity and the Grantee.
   D.   PEG Access Facility Management entity reports to Grantor. The PEG
Access Facility Management entity shall provide a report to the Grantor and the
Grantee, at least annually, indicating achievements in community-based
programming and services.
('65 Code, § 35B-4(d)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.320 RESERVATION BY GRANTOR.
   The Grantor reserves the right, at its discretion, from time to time, to
determine if the entities described in §§
11.30.310 and
11.30.315 of this Subchapter are performing their purposes in a manner
satisfactory to the Grantor, and if they are not, the Grantor may receive and
reallocate all or a portion of the channel capacity, operations appropriation,
to another entity. A new entity shall be required to comply in all respects
with the legal responsibilities described in §§
11.30.310 and
11.30.315 of this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 35B-4(e)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.325 RATES.
   The Grantee shall establish rates for its services that must be applied
fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area.
('65 Code, § 35B-4(f)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.330 ANNUAL REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE AND QUALITY OF SERVICE.
   At Grantor's sole option, within ninety (90) days of the first anniversary
of the effective date of each franchise, and each year thereafter throughout
the term of the franchise, the Grantor may hold a public hearing at which the
Grantee shall be present and shall participate, to review the performance and
quality of service of the Cable Communications System. The reports required in
§
11.30.920 regarding subscriber complaints, the records of performance tests and
the opinion survey report shall be utilized as the basis for review. In
addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review
meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered.
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing,
Grantor shall issue a report with respect to the adequacy of system performance
and quality of service. If inadequacies are found, Grantor may direct Grantee
to correct the inadequacies within a reasonable period of time.
   B.   Failure of Grantee, after due notice, to correct the inadequacies shall
be considered a breach of the franchise and Grantor may, at its sole
discretion, exercise any remedy within the scope of this Chapter considered
appropriate.
('65 Code, § 35B-4(g)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.335 SYSTEM AND SERVICES REVIEW.
   To provide for technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the state
of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, to
promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system, and to achieve a
continuing, advanced modern system, the following system and services review
procedures are hereby established:
   A.   At the Grantor's sole option, the Grantor may hold a public hearing on
or about the third anniversary date of the Franchise Agreement at which the
Grantee shall be present and shall participate, to review the cable
communications system and services. Subsequent system and services review
hearings may be scheduled by the Grantor each three (3) years thereafter.
   B.   Sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled system and services review
hearing, Grantee shall submit a report to Grantor indicating the following:
      1.   All cable system services reported in cable industry trade journals
as being commonly provided on an operational basis, excluding tests and
demonstrations, to communities in the United States with comparable
populations, not provided to the Grantor.
      2.   Any specific plans for provision of such new services by the
Grantee, or a justification indicating why the Grantee believes such services
are not feasible for the franchise area.
   C.   Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review
hearing shall include but shall not be limited to, services provided,
feasibility of providing new services, application of new technologies, system
performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights of
privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding processes, developments in
the law, and regulatory constraints.
   D.   Either the Grantor or the Grantee may select additional topics for
discussion at any review hearing.
   E.   Not later than sixty (60) days after the conclusion of each system and
service review hearing, the Grantor shall issue a report, including
specifically a listing of any cable services not then being provided to the
Grantor considered technically and economically feasible. The Grantor may
request the Grantee to provide such services within a reasonable time, under
reasonable rates and conditions.
('65 Code, § 35B-4(h)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
§ 11.30.400 CONSTRUCTION BOND.
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after the granting of a new franchise, or a
renewal which requires significant system construction, and prior to the
commencement of any construction work by the Grantee, the Grantee shall file
with the Grantor a construction bond in the amount specified in the Franchise
Agreement in favor of the Grantor as a result of the breach of any duty by the
Grantee assured by such bond.
   B.   Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by the
City Attorney.
   C.   In no event shall the amount of the bond be construed to limit the
liability of the Grantee for damages.
   D.   Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or permit
consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond and security
specified, respectively in §§
11.30.405 and
11.30.410 of this Subchapter.
   E.   Upon completion of construction, any construction bonds then in force
shall be released.
('65 Code, § 35B-5(a)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.405 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   A.   In addition to the construction bond set forth above, the Grantee may
be required, at least thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of operation,
to file with the Grantor a performance bond in the amount specified in the
Franchise Agreement in favor of the Grantor as a result of any occurrence in
the operation or termination of the Cable Communications System operated under
the Franchise Agreement and including the payments required to be made to the
Grantor hereunder.
   B.   Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by the
City Attorney.
   C.   In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the
liability of the Grantee for damages.
('65 Code, § 35B-5(b)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.410 SECURITY.
   A.   1.   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise,
the Grantee shall deposit into a bank account, established by the Grantor and
maintain on deposit through the term of this franchise, the sum specified in
the Franchise Agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all
the provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of any agency of the Grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults under this Chapter, and the payment by the Grantee of any claims,
liens and taxes due the Grantor which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the system.
      2.   Subject to the provisions of Subsections D. below, the security fund
may be assessed by the Grantor for purposes including, but not limited to, the
following:
         a.   Failure of the Grantee to pay the Grantor sums due under the
terms of the franchise.
         b.   Reimbursement of costs borne by the Grantor to correct franchise
violations not corrected by the Grantee, after due notice.
         c.   Monetary remedies or damages assessed against the Grantee due to
default or violation of franchise requirements.
   B.   At the Grantor's sole opinion, all or some portion of the security may
be provided in the acceptable form of an irrevocable letter of credit, in lieu
of a cash deposit.
   C.   Within thirty (30) days after notice to it that any amount has been
withdrawn by the Grantor from the security pursuant to Subsection A. above, the
Grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund
to the amount required by the Franchise Agreement.
   D.   If the Grantee fails, after thirty (30) days written notice to pay to
the Grantor any franchise fee or taxes due and unpaid; or, fails to pay to the
Grantor within such thirty (30) days, any damages, costs or expenses which the
Grantor shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the
Grantee in connection with the franchise; or fails, after thirty (30) days
notice of such failure, to comply with any material provision of the franchise
which the Grantor reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of
the security, the Grantor may thereafter withdraw the amount thereof, with
interest and any penalties, from the security. Upon such withdrawal, the
Grantor shall notify the Grantee of the amount and date thereof.
   E.   The security fund deposited pursuant to this Subchapter shall become
the property of the Grantor in the event the franchise is revoked for cause by
reason of the default of the Grantee in accordance with the procedures of §
11.21.165 of this Chapter. The Grantee, however, shall be entitled to the
return of such security, or portion thereof, as remains on deposit no later
than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the term of the franchise;
provided that, there is then no outstanding default on the part of the Grantee.
The Grantee shall be entitled to any interest accrued on the cash portion of
the security fund.
   F.   The rights reserved to the Grantor with respect to the security fund
are in addition to all other rights of the Grantor whether reserved by this
Chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right
with respect to such security fund shall constitute an election of remedies or
a waiver of any other right the Grantor may have.
('65 Code, § 35B-5(c)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.415 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A.   The Grantee shall by acceptance of any franchise granted indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, and
employees from any and all claims, suits, judgments for damages or other
relief, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees in any way arising out of or
through or alleged to arise out of or through:
      1.   The act of the Grantor in granting the franchise; and
      2.   The acts or omissions of the Grantee, its servants, employees, or
agents including, but not limited to, any failure or refusal by the Grantee,
its servants, employees or agents to comply with any obligation or duty imposed
on the Grantee by this Chapter or the Franchise Agreement.
      3.   a.   The exercise of any right or privilege granted or permitted by
this Chapter or the Franchise Agreement.
         b.   Such indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, all
claims arising in tort, contracts, infringements of copyright, violations of
statutes, ordinances or regulations or otherwise.
   B.   In the event any such claims shall arise, the Grantor or any other
indemnified party shall tender the defense thereof to the Grantee; provided,
that, the Grantor in its sole discretion may participate in the defense of such
claims at its expense, and in such event, the Grantee shall not agree to any
settlement of claims without Grantor approval.
   C.   The Grantee shall not be required to indemnify the Grantor for
negligence or willful misconduct on the part of the Grantor's officials,
boards, commissions, agents or employees.
('65 Code, § 35B-5(d)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.420 INSURANCE.
   A.   The Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise
insurance in amounts at least as follows:
      1.   Worker's compensation insurance. In such coverage as may be required
by the worker's compensation insurance and safety laws of the State of
California and amendments thereto.
      2.   Comprehensive general liability. Comprehensive general liability
insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily injury and
property damage shall be maintained at the sum(s) specified in the Franchise
Agreement.
      3.   Comprehensive automobile liability. Comprehensive automobile
liability including, but not limited to, nonownership and hired car coverage as
well as owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage
shall be maintained at the sum(s) specified in the Franchise Agreement.
   B.   The Grantee shall furnish the Grantor with copies of such insurance
policies or certificates of insurance.
   C.   Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the Grantor, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as additional insured, and
shall be primary to any insurance carried by the Grantor, and shall contain the
following endorsement:
   "It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
cancelled by the surety or the intention not to renew be stated by the surety
until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City by registered mail or written
notice of such intention to cancel or not renew."
   D.   The minimum amounts set forth in the Franchise Agreement for such
insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the Grantee to the
Grantor under the franchise issued hereunder to the amounts of such insurance.
   E.   All insurance carriers providing coverage under §
11.30.400 of this Subchapter shall be duly licensed to operate in the State of
California.
('65 Code, § 35B-5(e)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 11.30.500 SYSTEM DESIGN.
   The Cable Communications System shall be constructed in accordance with the
design requirements contained in the Franchise Agreement.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(a)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.505 GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE.
   The Grantee shall design and construct the cable system in such a manner as
to have the capability to pass by every single-family dwelling unit, multiple-
family dwelling unit, school and public agency within the franchise area.
Service shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules and
line extension policies specified in the Franchise Agreement. Cable system
construction and provision of service shall be nondiscriminatory, and the
Grantee shall not delay or defer service to any section of the franchise area
on the grounds of economic preference.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(b)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.510 CABLECASTING FACILITIES.
   The Grantee shall provide cable-casting facilities in accordance with the
requirements of the Franchise Agreement.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(c)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.515 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.
   A.   The Grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system
construction schedule contained in the Franchise Agreement.
   B.   The Grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan indicating
progress schedule, area construction maps, test plan, and projected dates for
offering service. In addition, the Grantee shall update this information on a
monthly basis, by submitting a copy of its normal internal progress reports,
showing specifically whether schedules are being met and the reasons for any
delay.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(d)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.520 REMEDIES FOR DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION.
   The Grantor may at its sole option, apply any or all of the remedies in
connection with delays in system construction as specified in §
11.30.915 of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(e)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.525 PROVISION OF SERVICE.
   After service has been established by activating trunk and distribution
cables for any area, the Grantee shall provide service to any requesting
subscriber within that area within thirty (30) days from the date of request;
provided, that, the Grantee has been able to obtain any easement, right of
entry agreement, or other permission required for the Grantee to lawfully and
reasonably provide service.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(f)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.530 UNDERGROUNDING OF CABLE.
   The undergrounding of cable is encouraged. In any event, cables shall be
installed underground at the Grantee's cost where utilities are already
underground, or where required by law. Previously installed aerial cable shall
be undergrounded and relocated in concern with other utilities, when such other
utilities may convert from aerial to underground construction.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(g)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.535 NEW DEVELOPMENT UNDERGROUNDING.
   A.   In cases of new construction or property development where utilities
are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give the
Grantee at least five (5) working days notice of the particular date on which
open trenching will be available for the Grantee's installation of conduit,
pedestals and/or vaults to be provided at the Grantee's expense. The Grantee
shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Whether or not the
Grantee receives timely notice, as provided above, it shall be the Grantee's
responsibility to underground its cables and to provide service in new
developments.
   B.   Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the
development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if
the Grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults within five
(5) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the
notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be
closed after the five (5) working days of the date of the trenches are
available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property
owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five (5) day period, the
cost of new trenching is to be borne by the Grantee.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(h)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.540 UNDERGROUND AT MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS.
   In cases of multiple dwelling units serviced by aerial utilities, the
Grantee shall make every effort to minimize the number of individual aerial
drop cables giving preference to undergrounding of multiple drop cables between
the pole and the dwelling unit.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(i)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.545 STREET OCCUPANCY.
   A.   The Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities
whenever possible and economically feasible, and shall not construct or install
any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on
public property until the written approval of the Grantor is obtained.
   B.   The Grantee shall notify the Grantor at least ten (10) days prior to
the intention of the Grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The
Grantor shall cooperate with the Grantee in granting any permits required,
providing such grant and subsequent construction by the Grantee shall not
unduly interfere with the use of such streets and proposed construction shall
be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the ordinances of the
Grantor.
   C.   All transmission lines, equipment and structure shall be so installed
and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners and at all times, shall be kept and maintained
in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair.
The Grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures
and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the
public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be
used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all
members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by
the Grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual
travel on such public way.
   D.   The Grantee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the
Grantor, restore to the Grantor's reasonable standards and specifications any
damage or disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operations or
construction on its behalf.
   E.   Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in
the judgment of the Grantor to remove any of the Grantee's facilities, no
charge shall be made by the Grantee against the Grantor for restoration and
repair, except for any damage caused by the negligence of the Grantor in such
removal.
   F.   Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at
its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities,
subject to the supervision and direction of the Grantor.
   G.   Upon receipt of thirty (30) days written notice, the Grantee at its
expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any
property of the Grantee when, in the opinion of the Grantor the same is
required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation,
freeway or street grade, separation or realignment, installation of sewers,
drains, waterpipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks,
or any other types of structures or improvements by governmental agencies
whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other
structure or public improvement, including but not limited to movement of
buildings, redevelopment, or any general program under which the Grantor shall
undertake to cause any such properties to be located beneath the surface of the
ground. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of the
Grantee.
   H.   After receipt of thirty (30) days written notice, upon failure of the
Grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the
provisions of this Chapter to be done in any street, within the time prescribed
and to the satisfaction of the Grantor, the Grantor may, at its option, cause
such work to be done and the Grantee shall pay to the Grantor the cost thereof
in the itemized amounts reported by the Grantor to the Grantee within thirty
(30) days after receipt of such itemized report. Except as to the payment by
the Franchisee to the City of such itemized amounts, the City shall indemnify
and hold the Franchisee harmless from and against any and all claims,
liabilities, losses, damages and expenses arising from or related to any gross
negligence in the performance by the City of such work.
   I.   The Grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless written
permission has been given by the Grantor.
   J.   Grantor reserves the right to require conduit for underground cable in
special areas.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(j)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.550 CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   A.   Construction standards.
      1.   Grantor codes and permits. Grantee shall comply with all applicable
Grantor construction codes and permits procedures, which may include payment of
applicable permit and inspection fees.
      2.   Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices shall be in
accordance with all applicable sections of Federal and State Occupational and
Safety and Health Acts and any amendments thereto as well as all State and
local codes where applicable.
      3.   Compliance with electrical codes. All installation of electronic
equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance
with the provisions of all applicable State and local codes.
      4.   Antennas and towers. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be
designed for the proper loading as specified in Electronics Industry
Association's R.S. 222-A specifications, and provisions of the Uniform Building
Code, as modified.
      5.   Compliance with aviation requirements. Antenna support structures
(towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with
all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and
all other applicable State or local codes and regulations.
      6.   Construction standards and requirements. All of the Grantee's plant
and equipment, including but not limited to, the antenna site, headend and
distribution system towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable,
coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and
operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by
experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or
interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to hinder or
obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      7.   Safety, nuisance, requirements. The Grantee shall at all times
employ professional care and shall install and maintain in use commonly
accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely
to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
   B.   Technical standards. The Cable Communications System shall meet all
technical and performance standards contained in the Franchise Agreement.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(k)(1),(2))) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.555 TESTS AND COMPLIANCE PROCEDURE.
   A.   Test and compliance procedure. The Grantee shall submit, within sixty
(60) days after the effective date of the Franchise Agreement, a detailed test
plan describing the methods and schedules for testing the Cable Communications
System on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the FCC requirements
and/or guidelines, and provisions of the Franchise Agreement. System tests
shall be performed at intervals no greater than twelve (12) months.
   B.   Special tests. At any time after commencement of service to subscribers
the Grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests,
different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal.
Requests for such additional tests will be made on the basis of complaints
received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant
noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in
controversy. The Grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such
special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to the Grantee or to
the subscriber.
   C.   Costs of tests. The cost of all tests required by Subsections A. and B.
above, and retesting as necessary, shall be borne by the Grantee.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(k)(3)—(5)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.560 AREA-WIDE INTERCONNECTION.
   A.   Interconnection. The Grantor may request the Grantee to interconnect
public usage channels of the Cable Communications System with any or all other
cable systems in adjacent areas. Interconnection of systems shall permit
interactive transmission and reception of program material, and may be done by
direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate
method.
   B.   Interconnection procedure. Upon receiving the request of the Grantor to
interconnect, the Grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the
other affected system or systems, and shall report to the Grantor the results
of such negotiation no later than sixty (60) days after initiation.
   C.   Relief. The Grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect or the Grantor may rescind its request to interconnect upon
petition by the Grantee to the Grantor, if the Grantor finds that the Grantee
has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the
system or systems of the proposed interconnection, or that the cost of the
interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in
subscriber rates.
   D.   Cooperation required. The Grantee shall cooperate with any
interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or City,
County, State or Federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established
for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the
interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the franchise area.
   E.   Initial technical requirements to assure future interconnection
capability.
      1.   Every Grantee receiving a franchise to operate a Cable
Communications System within the franchise area shall use the same frequency
allocations for commonly provided television signals so far as is technically
and economically feasible.
      2.   The Grantee shall make a reasonable effort to provide local
origination and access equipment that is compatible throughout the area served
by the cable system.
('65 Code, § 35B-6(k)(6)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
SERVICE PROVISIONS; CONSUMER PROTECTION
§ 11.30.700 CATEGORIES OF SERVICES.
   A.    Services to be provided. The Grantee shall provide the broad
categories of video programming services listed in the Franchise Agreement.
These categories shall not be reduced without prior notification to the
Grantor.
   B.   Basic cable service. The "Basic Cable Service" shall include any
service tier which includes the retransmission of local television signals.
This service shall be provided to all subscribers at the established monthly
subscription rates.
   C.   Local origination channel(s). If local origination programming is
provided, the Grantee shall operate any cable-casting studios on a high-
quality, professional basis for the purpose of providing cablecast programming
responsible to local needs and interests.
   D.   Public, Educational and Government (PEG) Access facilities. The Grantee
shall provide the PEG Access facilities including channel capacity, necessary
interface equipment and cabling to permit operation as specified in the
Franchise Agreement.
   E.    Cable channels for commercial use. The Grantee shall designate channel
capacity for commercial use as required by applicable law.
('65 Code, § 35B-7) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.705 CONSUMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   The Grantee shall maintain a local office to provide the necessary
facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer
standards under normal conditions of operation:
   A.   Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business
hours to assure that a minimum of ninety percent (90%) of all callers for
service will not be required to wait more than three (3) minutes before being
connected to a service representative.
   B.   Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four (24) hour
basis, including weekends and holidays.
   C.   A business and service office open during normal business hours a
minimum of forty-eight (48) hours per week, and adequately staffed to accept
subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints.
   D.   An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding
to and repairing major system malfunction on a twenty-four (24) hour basis.
   E.   An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber
within ten (10) days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and
feeder cable have been activated, and where lawful access has been obtained.
   F.   Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four (4) hour time period,
all appointments with subscribers for installation or service, unless otherwise
agreed to by a subscriber.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(a)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.710 REQUESTS FOR CABLE SERVICE REPAIRS.
   A.   The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible.Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by
notice and shall occur during period of minimum use of the system, preferably
between midnight and 6:00 a.m. A written log or an equivalent stored in
computer memory and capable of access and reproduction, shall be maintained for
all service interruptions and requests for cable service as required by §
11.30.920, Subsection E. herein.
   B.   The Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally
capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following
time frames:
      1.   System outage. Within two (2) hours, including weekends, of
receiving subscriber calls which by number identify a system outage of sound or
picture of one (1) or more channels, affecting all the subscribers of the
system or a considerable number thereof.
      2.   Isolated outage. Within twenty-four (24) hours, including weekends,
of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or
picture for one (1) or more channels.
      3.   Inferior reception quality.
         a.   Within forty-eight (48) hours, including weekends, of receiving a
request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.
         b.   The Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for
service under the provisions of this Subchapter when a technician arrives at
the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a
subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, response shall be deemed
to have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of arrival.
         c.   No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call
unless the service request can be demonstrated to be repeated and noncable
system in origin, or to involve subscriber negligence.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(b)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.715 VERIFICATION OF STANDARDS.
   Upon reasonable notice, the Grantee shall demonstrate compliance with any or
all of the standards required in §§
11.30.705 and
11.30.710 of this Subchapter. The Grantee shall provide sufficient detail to
permit the Grantor to verify the extent of compliance.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(c)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.720 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS.
   A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer
protection standards of §§
11.30.705 and
11.30.710 of this Subchapter, after the Grantee receipt of due notice and an
opportunity to cure, may be termed a breach of the franchise, subject to any
and all remedies as prescribed in §
11.30.915 of this Chapter herein and applicable law.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(d)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.725 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   The Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon
and resolving subscriber complaints in good faith without intervention by the
Grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a
subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing. At the
conclusion of the Grantee's investigation of a subscriber complaint, but in no
event more than ten (10) days after receiving the complaint, the Grantee shall
notify the subscriber in writing of the results of its proposed action or
resolution of the complaint, if any. The Grantee shall also notify the
subscriber of the subscriber's right to file a complaint with the Grantor in
the event the subscriber is dissatisfied with the Grantee's decision. The
Grantee's procedures shall be filed with the Grantor. No other proceedings to
resolve subscriber complaints shall be undertaken until the procedure
established by this Section has been exhausted.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(e)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.730 NOTICES TO SUBSCRIBERS.
   A.   Operating policies. 
      1.   As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the cable system, and
at least once annually thereafter, the Grantee shall provide such subscriber
with written information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or
complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the
employee or employees, or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be
addressed, and also furnish information concerning the Grantor office
responsible for administration of the franchise with the name and telephone
number of the office. The notice shall also indicate the Grantee's business
hours, legal holidays and procedures for responding to inquiries after normal
business hours.
      2.   The Grantee shall provide all subscribers and the Grantor written
notice no less than thirty (30) days prior to any proposed change in these
policies.
   B.   Rates and services. The Grantee shall provide all subscribers and the
Grantor with at least thirty (30) days written notice prior to the
implementation of any change in rates or a material change in programming
services, excluding temporary marketing and sales promotional discounts or
offers.
   C.   Copies to Grantor. Copies of all notices provided to subscribers shall
be filed concurrently with the Grantor.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(f)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.735 QUALITY OF SERVICE.
   The overall quality of service provided by the Grantee to subscribers may be
subject to evaluation by the Grantor in conjunction with the annual review set
forth in §
11.30.330. In addition, the Grantor may evaluate the quality of service at any
time, based upon the number of subscriber complaints received by the Grantee
and the Grantor, and the Grantee's response to those complaints. The Grantor's
evaluation that service quality is inadequate may lead to direction to the
Grantee to cure the inadequacies. The Grantee shall commence corrective action
within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice. Failure to do so shall
be deemed to be a breach of the franchise and subject to the remedies
prescribed in §
11.30.915. The Grantor, after due process, may utilize the performance bond
and/or security of §
11.30.405 and
§ 11.30.410, respectively, to remedy any such franchise breach.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(g)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.740 TENANT RIGHTS.
   It is Grantor's intent tenants not be discriminated against in the ability
to subscribe to cable services. The Grantee shall be required to provide
service to tenants in individual units of a multiple housing facility with all
services offered to other dwelling units within the franchise area, so long as
the owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by the Grantee, to
the following:
   A.   To the Grantee's providing the service to units of the facility;
   B.   To reasonable conditions and time for installation, maintenance, and
inspection of the system on the facility premises;
   C.   To reasonable conditions promulgated by the Grantee to protect the
Grantee's equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system; and
   D.   To not discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants
who receive cable service and those who do not.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(h)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.745 GRANTEE AUTHORITY TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the Grantee to exercise its rights and perform
its obligations under the franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted service to
each and all of its customers; provided, that, such rules, regulations, terms
and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or
applicable State and Federal laws, rules and regulations.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(i)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.750 RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.
   A.   The Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, PEG access channel users, or general citizens
on the basis of income, race, disability, color, religion, national origin, age
or sex. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Grantee from establishing
reasonable policies regarding credit risks, subscriber deposits or advance
payment policies, or from refusing to provide service to any household which
has a history of nonpayment, damage to the Grantee's equipment, or has
threatened or assaulted the Grantee's employees. The Grantee shall comply at
all times with all other Federal, State and local laws and regulations, and all
executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are
hereby incorporated and made part of this Chapter by reference.
   B.   The Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity
requirements of Federal, State and local law and regulations in effect on the
date of the franchise grant, and as amended from time to time.
   C.   The Grantee's policy with regard to personally identifiable information
shall be consistent with Federal law.
   D.   Fairness of accessibility. The entire system of the Grantee shall be
operated in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal
accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other
services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies and other entities having
a legitimate use for the system, and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from
its use.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(j)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.755 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.
   A.   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service
insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored. In
the event that the Grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the
system, or the Grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew
this franchise, the Grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers
receive continuous, uninterrupted service.
   B.   In the event of a change of Grantee, or in the event a new operator
acquires the system, the original Grantee shall cooperate with the Grantor, the
new Grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all
subscribers. During such period, the Grantee shall be entitled to the revenues
for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to
reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.
   C.   In the event the Grantee fails to operate the system for seven (7)
consecutive days without prior approval of the Grantor or without just cause,
the Grantor may, at its option, and without further process impose liquidated
damages not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per day for each
succeeding day that service remains unavailable.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(k)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.760 IDENTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   Every employee of the Grantee or its contractors or subcontractors shall be
clearly identified on sight to the public as a representative of the Grantee.
Every vehicle of the Grantee or its contractors or subcontractors shall be
similarly identified. The Grantee's telephone number shall also be clearly
marked on all such vehicles.
('65 Code, § 35B-8(l)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 11.30.900 OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICY; RECORDS REQUIRED.
   A.   Open books and records. 
      1.   The Grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with a
policy of totally open books and records. The Grantor, upon reasonable notice,
at reasonable intervals and for reasons related to the enforcement and
administration of this Chapter or the Franchise Agreement, and to obtain
information which has not otherwise been provided the Grantor or which Grantor
has reasonable basis to believe has not been reported fairly and accurately,
shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours, all
books, records, maps, plans, service complaint logs, performance test results
and other like materials of the Grantee which relate to the operation of the
franchise and are maintained at the local office required by this Subsection;
provided that, the Grantor shall maintain the confidentiality of any trade
secrets or other proprietary information in the possession of the Grantee; and
provided further that, records shall be exempt from inspection pursuant to this
Section to the extent required by applicable law regarding subscriber privacy
and to the extent such records are protected by law regarding subscriber
privacy and to the extent such records are protected by law against discovery
in civil litigation.
      2.   If any of such books or records are not kept in the local office, or
upon reasonable request made available to the Grantor, and if the Grantor shall
determine that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate to
the performance of any of the Grantor's duties, then all travel and maintenance
expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the
Grantee.
   B.   Records required. In any event the Grantee shall at all times maintain:
      1.   The complaint file required by §
11.30.920 E. of this Chapter.
      2.   A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps
showing the exact location of all Cable Communications System equipment
installed or in use in the franchise area, exclusive of subscriber service
drops.
('65 Code, § 35B-9) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.905 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTOR.
   A.   Right of inspection of construction. The Grantor shall have the right
to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the
provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary
to ensure compliance with the terms of this franchise and other pertinent
provisions of law.
   B.   Right of intervention. The Grantor shall have the right of intervention
in any suit or proceeding involving a material issue relating to the cable
system franchise to which the Grantee is a party, and the Grantee shall not
oppose such intervention by the Grantor.
('65 Code, § 35B-10) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.910 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTEE.
   In the event of any dispute between the Grantee and the Grantor over this
Chapter or the Franchise Agreement, or with respect to any rights or
obligations arising therefrom, the Grantee shall first pursue and exhaust all
available administrative remedies. Thereafter the Grantee may pursue any
appropriate legal action.
('65 Code, § 35B-11) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.915 FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS.
   A.   Remedies for franchise violations. If the Grantee fails to perform any
material obligation under the franchise, or fails to do so in a timely manner,
the Grantor may at its option, and in its sole discretion:
      1.   Assess against the Grantee monetary damages up to the limits
established in the Franchise Agreement for material franchise violations, said
assessment to be levied against the security fund, herein above provided, and
collected by the Grantor after completion of the procedures specified in
Subsection C. The amount of such assessment shall be deemed to represent
liquidation of damages actually sustained by the Grantor by reason of the
Grantee's failure to perform. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by
the Grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or
under applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from
Grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual
attorney fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by the Grantor by reason
of or arising out of such breach of the franchise. This provision for
assessment of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from
the Grantor's right to enforce the provisions of the construction and
performance bonds provided for in §§
11.30.400 through
11.30.420.
      2.   Terminate the franchise, for any of the causes stated in §§
11.30.100 through
11.30.175, above.
      3.   Impose any lesser penalty consistent with this Chapter, the
franchise and applicable law, as the Grantor may deem appropriate.
      4.   No remedy shall be imposed by the Grantor against the Grantee for
any violation of the franchise without the Grantee being afforded due process
of law, as provided for in Subsection B. below.
   B.   Additional remedies. Grantor may impose any or all of the above
enumerated measures against the Grantee, which shall be in addition to any and
all other legal or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under any
applicable law.
   C.   Procedure for remedying franchise violations. In the event the Grantor
determines that the Grantee has violated any material provision of the
franchise, the Grantor may make a written demand on the Grantee to remedy such
violation. If the violation is not remedied, or in the process of being
remedied, to the satisfaction of the Grantor within thirty (30) days following
such demand, the Grantor shall determine whether or not such violation by the
Grantee was excusable or inexcusable, in accordance with the following
procedure:
      1.   An administrative hearing shall be held to review the alleged
violation. If this hearing does not result in a satisfactory resolution, and/or
the Grantee requests a public hearing, then a public hearing shall be held, and
the Grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon thirty (30)
days written notice to the Grantee of the time and the place of the hearing
provided and the allegations of franchise violations.
      2.   If, after notice is given and, at the Grantee's option, a full
public proceeding is held, the Grantor determines such violation by the Grantee
was excusable as provided in Subsection D. below, the Grantor shall direct the
Grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional time, in such
manner and upon such terms and conditions as the Grantor may reasonably direct.
      3.   If, after notice is given and, at the Grantee's option, a full
public proceeding is held, the Grantor determines such violation was
inexcusable, then the Grantor may impose a remedy in accordance with Subsection
A. above.
   D.   Force majeure; grantee's inability to perform.
      1.   In the event the Grantee's performance of any of the terms,
conditions, obligations, or requirements of the franchise is prevented or
impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably
foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no
penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided the
Grantee has notified the Grantor in writing within thirty (30) days of its
discovery of the occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond the Grantee's
reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not
be limited to, Acts of God and civil emergencies.
      2.   The Grantor and Grantee, in the Franchise Agreement, may mutually
define those conditions deemed subject to force majeure application.
('65 Code, § 35B-12) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.920 REPORTS.
   A.   Annual reports. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of
the Grantee's fiscal year, the Grantee may be required to submit a written
annual report, in a form requested by the Grantor, including, but not limited
to, the following information:
      1.   A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial
report year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system,
including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the
reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of Service.
      2.   A revenue statement, audited by an independent Certified Public
Accountant, or certified by an officer of the Grantee.
      3.   A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two (2)
years;
      4.   A list of the Grantee's officers, members of its boards of
directors, and other principals of the Grantee;
      5.   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five
percent (5%) or more of the voting interest in the Grantee and its parent,
subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, if any, unless the
parent is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly available.
      6.   To the extent money, other than profits, is paid to a parent,
subsidiary, or the person affiliated with the Grantee, the amounts of such
payments and the basis for computation of such amounts (e.g., the basis for
computing any management fees or share of "home office" overhead).
   B.   Plant survey and system performance report. At the Grantor's request,
the Grantee shall submit to the Grantor an annual plant survey and system
performance report. The report shall include a description and "as-built" maps
of the portions of the franchise area that have been cabled and have all
services available, and the results of system performance tests conducted in
conformity with all applicable FCC and franchise technical requirements.
   C.   Copies of Federal and State reports. The Grantee may be required to
submit to the Grantor copies of all pleadings, applications, notifications,
communications and documents of any kind, submitted by the Grantee to, as well
as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by, any Federal, State
and local courts, regulatory agencies and other government bodies relating to
its cable television operations within the franchise area. The Grantee shall
submit such documents to the Grantor no later than thirty (30) days after
receipt of a Grantor request. If any requested report is determined to be
confidential by law or by the practices of Federal or State agencies, such
confidential data shall be submitted to the City Attorney on a confidential
basis, and shall be exempt from public disclosure.
   D.   Public reports. A copy of each of the Grantee's annual and other
periodic public financial reports and those of its parent, as the Grantor
requests, shall be submitted to the Grantor within thirty (30) days after
receipt for a request.
   E.   Complaint file and reports. An accurate and comprehensive file shall be
kept by the Grantee of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. A
procedure shall be established by the Grantee by the time of installation of
the cable system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the
satisfaction of the Grantor. Complete records of the Grantee's actions in
response to all complaints shall be kept. These files and records shall remain
open to the public during normal business hours, so that individuals are able
to inspect their own files.
      1.   A summary of service complaints, identifying the number and nature
of the complaints and their disposition, upon Grantor request, shall be
completed by the tenth day of the succeeding month.
      2.   A log and summary of all service interruptions.
      3.   If requested by the Grantor, the results of an annual opinion survey
report which identifies satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with
cable communications services offered by the Grantee, and subject to Grantor
regulation, shall be submitted to the Grantor no later than two (2) months
after the end of the Grantee's fiscal year. The surveys required to make the
report shall be in a form that can be transmitted to subscribers with one (1)
or more bills for service, such as postage-paid self-addressed post cards. At
the Grantor's option, the grantor may prepare the survey form and request its
inclusion with a monthly bill to subscribers.
   F.   Miscellaneous reports. The Grantee shall submit to the Grantor such
other information or reports in such forms and at such times as the Grantor may
reasonably request or require, at reasonable intervals and for reasons related
to the enforcement and administration of this Chapter or the franchise, and to
obtain information which has not otherwise been provided the Grantor or which
the Grantor has reasonable basis to believe has not been reported fairly and
accurately.
   G.   Inspection of facilities. The Grantee shall allow the Grantor to make
inspections of any of the Grantee's facilities and equipment, at reasonable
intervals and for reasons related to the enforcement and administration of this
Chapter or the franchise, and to obtain information which has not otherwise
been provided the Grantor or which the Grantor has reasonable basis to believe
has not been reported fairly and accurately upon at least ten (10) days notice,
or, in case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice, to allow the
Grantor to verify the accuracy of any submitted report.
   H.   Public inspection. All reports subject to public disclosure, shall be
available for public inspection at a designated Grantor office during normal
business hours.
   I.   Failure to report. The willful refusal, failure, or neglect of the
Grantee to file any material reports reasonably required, or such other reports
as the Grantor reasonably may request, may be deemed a material breach of the
franchise, and may subject the Grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable,
which are available to the Grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
   J.   False statements. Any materially false or misleading statement or
representation made knowingly and willfully by the Grantee in any report
required under the franchise may be deemed a material breach of the franchise
and may subject the Grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are
available to the Grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
   K.   Cost of reports. One (1) copy of all reports and records required under
this or any other Section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the
Grantee.
('65 Code, § 35B-13) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.925 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Franchise to the contrary, the
Grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the State
and Federal government or any administrative agencies thereof. Provided,
however, if any such State or Federal law or regulation shall require the
Grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the Grantee to perform any
service, or shall prohibit the Grantee from performing any service, in conflict
with the terms of the franchise or any law or regulation of the Grantor, then
as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the Grantee shall notify the
Grantor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or
law and the laws or regulations of the Grantor or the franchise.
('65 Code, § 35B-14(a)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.930 SEPARABILITY OF NONMATERIAL AND MATERIAL PROVISIONS.
   A.   Nonmaterial provisions. If any provision of this Chapter or any related
agreements is held by any court or by any Federal, State or local agency of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal, State or
local law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such
court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the
requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, and if said provision is
considered non-material by the Grantor, said provision shall be considered a
separate, distinct and independent part of this Chapter, and such holding shall
not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In
the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed,
rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof or
thereof which has been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with
the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon
return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding on the parties
hereto, provided that the Grantor shall give the Grantee thirty (30) days
written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision.
   B.   Material provisions. If any material section of this Chapter, as
determined by the Grantor and the Grantee, is held to be invalid or preempted
by Federal, State or County regulations or laws, resulting in a material
adverse consequence to either party, the Grantor and Grantee shall attempt to
negotiate appropriate modifications to the franchise to provide reasonable
relief to the Grantor or Grantee from such invalidity or preemption, including
the payment of damages. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on such
modifications, then the dispute shall be submitted to a mutually agreeable
arbitrator, in accordance with State law, who shall determine what
modifications and/or liquidated damages are appropriate. The arbitrator's
decision shall be binding on the parties, provided, that no decision of the
arbitrator shall require the Grantor or Grantee to be in violation of any
Federal or State law or regulation.
('65 Code, § 35B-14(b), (c)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.935 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, a local address
for service of notices by mail.
('65 Code, § 35B-14(d)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.940 NO RECOURSE AGAINST GRANTOR.
   Neither the Grantee nor any other person shall have any recourse whatsoever
against the Grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees
for any loss, costs, expenses, or damage arising out of any provisions or
requirement of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise
unless such loss, costs, expenses, or damage result from the negligence,
misconduct, or malfeasance of the Grantor or any of its officials, boards,
commissions, agents, or employees.
('65 Code, § 35B-14(e)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
§ 11.30.945 NONENFORCEMENT BY GRANTOR.
   The Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this Chapter by reason of any failure of the Grantor to
enforce prompt compliance.
('65 Code, § 35B-14(f)) (Ord. No. 87-021 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-009 § 1)
CHAPTER 11.32: CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
Section
   
11.32.005   Title
   
11.32.010   Authority and purpose
   
11.32.015   Intent
   
11.32.020   Definitions
   
11.32.025   Tax imposed
   
11.32.030   Reporting and remittance of tax
   
11.32.035   Payments and communications; timely remittance
   
11.32.040   Payment; when taxes deemed delinquent
   
11.32.045   Notice not required by city
   
11.32.050   Non-payment of cannabis business tax; penalties and interest
established by resolution
   
11.32.055   Refunds and credits
   
11.32.060   Refunds and procedures
   
11.32.065   Exemptions from the tax
   
11.32.070   Administration of the tax
   
11.32.075   Enforcement; action to collect
   
11.32.080   Apportionment
   
11.32.085   Constitutionally and legality
   
11.32.090   Audit and examination of records and equipment
   
11.32.095   Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges
   
11.32.100   Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business
   
11.32.105   Deficiency determinations
   
11.32.110   Failure to report; nonpayment and fraud
   
11.32.115   Tax assessment; notice of requirements
   
11.32.120   Tax assessment; hearing, application, and determination
   
11.32.125   Appeal procedure
   
11.32.130   Conviction for violation; taxes not waived
   
11.32.135   Violation deemed misdemeanor; penalty
   
11.32.140   Remedies cumulative
   
11.32.145   Amendment
§ 11.32.005 TITLE.
   This Chapter shall be known as the Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance and shall
be applicable in the City of Culver City, California which shall be referred to
herein as "City."
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.010 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   A.   The purpose of this Chapter is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes,
pursuant to §§ 37101 and 37100.5 of the California Government Code, upon
Cannabis Businesses that engage in business in the City. The Cannabis Business
Tax is levied based upon business gross receipts and square footage of plant
canopy. It is not a sales and use tax, a tax upon income, or a tax upon real
property.
   B.   The Cannabis Business Tax is a general tax enacted solely for general
governmental purposes of the City and not for specific purposes. All of the
proceeds from the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be placed in the City's
general fund and be available for any legal municipal expenditure.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.015 INTENT.
   The intent of this Chapter is to levy a tax on cannabis businesses that are
legal in the City, as well as any cannabis businesses that become legal
subsequent to the adoption of this Chapter or that otherwise operate in the
City. Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted to authorize or permit any
business activity that would not otherwise be legal or permissible under laws
applicable to the activity at the time the activity is undertaken.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.020 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when
used in this Chapter:
   BUSINESS. All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the
City, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession,
occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, whether or not carried on for
gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to
his or her employer.
   CANNABIS.  Except as specified herein, all parts of the Cannabis sativa
Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. CANNABIS also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. CANNABIS
does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this
Chapter, CANNABIS does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by § 11018.5 of
the Health and Safety Code.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. Cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate
one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency.
Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for
purposes of this division. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as
defined by § 109935 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined by
§ 109925 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one
(1) or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency.
Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for
purposes of this Subdivision. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as
defined by § 109935 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined by
§ 109925 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   CANOPY. All areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, inclusive of
all vertical planes, whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. The
plant canopy does not need to be continuous on any premise in determining the
total square footage which will be subject to tax.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any business br operation
which engages in medicinal or adult-use commercial cannabis activity whether or
not carried on for gain or profit.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX OR MARIJUANA BUSINESS TAX. The tax due pursuant to
this Chapter for engaging in commercial cannabis or marijuana business n the
City.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Cultivation conducted by, for, or as part
of a commercial cannabis business.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT. A regulatory permit issued by he City
of Culver City pursuant to
Chapter 11.17 to a commercial cannabis business, and is required before any
commercial cannabis activity may be conducted in the City. The initial permit
and annual renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit is made expressly
contingent upon the business' ongoing compliance with all of the requirements
of the Culver City Municipal Code and any regulations adopted by the City
governing the commercial cannabis activity at issue.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
   DELIVERY. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to la
customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
   DISTRIBUTION. The procurement, sale, and/or transport of cannabis and
cannabis products between licensees.
   EMPLOYEE. Each person who renders any service, with or without compensation,
for the owner, permittee, or agent of either an owner or permittee of a
commercial cannabis business. For purposes of this Chapter, the term employee
shall include part-time, full-time, temporary, or permanent employees.
   ENGAGED IN BUSINESS AS A CANNABIS BUSINESS. The commencing, conducting,
operating, managing or carrying on of a cannabis business and the exercise of
corporate or franchise powers, whether done as owner, or by means of an
officer, agent, manager, employee, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed
location in the City or coming into the City from an outside location to engage
in such activities. A person shall be deemed engaged in business within the
City if:
      1.   Such person or person's employee maintains a fixed place of business
within the City for the benefit or partial benefit of such person;
      2.   Such person or person's employee owns or leases real property within
the City for business purposes;
      3.   Such person or person's employee regularly maintains a stock of
tangible personal property in the City for sale in the ordinary course of
business;
      4.   Such person or person's employee regularly conducts solicitation of
business within the City;
      5.   Such person or person's employee performs work or renders services
in the City; and
   The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning
of "engaged in business."
   EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS. Evidence such as, without limitation, use of
signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media, including the use of
internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a government agency or
to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis business in the City.
   FISCAL YEAR. July 1 through June 30 of the following calendar year.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. Except as otherwise specifically provided, whether
designated a sales price, royalty, rent, commission, dividend, or other
designation, the total amount (including all receipts, cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature) received or payable for sales of goods, wares
or merchandise or for the performance of any act or service of any nature for
which a charge is made or credit allowed (whether such service, act or
employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or not), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of
the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest
paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, the following
shall be excluded from gross receipts:
      1.   Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales;
      2.   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase
price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
      3.   Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers
to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or
return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts;
      4.   Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or
surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in
the regular course of the taxpayer's business;
      5.   Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or
units of the same business;
      6.   Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which
reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible
in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in
the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or
portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected
they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they
are recovered;
      7.   Transactions between a partnership and its partners;
      8.   Receipts from services or sales in transactions between affiliated
corporations. An affiliated corporation is a corporation:
         a.   The voting and non-voting stock of which is owned at least eighty
percent (80%) by such other corporation with which such transaction is had; or
         b.   Which owns at least eighty percent (80%) of the voting and non-
voting stock of such other corporation; or
         c.   At least eighty percent (80%) of the voting and non-voting stock
of which is owned by a common parent corporation which also has such ownership
of the corporation with which such transaction is had.
      9.   Transactions between a limited liability company and its member(s),
provided the limited liability company has elected to file as a Subchapter K
entity under the Internal Revenue Code and that such transaction(s) shall be
treated the same as between a partnership and its partner(s) as specified in
Subsection 7. above;
      10.   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when
forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in
excess of one dollar;
      11.   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an
agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom
collected. These agents or trustees must provide the finance department with
the names and the addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This
exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained
by the agent or trustees.
   MANUFACTURE. To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or
prepare a cannabis product.
   NURSERY. A person that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and
other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation,
and cultivation of cannabis.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural
as well as the singular number.
   SALE. Includes any sale, exchange, or barter or other transaction for any
consideration.
   SQUARE FOOT OR SQUARE FOOTAGE. The maximum amount of canopy for commercial
cannabis cultivation authorized by a City permit issued to a person engaging in
commercial cannabis business shall be the basis for the tax base for
cultivation.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STATE LICENSE OR LICENSE. A license issued by the State of California, or
one of its departments or divisions, pursuant to California Business &
Professions Code §§ 26000, et seq. and any subsequent State of California
legislation regarding the same, to engage in commercial cannabis activity.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Chief Financial Officer of the City of Culver City,
his or her designee(s), or any other City officer charged with the
administration of the provisions of this Chapter.
   TESTING LABORATORY. A facility, entity, or site in the state that offers or
performs testing of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the
following:
      1.   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other
persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state; and
      2.   Licensed by the State of California.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.025 TAX IMPOSED.
   A.   There is established and imposed upon each person who is engaged in
business as a cannabis business an annual Cannabis Business Tax at the rates
set forth in this Chapter.
   B.   Tax on retail medicinal commercial cannabis businesses. The Cannabis
Business Tax upon every person who engages in business in the City as a retail
medicinal commercial cannabis business shall be at the following annual rate:
      1.   The tax rate upon the effective date of this chapter, through June
30, 2020, shall be five percent (5%) of the gross receipts.
      2.   Beginning on July 1, 2020, such tax rate may increase by resolution
adopted by the City Council but shall not exceed the maximum tax rate of eight
percent (8%) without voter approval.
   C.   Tax on retail adult-use commercial cannabis businesses. The Cannabis
Business Tax upon every person who engages in business in the City as a retail
adult-use commercial cannabis business shall be at the following annual rate:
      1.   The tax rate upon the effective date of this chapter, through June
30, 2020, shall be six percent (6%) of the gross receipts.
      2.   Beginning on July 1, 2020, such tax rate may increase by resolution
adopted by the City Council but shall not exceed the maximum tax rate of ten
percent (10%) without voter approval.
   D.   Tax on commercial manufacturing cannabis businesses. The Cannabis
Business Tax upon every person who engages in business in the City as a
commercial manufacturing cannabis business shall be at the following annual
rate:
      1.   The tax rate upon the effective date of this chapter, through June
30, 2020, shall be four percent (4%) of the gross receipts.
      2.   Beginning on July 1, 2020, such tax rate may increase by resolution
adopted by the City Council but shall not exceed the maximum tax rate of six
percent (6%) without voter approval.
   E.   Tax on commercial cannabis distribution businesses. The Cannabis
Business Tax upon every person who engages in business in the City as a
commercial cannabis distribution business shall be at the following annual
rate:
      1.   The tax rate upon the effective date of this chapter, through
December 31, 2023, shall be two percent (2%) of the gross receipts.
      2.   Beginning on January 1, 2024, the tax rate shall be zero percent
(0%).
      3.   Beginning on July 1, 2020, such tax rate may increase by resolution
adopted by the City Council but shall not exceed the maximum tax rate of six
percent (6%) without voter approval.
   F.   Tax on testing laboratories. The Cannabis Business Tax upon every
person who engages in business in the City as a cannabis testing laboratory
shall be at the following annual rate:
      1.   The tax rate upon the effective date of this chapter, through June
30, 2020, shall be one percent (1%) of the gross receipts.
      2.   Beginning on July 1, 2020, such tax rate may increase by resolution
adopted by the City Council but shall not exceed the maximum tax rate of one
and one-half percent (1.5%), without voter approval.
   G.   Tax on commercial cannabis cultivation. The Cannabis Business Tax upon
every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the City
shall be at the following annual rate:
      1.   The tax rate upon the effective date of this chapter, through June
30, 2020, shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) per square foot of canopy space.
      2.   Beginning on July 1, 2020 and on July 1 of each succeeding fiscal
year thereafter, the tax rate per square foot of canopy space shall increase
from the tax rate effective in the prior fiscal year shall increase by the
percentage change between January of the calendar year prior to such increase
and January of the calendar year of the increase in the Consumer Price Index
("CPI") for all urban consumers in the Los-Angeles-Riverside-Orange County
areas as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics.
However, no CPI adjustment resulting in a decrease of any tax imposed by this
subsection shall be made.
      3.   For purposes of this Subdivision B. the square feet of canopy space
for a business shall be rebuttably presumed to be the maximum square footage of
canopy allowed by the business's City permit for commercial cannabis
cultivation. Should a City permit be issued to a business which cultivates only
for certain months of the year, the City shall prorate the tax as to
sufficiently reflect the period in which cultivation is occurring at the
business. In no case shall canopy square footage which is authorized by the
City commercial cannabis permit but not utilized for cultivation be deducted
for the purpose of determining the tax for cultivation, unless the Tax
Administrator is informed in writing and authorizes such reduction for the
purpose of relief from the tax prior to the period for which the space will not
be used, that such space will not be used.
(Ord. 2018-010 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2023-008 § 1)
§ 11.32.030 REPORTING AND REMITTANCE OF TAX.
   The Cannabis Business Tax imposed by this Chapter shall be imposed on a
fiscal year basis and shall be due and payable in quarterly installments as
follows:
   A.   Each person owing a Cannabis Business Tax shall, on or before the last
day of the month following the close of each fiscal year quarter, prepare and
submit a tax statement on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator and
remit to the Tax Administrator the tax due. The tax due shall be no less than
the quarterly installment due, but the taxpayer may at any time pay the tax due
for the entire fiscal year.
   B.   Tax statements and payments for all outstanding taxes owed the City are
immediately due to the Tax Administrator upon cessation of business for any
reason.
   C.   The Tax Administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish shorter
reporting and payment periods for any taxpayer as the Tax Administrator deems
necessary to insure collection of the tax.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.035 PAYMENTS AND COMMUNICATIONS; TIMELY REMITTANCE.
   Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is
due, it must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the final due
date. A postmark will not be accepted as timely remittance. If the due date
falls on Saturday, Sunday holiday, or a day City Hall is closed, the due date
shall be the next regular business day on which City Hall is open to the
public.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.040 PAYMENT; WHEN TAXES DEEMED DELINQUENT.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this
Chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed
delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date
as specified in §§
11.32.030 and
11.32.035.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.045 NOTICE NOT REQUIRED BY THE CITY.
   The City may as a courtesy send a tax notice to the business however, the
Tax Administrator is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill
to any person subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Failure to send such
notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under
the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.050 NON-PAYMENT OF CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX; PENALTIES AND INTEREST
ESTABLISHED BY RESOLUTION.
   A.   Any person who fails or refuses to pay any Cannabis Business Tax
required to be paid pursuant to this Chapter on or before the due date shall
pay penalties and interest established by resolution of the City Council. This
penalty provision shall not be construed to preclude or limit the enforcement
of the penal provision of this Chapter.
   B.   Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a
Cannabis Business Tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the
bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus
any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this Chapter, and any other
amount allowed under state law.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.055 REFUNDS AND CREDITS.
   A.   No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this Chapter,
except as provided in §
11.32.060.
   B.   No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be made
because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a
business.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.060 REFUNDS AND PROCEDURES.
   A.   Whenever the amount of any Cannabis Business Tax, penalty or interest
has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or
received by the City under this Chapter, it may be refunded to the claimant who
paid the tax, or credited towards a future tax liability, provided that a
written claim for refund is filed with the Tax Administrator within one year of
the date the tax was originally due and payable.
   B.   The Tax Administrator, his or her designee or any other City officer
charged with the administration of this Chapter shall have the right to examine
and audit all the books and business records of the claimant to determine the
eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be
allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of claimant's books
and business records after request by the Tax Administrator to do so.
   C.   If the Cannabis Business Tax was erroneously paid and the error is
attributable to the City, the City shall refund the amount of tax erroneously
paid up to one year from when the error was identified.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.065 EXEMPTIONS FROM THE TAX.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis
cultivation as defined in the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and
Safety Act (MAUCRSA) or any subsequent state legislation regarding the same.
This Chapter shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is specifically
exempted from state licensing requirements, that meets the definition of
personal use or equivalent terminology under state law, and for which the
individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that personal use.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.070 ADMINISTRATION OF THE TAX.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to collect the taxes,
penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this Chapter.
   B.   For purposes of administration and enforcement of this Chapter
generally, the Tax Administrator may from time to time promulgate such
administrative rules and procedures consistent with the purpose, intent, and
express terms of this Chapter as he or she deems necessary to implement or
clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement.
   C.   The Tax Administrator may take such administrative actions as needed to
administer the tax, including but not limited to:
      1.   Provide to all Cannabis Business Tax taxpayers forms for the
reporting of the tax;
      2.   Increase tax rates in accordance with this Chapter;
      3.   Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of
this Chapter;
      4.   Receive and record all taxes remitted to the City as provided in
this Chapter;
      5.   Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant to
this Chapter;
      6.   Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this Chapter;
      7.   Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this
Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.075 ENFORCEMENT; ACTION TO COLLECT.
   A.   Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the City. Any person
owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable in
an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such debt. The
provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed a limitation upon the right of
the City to bring any other action including criminal, civil and equitable
actions, based upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties and/or fees imposed
by this Chapter or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of this
Chapter.
   B.   In addition to any other remedies available under federal, state, or
local law, if any amount required to be paid to the City under this Chapter is
not paid when due, the Tax Administrator may, within three years after the
amount is due, record a certificate of lien specifying the amount of taxes,
fees and penalties due, and the name and address of the individual or business
as it appears on the records of Tax Administrator. The lien shall also specify
that the Tax Administrator has complied with all provisions of this Chapter in
the determination of the amount required to be paid. From the time of the
filing for record, the amount required to be paid, together with penalties
thereon, constitutes a lien upon all real property in the City owned by the
individual or business, or subsequently acquired by the individual or business
before the lien expires. The lien has the force, effect, and priority of a
judgment lien and shall continue for ten years from of filing of the
certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged.
   C.   At any time within three (3) years after any individual or business is
delinquent in the payment of any amount herein required to be paid or within
three years after the last recording of a certificate of lien under Subsection
B. of this Section, the Tax Administrator may issue a warrant for the
enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be
paid to the City under this Chapter. The warrant shall be directed to the
Sheriff and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant
shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner and with the
same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution. The Tax
Administrator may pay or advance to the Sheriff, the same fees, commissions and
expenses for service provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of
execution. The Tax Administrator shall approve the fees for publication in the
newspaper.
   D.   At any time within three (3) years after recording a lien against any
individual or business, if the lien is not discharged and released in full, the
Tax Administrator may forthwith seize any asset or property, real or personal
(including bank account), of the operator and sell at public auction the asset
or property, or a sufficient part of it to pay the amount due together with any
penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any cost incurred on
account of the seizure and sale. Assets or property of the business subject to
seizure and sale subject to this Chapter shall not include any assets or
property which is exempt from execution under the provisions of Code of Civil
Procedure.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.080 APPORTIONMENT.
   If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the
City, it is the intent of the City to apply the Cannabis Business Tax so that
the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed activity
actually carried on in the City. To the extent federal or state law requires
that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may indicate
said apportionment on his or her tax return. The Tax Administrator may
promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds
useful or necessary. Such administrative procedures shall be approved by the
City Attorney prior to becoming effective.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.085 CONSTITUTIONALITY AND LEGALITY.
   This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United
States Constitution and state law. None of the tax provided for by this Chapter
shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon interstate
commerce, a violation of the equal protection and due process clauses of the
Constitution of the United States or the State of California or a violation of
any other provision of the Culver City Charter or state law.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.090 AUDIT AND EXAMINATION OF RECORDS AND EQUIPMENT.
   A.   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to audit and examine all
books, records, accounts, inventory and onsite operations of persons engaged in
cannabis businesses specific to the business, including examination of both
state and federal income tax returns, sales tax returns, or other evidence
documenting the gross receipts of persons engaged in cannabis businesses, and,
where necessary, all equipment, of any person engaged in cannabis businesses in
the City, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of Cannabis Business Tax,
if any, required to be paid by the provisions hereof, and for the purpose of
verifying any statements or any item thereof when filed by any person pursuant
to this Chapter.
   B.   It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and
payment to the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of the later of four years from the due date of the return or the
date the return is filed, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and
payment to the City, which records the Tax Administrator or his/her duly
authorized designee shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.
All records for any period being audited by the City shall be retained until
the audit is complete.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.095 OTHER LICENSES, PERMITS, TAXES, FEES OR CHARGES.
   A cannabis business subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall also be
subject to the business tax requirements defined in
Chapter 11.01 of the Culver City Municipal Code. Nothing contained in this
Chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way
affect any requirements for any permit or license required by, under or by
virtue of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution
of the City, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any
way affect any tax, fee or other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under
or by virtue of any other Chapter of this Code or any other ordinance or
resolution of the City. Any references made or contained in any other Chapter
of this code to any licenses, license taxes, fees, or charges, or to any
schedule of license fees, shall be deemed to refer to the licenses, license
taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of license fees, provided for in other
Chapters of this code.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.100 PAYMENT OF TAX DOES NOT AUTHORIZE UNLAWFUL BUSINESS.
   A.   The payment of a Cannabis Business Tax required by this Chapter, and
its acceptance by the City, shall not entitle any person to carry on any
cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements
of this Code and all other applicable state laws.
   B.   No tax paid under the provisions of this Chapter shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or
any business in violation of any local or state law.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.105 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS.
   If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as
required under the provisions of this Chapter is correct, or that the amount of
tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be
paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained
in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession
or that may come into his or her possession within three years of the date the
tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of
the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person
discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be made at
any time within three (3) years thereafter as to any liability arising from
engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued
prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency
determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned in the
same manner as notices of assessment are given under §
11.32.115.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.110 FAILURE TO REPORT; NONPAYMENT AND FRAUD.
   A.   Under any of the following circumstances, the Tax Administrator may
make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person
under this Chapter at any time:
      1.   If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the
provisions of this Chapter;
      2.   If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this
Chapter;
      3.   If the person has not, after demand by the Tax Administrator, filed
a corrected statement, or furnished to the Tax Administrator adequate
substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or
paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this Chapter; or
      4.   If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any
business tax due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five
percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to
penalties and interest otherwise stated in this Chapter and any other penalties
allowed by law.
   B.   The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any
tax known by the Tax Administrator to be due or estimated by the Tax
Administrator, after consideration of all information within the Tax
Administrator's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person
assessed, to be due under each applicable Chapter of this Title, and shall
include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the
date of the notice of assessment.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.115 TAX ASSESSMENT; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal
delivery, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage
prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the
business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the Tax
Administrator for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this Chapter;
or, should the person have no address registered with the Tax Administrator for
such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of
this Chapter, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the
United States mail.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.120 TAX ASSESSMENT; HEARING, APPLICATION AND DETERMINATION.
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after the date of service the person may apply
in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If
application for a hearing before the City is not made within the time herein
prescribed, the tax assessed by the Tax Administrator shall become final and
conclusive.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of any such application for
hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing
before him or her no later than thirty (30) days after the receipt of the
application, unless a later date is agreed to by the Tax Administrator and the
person requesting the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the Tax
Administrator to the person requesting such hearing not later than five (5)
days prior to such hearing. At such hearing said applicant may appear and offer
evidence why the assessment as made by the Tax Administrator should not be
confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing, the Tax Administrator
shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give
written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in §
11.32.120 for giving notice of assessment.
   C.   The decision of the Tax Administrator under this Section may be
appealed to the City Manager as set forth in Section
11.32.125 of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.125 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect
to the amount of tax, interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under this
Chapter may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the
City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the serving or mailing of the
determination of tax due. The City Clerk shall fix a time and place for hearing
such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to the taxpayer at
the last known place of address. The finding of the City Manager shall be final
and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed
by this Chapter for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due
shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.130 CONVICTION FOR VIOLATION; TAXES NOT WAIVED.
   The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required
tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax
debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a
criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter or of
any state law requiring the payment of all taxes.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.135 VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefore as provided in
Chapter 1.01 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.140 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   The penalties set forth in this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to
all other remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in the City's Code, or
in any other ordinance, laws, rules or regulations of the City, County, or the
State of California.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
§ 11.32.145 AMENDMENT.
   This Chapter may be amended by the City Council without a vote of the people
to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by Title XIII C of the
California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment that
would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this Chapter. The people
of the City of Culver City affirm that the following actions shall not
constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:
   A.   The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than
that set by this Chapter, if the City Council has acted to reduce the rate of
the tax;
   B.   An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or
any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or
clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification)
is not inconsistent with the language of this Chapter; or
   C.   The collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter, even if the City
had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax.
(Ord. No. 2018-010 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 11.34: COMMERCIAL TENANT EVICTION PROTECTIONS
Section
   
11.34.005   Findings
   
11.34.010   Eviction protections
   
11.34.015   Definitions
   
11.34.020   Applicability
   
11.34.025   Prohibitions
   
11.34.030   Grace period from eviction for nonpayment of back rent after
moratorium period expires
   
11.34.035   Inspection and copying of records
   
11.34.040   Retaliation and harassment prohibited
   
11.34.045   Enforcement and administrative fines
§ 11.34.005 FINDINGS.
   The City Council of the City of Culver City hereby finds, determines and
declares that:
   A.   On March 14, 2020, the City Manager, under the authority of §
3.09.020, as the Director of Emergency Services, issued a Proclamation of Local
Emergency in relation to the arrival of the COVID-19 virus in the Culver City
community, which was ratified by the City Council on March 18, 2020.
   B.   On March 16, 2020, the City Manager, under the authority of §
3.09.020, as the Director of Emergency Services, issued a Public Order enacting
city measures to protect members of the public and city workers from undue risk
of COVID-19 and on March 20, 2020 issued a First Supplement to Public Order.
Section 2 of the March 20 Order included, among other things, the following
order (“Commercial Tenant Eviction Moratorium” or “CTEM”):
      "[N]o landlord shall evict a commercial tenant in the City of Culver City
during this local emergency period if the tenant is able to show an inability
to pay rent due to circumstances related to the COVID-19 pandemic. These
circumstances include:
      A.   loss of income due to a COVID-19 related workplace closure;
      B.   child care expenditures due to school closures;
      C.   health care expenses related to being ill with COVID-19;
      D.   expenses or loss of income due to caring for a member of the
tenant's household who is ill with COVID-19; or
      E.   reasonable expenditures that stem from government-ordered emergency
measures.
      Nothing in this Section 2 shall be construed to mean that the commercial
tenant will not still be obligated to pay lawfully charged rent as provided
below. Tenants will have up to six months following the expiration of the local
emergency period to repay any back due rent. Commercial tenants may use the
protections afforded in this Section 2 as an affirmative defense in an unlawful
detainer action. The moratorium on evictions imposed by this subsection shall
remain in effect during the pendency of the local emergency period, but will
not apply in cases where eviction is necessary to address an imminent and
objectively verifiable threat to the health and safety of tenant or tenant's
employees, landlord or landlord's employees, or neighboring businesses or
residents."
   C.   The Commercial Tenant Eviction Moratorium also provided the City
Manager the authority to promulgate rules and implementation measures
(collectively, “implementation measures”) with regard to the Commercial Tenant
Eviction Moratorium, which were issued on March 27, 2020.
   D.   Since March 2020, various orders were issued by the State of California
and the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, as well as neighboring
communities, designed to protect both residential and commercial tenants from
eviction during the COVID-19 pandemic.
   E.   The Commercial Tenant Eviction Moratorium was updated on eight
occasions: March 20, April 7, April 28, May 19 (revised May 26), August 4,
September 17 and November 12, 2020; and February 25, 2021; and the related
Implementation Measures were updated on April 29, May 20, May 26, May 27,
August 4, September 17 and November 12, 2020; and February 25 and March 10,
2021.
   F.   On March 14, 2022, the City Council discussed the status of the CTEM
and provided direction to the City Manager: (1) to terminate the Moratorium
Period of the CTEM July 31, 2022 or the termination of the Local Emergency,
whichever occurs earlier; (2) to retain the 12-month grace period for the
repayment of back rent; and (3) to establish additional repayment options for
tenants to select, including a 24-month or 30-month graduated payment plan for
the repayment of back rent. The selected repayment plan would be superseded by
any repayment plan agreed upon in writing as between a landlord and tenant. The
City Council also confirmed landlords may not charge late fees or penalties on
any back rent owed.
   G.   On April 29, 2022, the City Manager issued a public order terminating
the CTEM Moratorium Period on July 31, 2022 or the termination of the Local
Emergency (as determined by resolution of the City Council), whichever occurs
earlier, consistent with the City Council's March 14th direction. The April 29
Public Order also established the foregoing grace period/repayment options for
back rent, as further detailed in the related Implementation Measures issued by
the City Manager on April 29, 2022.
   H.   Pursuant to the April 29 Public Order and April 29 Implementation
Measures, commercial tenants were required to provide their landlord with
written notice selecting either the 12-month, 24-month or 30-month grace
period/repayment options as set forth in Section 8 of the April 29
Implementation Measures. If a tenant failed to provide written communication to
the landlord selecting one of the grace period/repayment options on or before
July 31, 2022, the tenant automatically became subject to the 12-month grace
period for repayment of back rent.
   I.   On July 31, 2022, the CTEM Moratorium Period terminated, and landlords
and tenants have been subject to the requirements of the Implementation
Measures for the payment of current rent due and back rent accrued during the
Moratorium Period.
   J.   On February 27, 2023, the City Council directed the City Manager to
return to City Council with (1) a resolution terminating the COVID-19 local
emergency, effective April 1, 2023; and (2) a proposed urgency ordinance
establishing commercial tenant eviction protections during the grace period for
the repayment of rent accrued during the Moratorium Period established under
COVID-19 local emergency.
   K.   On March 27, 2023, the City Council adopted Resolution No. 2023-R018
terminating the COVID-19 local emergency, effective April 1, 2023.
   L.   With the termination of the COVID-19 local emergency, the public orders
establishing the Commercial Tenant Eviction Moratorium, including the
Implementation Measures, will no longer be enforceable.
   M.   Commercial tenants have relied on eviction protection during the grace
periods/repayment schedules they selected under the implementation measures,
provided they are in compliance with the requirements of the implementation
measures.
   N.   Despite the state, county and local emergencies terminating, many
commercial tenants are still in an economic recovery from the significant
economic impacts to their businesses since March 2020.
   O.   Based on the foregoing, the City Council finds it to be necessary for
the immediate preservation of the public's health, safety and general welfare,
to continue to protect commercial tenants from eviction during the grace
periods established under the CTEM for the repayment of rent accrued during the
Moratorium Period under the COVID-19 local emergency, provided tenants are in
compliance with the requirements set forth therein.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 1)
§ 11.34.010 EVICTION PROTECTIONS.
   Based on the findings set forth in §
11.34.005, the City Council hereby determines that eviction protections for
commercial tenants who are in compliance with the requirements of applicable
grace periods for the repayment of rent accrued during the Moratorium Period
established under the COVID-19 local emergency are warranted, and hereby
establishes the regulations set forth in this Chapter, which shall remain in
effect through and including January 31, 2025.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 2)
§ 11.34.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   AFFECTED TENANT. A commercial tenant who was unable to pay their rent during
the Moratorium Period due to circumstances related to the COVID-19 pandemic and
either (1) on or before July 31, 2022 provided written communication to their
landlord of their selection of the grace period options described in §
11.34.030; or (2) failed to provide their landlord with written communication
on or before July 31, 2022 of their selection of one of the grace period
options; thereby, automatically becoming subject to the 12-month grace period
described in §
11.34.030.
   BACK RENT. That portion of rent owed by an affected tenant that qualified
for deferral during the Moratorium Period and remained unpaid upon expiration
of the Moratorium Period.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY.
      1.   Real property, including any part, portion, or unit thereof, and any
related facilities, space, or services, except the following:
         a.   Any dwelling unit as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 1940.
         b.   Any dwelling unit in any mobilehome park, as defined in Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 18214.
         c.   Any recreational vehicle as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 799.24.
      2.   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY may include but is not limited to retail,
office, industrial, manufacturing, assembly, warehousing, hotels, motels, and
special uses such as gas stations, theaters, bowling alleys, health care
facilities, nursing facilities, child care centers, and schools.
   COMMERCIAL TENANT. Any individual, agency, association, branch, corporation,
estate, group, partnership, or other entity or organization entitled by lease
or by sufferance, to the use or occupancy of a commercial property, provided
that such person holds a valid business license issued by the City of Culver
City, unless exempt from business license requirements under the Culver City
Municipal Code. Effective June 1, 2020, COMMERCIAL TENANT shall not include a
multinational company, publicly traded company, or a company that employed 200
or more employees on March 20, 2020. Effective March 1, 2021, COMMERCIAL TENANT
shall not include a multi-national company, publicly traded company, or a
company that, together with that company's parent, subsidiary, affiliated, and
related companies, employed 200 or more employees on March 20, 2020. For the
purpose of this definition, a "multinational company" and "publicly traded
company" shall include that company's parent, subsidiary, affiliated, and
related companies.
   GRACE PERIOD. The period of time for the repayment of back rent selected by,
or automatically applied to, the affected tenant on or before July 31, 2022, as
described in §
11.34.030.
   IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES. The Tenth Amended Rules and Implementation Measures
Regarding Commercial Tenant Eviction Moratorium issued by the City Manager on
April 29, 2022.
   LANDLORD. An owner, lessor, or sublessor who receives or is entitled to
receive rent for the use and occupancy of a commercial property and the agent,
representative, or successor of any of the foregoing.
   LEASE. The written or oral agreement setting forth the terms and conditions
of the commercial tenant's use or occupancy of the commercial property.
   MORATORIUM PERIOD. March 20, 2020 through and including July 31, 2022.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION. Any notice, including notice given under Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1161, informing a commercial tenant of the termination of its
tenancy for nonpayment of rent.
   RENT. The sum of all monetary payments and all nonmonetary consideration
demanded or received by a landlord from a commercial tenant for the use or
occupancy of the commercial property, including the commercial tenant's access
to and use of services provided by the landlord related to the use or occupancy
of the commercial property. rent includes, without limitation, the fair market
value of goods accepted, labor performed, or services rendered.
   WRITTEN COMMUNICATION. Includes mail, email or text communications to the
landlord or the landlord's representative with whom the affected tenant has
previously corresponded by mail, email or text.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 3)
§ 11.34.020 APPLICABILITY.
   A.   This Chapter applies to affected tenants of every commercial property
located in the City of Culver City who accumulated back rent during the
Moratorium Period and landlords of affected tenants.
   B.   This Chapter shall apply to every Notice of Termination, eviction
notice, and unlawful detainer action for non-payment of Rent brought under Cal.
Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1161 and 1161.1, seeking to recover occupancy of a
commercial property occupied by an affected tenant, regardless of the date it
is served or filed, if the commercial property has not been permanently vacated
as of the effective date of this Chapter.
   C.   This Chapter shall not apply in cases where eviction is necessary to
address an imminent and objectively verifiable threat to the health and safety
of the affected tenant, or the affected tenant's employees, the landlord or the
landlord's employees, or neighboring businesses or residents. In such cases,
the landlord must give written notice to the affected tenant and to the Office
of Cultural and Economic Development - Economic Development Division of the
City of Culver City, describing in detail the nature of the imminent threat,
the reason eviction is necessary to address the threat, and the steps taken by
landlord to avoid eviction. The Economic Development Division may request
additional documentation and may order suspension of the eviction process if it
determines, in its reasonable discretion, that the eviction is unnecessary.
   D.   This Chapter does not in any way diminish, nullify or supersede
provisions, including but not limited to, Force Majeure provisions, in the
affected tenant's lease that entitle the affected tenant to additional
protections, rights and benefits regarding the payment of rent and such
provisions continue to be fully enforceable by the affected tenant according to
their terms.
   E.   This Chapter does not in any way preclude a landlord from seeking
payment, by other lawful means, of rent or back rent.
   F.   This Chapter does not apply to rent that became due prior to March 20,
2020 or after July 31, 2022.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 4)
§ 11.34.025 PROHIBITIONS.
   A.   No landlord shall evict an affected tenant until the applicable grace
period set forth in §
11.34.030 has expired, provided the affected tenant is in compliance with §
11.34.030C.
   B.   A landlord may not use the eviction process to seek back rent from an
affected tenant until the applicable grace period set forth in §
11.34.030 has expired, provided the affected tenant is in compliance with §
11.34.030C.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 5)
§ 11.34.030 GRACE PERIOD FROM EVICTION FOR NONPAYMENT OF BACK RENT AFTER
MORATORIUM PERIOD EXPIRES.
   A.   Nothing in this Chapter shall relieve an affected tenant of liability
for unpaid rent or back rent.
   B.   A landlord may take such actions as allowed by state and local law to
collect any back rent that remains unpaid, except that during the applicable
grace period set forth in §
11.34.030C., below, a landlord shall not seek recovery of possession of the
commercial property for the nonpayment of back rent from an affected tenant,
provided the affected tenant is in compliance with §
11.34.030C. below.
   C.   In order to qualify for the protections of the Commercial Tenant
Eviction Moratorium during the applicable grace period, an affected tenant must
have, by July 31, 2022, selected and must be in compliance with the
requirements of the applicable grace period set forth in §
11.34.030C.1. through C.3., unless a different agreement for repayment of back
rent was reached between a landlord and affected tenant, as set forth in §
11.34.030C.4.
      1.   Twelve-month grace period: Under this 12-month grace period, the
affected tenant must repay back rent in full no later than July 31, 2023.
         a.   No monthly minimum payments are required, and back rent must be
fully paid no later than July 31, 2023.
         b.   A landlord may have cause to evict an affected tenant based on
the unpaid back rent only after July 31, 2023.
         c.   After July 31, 2023, the landlord may take such actions as
allowed by state and local law to seek recovery of possession of the commercial
property for nonpayment of back rent still owed.
      2.   Twenty-four-month graduated repayment plan.
         a.   Under this 24-month grace period, the affected tenant must repay
back rent according to the following 24-month repayment schedule (month 1
commencing August 1, 2022 and month 24 ending July 31, 2024):
            (1)   Months 1 through 4: 1% of back rent each month.
            (2)   Months 5 through 6: 2% of back rent each month.
            (3)   Months 9 through 12: 3% of back rent each month.
            (4)   Months 13 through 16: 5% of back rent each month.
            (5)   Months 17 through 20: 6% of back rent each month.
            (6)   Months 21 through 24: 8% of back rent each month.
         b.   The following table provides, as an example only, the 24-month
repayment schedule in the case of back rent in the amount of $100,000:
24-Month Repayment Plan
Month Repayment Rate Amount Due
1     1%             $1,000
2     1%             $1,000
3     1%             $1,000
4     1%             $1,000
5     2%             $2,000
6     2%             $2,000
7     2%             $2,000
8     2%             $2,000
9     3%             $3,000
10    3%             $3,000
11    3%             $3,000
12    3%             $3,000
13    5%             $5,000
14    5%             $5,000
15    5%             $5,000
16    5%             $5,000
17    6%             $6,000
18    6%             $6,000
19    6%             $6,000
20    6%             $6,000
21    8%             $8,000
22    8%             $8,000
23    8%             $8,000
24    8%             $8,000
      Total Paid     $100,000
 
      3.   Thirty-month graduated repayment plan.
         a.   Under this 30-month grace period, the affected tenant must repay
back rent according to the following 30-month repayment schedule (month 1
commencing August 1, 2022 and month 30 ending January 31, 2025):
            (1)   Months 1 through 4: 2% of back rent each month.
            (2)   Months 5 through 9: 3% of back rent each month.
            (3)   Months 10 through 16: 4% of back rent each month.
            (4)   Months 17 through 20: 5% of back rent each month.
            (5)   Months 21 through 22: 4% of back rent each month.
            (6)   Months 23 through 27: 3% of back rent each month.
            (7)   Months 28 through 30: 2% of back rent each month.
         b.   The following table provides, as an example only, the 30-month
repayment schedule in the case of back rent in the amount of $100,000:
30-Month Repayment Plan
Month Repayment Rate Amount Due
1     2%             $2,000
2     2%             $2,000
3     2%             $2,000
4     2%             $2,000
5     3%             $3,000
6     3%             $3,000
7     3%             $3,000
8     3%             $3,000
9     3%             $3,000
10    4%             $4,000
11    4%             $4,000
12    4%             $4,000
13    4%             $4,000
14    4%             $4,000
15    4%             $4,000
16    4%             $4,000
17    5%             $5,000
18    5%             $5,000
19    5%             $5,000
20    5%             $5,000
21    4%             $4,000
22    4%             $4,000
23    3%             $3,000
24    3%             $3,000
25    3%             $3,000
26    3%             $3,000
27    3%             $3,000
28    2%             $2,000
29    2%             $2,000
30    2%             $2,000
      Total Paid     $100,000
 
      4.   Other written agreement for repayment of back rent: If, no later
than July 31, 2022, a landlord and affected tenant mutually agreed, in writing,
to an alternative plan for the payment of back rent ("alternate agreement"),
the alternate agreement shall supersede the requirements set forth in §
11.34.030C.1. through C.3. above. By mutual agreement of a landlord and
affected tenant, the alternate agreement also may waive portions of what an
affected tenant owes in back rent, and may grant an affected tenant additional
time to pay back rent beyond any grace periods set forth in §
11.34.030C.1. through C.3. above. An affected tenant will qualify for the
protections of the Commercial Tenant Eviction Moratorium only as long as the
affected tenant adheres to the repayment schedule set forth in the alternate
agreement.
      5.   Written communication: In order for an affected tenant to receive
protection from eviction during the applicable grace period, on or before July
31, 2022, an affected tenant must have selected, by written communication to
the landlord, one of the grace period options, set forth in §
11.34.030C.1 through C.3, above, or entered into an alternate agreement with
landlord.
      6.   Default to 12-month grace period: If an affected tenant failed to
provide written communication to the landlord selecting one of the repayment
options set forth in §
11.34.030C.1. through C.3. on or before July 31, 2022, then the affected tenant
will automatically be subject to the 12-month grace period repayment provisions
set forth in §
11.34.030C.1.
      7.   Payments due: Payments due under a grace period set forth in §
11.34.030C.2. or C.3. above must be made on or before the 1st of each month the
payment is due, unless otherwise mutually agreed in writing.
      8.   Forfeiture of eviction protections: If at any time during the
repayment plans set forth in §
11.34.030C.2. through C.4. above, an affected tenant fails to make a payment
timely, then the affected tenant will forfeit any protection from eviction
afforded during the applicable grace period.
      9.   No late fees or interest: no late fees or interest shall be charged
to the affected tenant on back rent owed.
   D.   Without limiting a landlord's rights, as described in §
11.34.020E. or §
11.34.030B. above, an affected tenant will have the applicable grace period set
forth in §
11.34.030 to pay all back rent, before being subject to eviction for nonpayment
of back rent, provided any payment requirements under the applicable grace
period are satisfied.
   E.   During the applicable grace period, the landlord may collect rent as it
accrues for each rental period but may not terminate the tenancy of an affected
tenant for nonpayment of back rent, provided any payment requirements under the
applicable grace period are satisfied. During the applicable grace period, the
landlord may terminate the tenancy of an affected tenant for nonpayment of rent
accruing during the applicable grace period.
   F.   If during the Moratorium Period the landlord exercised a legal right to
draw upon the affected tenant's deposit under Cal. Civil Code § 1950.7 for
payment of rent, then the affected tenant may elect to have payment of back
rent during the applicable grace period allocated to the deposit to restore the
amount drawn down by the landlord, in which case such amount shall be credited
to the back rent owed.
   G.   Upon an affected tenant's failure to make payment timely, pursuant to
the repayment schedules established in §
11.34.030C.2., C.3. or C.4. above, if applicable, the landlord may take such
actions as allowed by state and local law to seek recovery of possession of the
commercial property for the nonpayment of back rent.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 6)
§ 11.34.035 INSPECTION AND COPYING OF RECORDS.
   Landlords must retain for a period of at least one year after expiration of
the applicable grace period all records and documents pertaining to every
Notice of Termination that is given and every unlawful detainer proceeding that
is commenced or prosecuted during the Moratorium Period and must permit
inspection and copying of such records and documents by the Economic
Development Division or its agents. For every Notice of Termination that is
given and every unlawful detainer proceeding that is commenced or prosecuted
based on an affected tenant's failure to pay rent during the applicable grace
period for payment of back rent, the relevant records and documents must be
retained for a period of at least one year after expiration of the applicable
grace period.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 7)
§ 11.34.040 RETALIATION AND HARASSMENT PROHIBITED.
   Retaliatory action against a commercial tenant for filing a complaint with
the city, or exercising any other legal right, is prohibited under California
law.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 8)
§ 11.34.045 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   A.   Affirmative defense. Each landlord that seeks to terminate a tenancy of
an affected tenant must comply with the requirements of this Chapter. Non-
compliance with any applicable provision of this Chapter shall constitute an
affirmative defense against an unlawful detainer action under Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure §§ 1161 and 1161.1, as amended. An affected tenant's failure to
comply with applicable requirements and make timely payments, as set forth in
this Chapter, shall not constitute an affirmative defense against an unlawful
detainer action under Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1161 and 1161.1, as
amended.
   B.   Administrative citations. The city's Enforcement Services Division is
authorized to take appropriate steps to enforce this Chapter, including
conducting investigations of possible violations by a landlord. The city, in
its sole discretion, may choose to enforce the provisions of this Chapter
through the administrative citation process set forth in Chapter 1.02 of the
CCMC. Notwithstanding any provision in Chapter 1.02 to the contrary, each
violation of any provision of this interim ordinance may be subject to an
administrative fine of up to $1,000. Each separate day, or any portion thereof,
during which any violation of such interim ordinance occurs or continues,
constitutes a separate violation. the city's decision to pursue or not pursue
enforcement of any kind shall not affect a tenant's rights to pursue civil
remedies or assert an affirmative defense against an unlawful detainer action
under Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1161 and 1161.1, as amended.
(Ord. No. 2023-003 § 9)
TITLE 13: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
13.01.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
13.02.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
13.03.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 13.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions  
   
13.01.005      Filing false or misleading statements or reports
   
13.01.010      Petitions
   
13.01.015      Mutilation of flag prohibited
   
13.01.020      Flag regulations; use and display
   
13.01.025      Automatic calling devices
   
13.01.030      Sale of aerosol spray paint containers and marker pens
Gambling
   
13.01.100   Gambling operations prohibited
   
13.01.105   Possession of bookmaking paraphernalia prohibited
   
13.01.110   Certain coin-operated games prohibited
   
13.01.115   Destruction of games upon violation
   
13.01.120   Confiscation of money
   
13.01.125   Draw poker games prohibited
   
13.01.130   Games of chance prohibited
   
13.01.135   Other prohibited games
Cross-reference:
   Games, amusements, and entertainments, see
Ch. 11.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13.01.005 FILING FALSE OR MISLEADING STATEMENTS OR REPORTS.
   A.   Statements. It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make or
file, on his own behalf or for any other person, firm or corporation, a false
or misleading oral or written statement, under any form of oath, to the City
Council or any City officer. The prohibition contained in this Section shall
apply to all applications, matters or issues in which the City has an interest
in the protection of the public welfare.
('65 Code, § 23-7)
   B.   Reports. It shall be unlawful for any person, on his behalf or for any
other person, firm or corporation, to wilfully make or file a false or
misleading oral or written report to the Police or Fire Divisions of the City
of Culver City for the purpose of causing said Divisions to make an
investigation of the subject matter of such report or for the purpose of
misleading an employee officially acting in said Divisions.
('65 Code, § 23-8)
(Ord. No. CS-473 §§ 1, 2)
§ 13.01.010 PETITIONS.
   A.   Regulating circulation of. It shall be unlawful for any person who
circulates, as principal or agent, or who has in charge and/or control of the
circulation of any petition provided for by law, to misrepresent or make any
false statement of a material fact or matter relating to or concerning the
contents, purposes, purport or effect of any such petition or of and concerning
any person or persons, directly or indirectly connected with the subject matter
of said petition, to any person for the purpose of securing signatures, whether
the signature of such solicited person be thereby secured or not. Petitions
intended or required to be presented to the City Council shall be subject to
the regulations of this Subsection.
('65 Code, § 23-31)
   B.   Misrepresentation prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, as
principal or agent, to wilfully and/or knowingly circulate, publish, or exhibit
any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact or matter relating
to or concerning the contents, purport, purposes or effect of any petition, or
of and concerning any person directly or indirectly connected with the subject
matter of said petition, for the purpose of thereby obtaining signatures or for
the purpose of thereby attempting to persuade any person to sign, or not to
sign, any such petition.
('65 Code, § 23-32) (Ord. No. 379)
§ 13.01.015 MUTILATION OF FLAG PROHIBITED.
   A.   No person, within the City of Culver City, shall in any nature or
manner, publicly or privately deface, alter, cut up for sale or resale, or
mutilate, for exhibition, advertisement or display, or attempt to deface,
alter, cut up for sale or resale, or mutilate for exhibition, advertisement or
display any flag, standard, colors, ensign, or any part thereof, of the United
States of America; and no person shall expose or cause to be exposed to public
view any such flag, standard, colors, ensign, or any part thereof, so defaced,
altered, cut up or mutilated for exhibition, advertisement or display.
   B.   No person shall sell, exchange, give away, offer or expose for sale or
resale any flag, standard, colors, ensign, or any part thereof, for purposes of
being defaced, altered, cut up or mutilated.
('65 Code, § 24-41) (Ord. No. CS-627 § 1 (part))
§ 13.01.020 FLAG REGULATIONS; USE AND DISPLAY.
   A.   Definition. For the purpose of this Section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   FLAG. Every flag of the United States and every picture or representation
thereof, of any size, made of any substance, or represented on any substance
evidently purporting to be any such flag of the United States and every picture
or representation which shows the design thereof.
   Exceptions. No provision of this Section which makes unlawful the use or
manner of display of the flag of the United States of America or of any picture
or representation thereof shall apply to any rule or custom permitted by Public
Laws 623 and 829 — 77th Congress, being 36 USC 173 et seq. or permitted by
proclamation of the President of the United States, or to any act permitted by
other statutes of the United States or of this State, or by any regulations of
the Armed Forces of the United States, nor shall it be construed to apply to
any newspaper, periodical, book, pamphlet, circular, certificate, diploma,
warrant, or commission of appointment to office, ornamental picture, article of
jewelry, or stationery for use in correspondence, on which is permitted, or
placed a flag with no design or writing thereon and not connected with any
advertisement.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully use or display the
flag of the United States of America in any manner contrary to this Section.
      1.   The flag shall not be dipped to any person or thing.
      2.   The flag shall never be displayed with the union down save as a
signal of dire distress.
      3.   The flag shall never touch anything beneath it, such as the ground,
the floor, water, or merchandise.
      4.   The flag shall never be used as drapery of any sort whatsoever,
never festooned, drawn back, nor up, in folds, but always allowed to fall free.
      5.   The flag shall never be carried flat or horizontally, but always
aloft and free.
      6.   The flag shall never be fastened, displayed, used, or stored in such
a manner as will permit it to be easily torn, soiled, or damaged in any way.
      7.   The flag shall never be draped over the hood, top, sides, seats, or
back of a vehicle or of a railroad train or of a boat. When a flag is displayed
on a motor vehicle, the staff shall be fixed firmly to the chassis or clamped
to the radiator cap.
      8.   The flag shall never be used as a covering for a ceiling.
      9.   The flag shall never have placed upon it, nor any part of it, nor
attached to it any mark, insignia, letter, word, figure, design, picture, or
drawing of any nature.
      10.   The flag shall never be used as a receptacle for receiving,
holding, carrying, or delivering anything.
      11.   The flag shall never be used for advertising purposes in any manner
whatsoever. It shall not be embroidered on such articles as cushions or
handkerchiefs and the like, printed or otherwise impressed on paper napkins or
boxes or anything that is designed for temporary use and discard; or used as
any portion of a costume or athletic uniform. Advertising signs shall not be
fastened to a staff or halyard from which the flag is flown.
      12.   The flag, when it is in such condition that it is no longer a
fitting emblem of display, shall be destroyed in a dignified way, preferably by
burning.
('65 Code, § 23-42) (Ord. No. CS-627 § 1 (part))
§ 13.01.025 AUTOMATIC CALLING DEVICES.
   A.   No person except a public utility engaged in the business of providing
communications services and facilities shall use or operate, attempt to use or
operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program or
otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will
upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic
means, initiate an intrastate call and deliver a recorded message to any
telephone number assigned to any subscriber by a public telephone company,
without the prior written consent of such subscriber.
   B.   The term “telephone number” includes any additional numbers assigned by
a public utility company engaged in the business of providing communications
services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to
connect with the subscriber to such primary number when the primary telephone
number is in use.
('65 Code, § 23-48) (Ord. No. CS-675 § 1)
§ 13.01.030 SALE OF AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CONTAINERS AND MARKER PENS.
   A.   Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail
commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint containers, or marker pens
with tips exceeding four (4) millimeters in width, containing anything other
than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries, shall store or
cause such aerosol spray paint containers or marker pens to be stored in an
area viewable by, but not accessible to the public without employee assistance,
pending legal sale or disposition of such paint containers or marker pens.
   B.   Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the County Jail
for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
('65 Code, § 23-58) (Ord. No. 93-009 § 1)
GAMBLING
§ 13.01.100 GAMBLING OPERATIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to operate, maintain, or keep or tolerate or permit the
operation, maintenance or keeping of any and all games of chance, betting and
bookmaking device or facility, card games, lottery or gambling device, slot
machines, punch boards or gambling machines, or any other machine facilities or
devices prohibited by Federal or State Law or City Ordinances.
('65 Code, § 23-13) (Ord. No. CS-24 § 2 (k))
§ 13.01.105 POSSESSION OF BOOKMAKING PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to have in his or
its possession in the City, a book or books, paper or papers, apparatus, device
or paraphernalia for the purpose of recording, registering, forwarding or
paying, or any betting marker or other memorandum, writing or record of, any
bet or bets, or any purported bet or bets, or wagers, or any purported wager or
wagers, upon the result, or purported result of any trial, or purported trial,
or contest, or purported contest, of skill, speed, or power of endurance of man
or beast, or between men, beasts or mechanical apparatus, or upon the result,
or purported result, of any lot, chance, casualty, or contingent event
whatsoever.
('65 Code, § 23-14) (Ord. No. CS-120)
§ 13.01.110 CERTAIN COIN-OPERATED GAMES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain,
possess, or have under control in any place of public resort, either as owner,
lessee, agent, employee, mortgagee, or otherwise, any table game or device
commonly known as a “pin game” or “marble game,” or any claw, scoop or grab
machine, or any “horse racing” machine or game, or any device similar thereto,
the operation, use or play of which is controlled by placing therein any coin,
plate, disk, plug, key or other device, or by the payment of any fee.
('65 Code, § 23-15) (Ord. No. 521 § 1)
§ 13.01.115 DESTRUCTION OF GAMES UPON VIOLATION.
   Any equipment, machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game, instrument or
article operated, used, kept, possessed or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this Subchapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
abated upon the conviction or plea of guilty to any violation of the provisions
of this Subchapter by any person, firm or corporation and shall be destroyed
under the direction of the Chief of Police of the City.
('65 Code, § 23-16) (Ord. No. 521 § 2)
§ 13.01.120 CONFISCATION OF MONEY.
   If any prohibited device contains money and is subject to destruction as
provided in §
13.01.115, it shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City as part of
such fund.
('65 Code, § 23-17) (Ord. No. 521 § 3)
§ 13.01.125 DRAW POKER GAMES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee,
or otherwise, to keep, conduct or maintain any house, room, premises or place
used, or held in part, as a gambling house, where that certain game played with
cards commonly known as “Draw Poker” is played and carried on for money or any
representative of value.
('65 Code, § 23-18) (Ord. No. 523 § 1)
§ 13.01.130 GAMES OF CHANCE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to play, bet at, on or against, or
conduct or permit to be conducted on any premises, any game not mentioned in
Cal. Penal Code §§ 330 or 330a which is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on
with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues, or other devices, for
money, check, chip, credit, or any other representative of value, or for any
other thing of value.
('65 Code, § 23-19) (Ord. No. CS-559)
§ 13.01.135 OTHER PROHIBITED GAMES.
   It shall be unlawful in the City for any person, firm, corporation, or
association, either as owner, lessee, manager, employee, agent or servant, to
conduct, manage, carry on, maintain, operate, open, deal or deal in, or to
cause or permit to be conducted, managed, carried on, maintained, operated,
opened, dealt or dealt in, any game, operation or transaction wherein any
prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award payment or gratuity,
consisting of any money, check, token, credit, goods, wares, merchandise,
property or thing of value is or is to be given, awarded or delivered, either
directly or indirectly, and wherein chance is a determining factor or is any
determining factor of the result of such game, operation or transaction, which
game, operation or transaction is conducted, carried on, maintained, operated
or played by the throwing, tossing, dropping, depositing or placing of any
ball, marker, object, thing or substance into any perforation, hole or
indentation in or upon any surface, receptacle, container, object or thing
having marked, designated or identified thereon by or with any figure, number,
character, symbol, letter, design or mark by means of any device, apparatus or
equipment, or by any means or in any manner, or by the drawing, selecting,
choosing or removing from any receptacle or container of any ball, disk,
object, substance or material marked, designated or identified by or with any
figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark, any such figure,
number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark herein above referred to,
corresponding to, duplicating, referring to or relating to, in whole or part,
directly or indirectly, any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design
or mark upon any card, paper, board, fabric, surface, object, substance or
thing, held, used, operated or maintained by any player or participant therein
or by any person where, by any predetermined or prearranged, or by any rule,
method, scheme, design or procedure any person is found, declared or determined
to be, or is, or is to be, the winner, donee, recipient, or taker of such
prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award payment or gratuity, in the
event that such player or participant pays, deposits, expends, gives or
pledges, either directly or indirectly, or agrees, promises or intends to pay,
deposit, expend, give or pledge, either directly or indirectly, any money,
check, credit, property or thing of value, or makes or agrees to make any
purchase for the privilege of playing or participating therein or of gaining
admission to the place or premises where such game, operation or transaction is
or is to be played, conducted, carried on, maintained or operated, or to any
other place or premises; provided, however, that no provisions of this
Subchapter shall be deemed or construed as prohibiting any act made unlawful by
the provisions of Cal. Penal Code §§ 330 or 330a, or 320, or of any other code
section or general law of the State of California, it being the intent of the
City Council to prohibit by this Subchapter all games, operations or
transactions herein described, not prohibited by the provisions of any general
law of this State, including all games, operations or transactions for profit
commonly known as keno, tango, movie tango, bingo, beano, skill ball, fortune,
Quinta, fascination or inspiration and all games, operations or transactions
similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated.
('65 Code, § 23-20) (Ord. No. 523 § 8)
CHAPTER 13.02: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
13.02.005   Maintenance standards of property; aesthetics
   
13.02.010   Defrauding amusement proprietor
   
13.02.015   Removal of shopping carts prohibited
   
13.02.020   Auto repair in residential zones
Trespass on Property
   
13.02.100   Private property open to the public
   
13.02.105   Private property
   
13.02.110   Dwelling houses, apartments, condominiums and the like
   
13.02.115   Public property
   
13.02.120   Form of notification
Signs
   
13.02.200   Signs prohibited in certain places
   
13.02.205   Signs on lots
   
13.02.210   Violations
   
13.02.215   Signs required warning of dangers of alcohol consumption during
pregnancy
Cross-reference:
   Graffiti, see §§
9.04.200 through
9.04.270
   Zoning regulations for signs, see
Chapter 17.330
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13.02.005 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS OF PROPERTY; AESTHETICS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having
charge of any premises to keep and maintain such premises in a manner at
variance with the landscaping and maintenance standards of surrounding
property, thereby causing substantial diminution in the enjoyment, use, or
property values of the property in the neighborhood in which such premises are
located.
('65 Code, § 23-1) (Ord. No. CS-432)
§ 13.02.010 DEFRAUDING AMUSEMENT PROPRIETOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any place of amusement where
admission is required without paying the required amount thereof, unless such
person is a guest of the owner or manager thereof or a lawfully acting law
enforcement officer.
('65 Code, § 23-2) (Ord. No. CS-38)
§ 13.02.015 REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS PROHIBITED.
   A.   Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply:
      LAUNDRY CART. A basket mounted on wheels and used by a customer or an
attendant in a coin-operated laundry or dry cleaning retail establishment to
transport fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them.
      PARKING AREA. A parking lot or other property provided by a retailer for
use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle.
      SHOPPING CART. A basket mounted on wheels or a similar device generally
used by a customer in a retail establishment to transport goods of any kind.
   B.   Application. The provisions of this Section shall apply when a shopping
cart or a laundry cart has a sign permanently affixed to it that: identifies
the owner of the cart or the retailer, or both; notifies the public of the
procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises;
notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises
or parking area of the retail establishment, or the unauthorized possession of
the cart, is a violation of state law; and lists a valid telephone number or
address for returning the cart removed from the premises or parking area to the
owner or retailer.
   C.   Prohibitions. If a shopping cart or laundry cart has a permanently
affixed sign, as provided in §
13.02.015B., it is unlawful to do any of the following acts:
      1.   To remove a shopping cart or laundry cart from the premises or
parking area of a retail establishment, with the intent to temporarily or
permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart;
      2.   To be in possession of any shopping cart or laundry cart that has
been removed from the premises or the parking area of a retail establishment,
with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of
possession of the cart;
      3.   To be in possession of any shopping cart or laundry cart with serial
numbers removed, obliterated or altered, with the intent to temporarily or
permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart;
      4.   To leave or abandon a shopping cart or laundry cart at a location
other than the premises or parking area of the retail establishment, with the
intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of
possession of the cart;
      5.   To alter, convert or tamper with a shopping cart or laundry cart, or
to remove any part or portion thereof, or to remove, obliterate or alter serial
numbers on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the
owner or retailer of possession of the cart;
      6.   To be in possession of any shopping cart or laundry cart while that
cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of a retail establishment,
with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of
possession of the cart.
   D.   Consent. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the owner of
a shopping cart or laundry cart, or to a retailer, or their agents or
employees, or to a customer of a retail establishment who has written consent
from the owner of a shopping cart or laundry cart or a retailer to be in
possession of the shopping cart or laundry cart, or to remove the shopping cart
or laundry cart from the premises or the parking area of the retail
establishment, or to do any of the acts specified in §
13.02.015C.
   E.   Cart ownership. In any criminal proceeding, it may be inferred that any
shopping cart or laundry cart, which has a sign affixed to it pursuant to §
13.02.015B., is the property of the person or business named in the sign, and
has not been abandoned by the person or business named in the sign.
   F.   Violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
Section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   G.   Application of other laws. The provisions of this Section are not
intended to preclude the application of any other laws relating to prosecution
for theft.
(Ord. No. 2005-014, § 1)
§ 13.02.020 AUTO REPAIR IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or do any work, or cause
or permit the same to be done, on any automobile or other vehicle, as defined
in Cal. Ve. Code § 670, at any time anywhere within the residential zones of
the City of Culver City, to wit: Zones R-1, Ra, R-2, R-3 and R-4, except as
follows:
      1.   Reasonable washing, cleaning and polishing of a vehicle is permitted
on the property of the owner or tenant in whose name the vehicle is registered.
      2.   Minor repairs may be performed on a vehicle if conducted either
within an enclosed garage or on the driveway area of the property of the owner
or tenant in whose name the vehicle undergoing minor repair is registered, and
provided:
         a.   No such minor repair work shall involve repetitive testings of an
operating engine.
         b.   No more than one (1) vehicle may be repaired at or during the
same period of time.
         c.   No such minor repair work shall be performed on any vehicle other
than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during the period when
Daylight Saving Time is observed.
         d.   No such minor repair work shall be performed on any vehicle
unless the vehicle is registered in the name of the owner or tenant of the
property where such work is taking place.
         e.   No such minor repair work shall be performed on any vehicle where
such work results in any loud, unusual or penetrating noise which is
disturbing, obnoxious, discomforting or annoying to a reasonable person of
normal sensitiveness residing in the area.
   B.   Nothing above shall be construed as permitting any person to repair or
do any other work on a vehicle within any nonresidential zone within the City
of Culver City except as provided by and subject to the provisions of the
Municipal Code of the City of Culver City and applicable laws of the State of
California.
   C.   Nothing herein is intended to modify or amend in any manner the
provisions of §
7.03.225 of the Municipal Code of the City of Culver City.
('65 Code, § 23-47) (Ord. No. CS-649 §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 84-001 § 1)
TRESPASS ON PROPERTY
§ 13.02.100 PRIVATE PROPERTY OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
   No person shall enter or remain upon any private property open to the public
after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof
to keep off or remove therefrom, except, that this Section shall not apply in
any of the following instances:
   A.   Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited
by the Unruh Civil Rights Act, Cal. Civil Code § 51;
   B.   Where its application would result in an interference with or
inhibition of lawful labor activity;
   C.   Where a public officer or employee acts within the course and scope of
his employment in performance of a duty imposed by law;
   D.   Where its application would result in an interference with or
inhibition of lawful speech and petitioning.
('65 Code, § 23-3) (Ord. No. CS-275 Art. II § 1; Ord. No. CS-895 § 1; Ord. No.
CS-991 § 1)
§ 13.02.105 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   A.   No person shall enter or be present upon any private property or
portion of private property not open to the general public without the consent
of the owner, the owner's agent, or the person in lawful possession, where
signs forbidding entry are displayed as provided in Subsection F.
   B.   No person shall enter upon any private property or portion of private
property, not open to the general public, who within the immediately preceding
six (6) months was advised as follows: to leave and not return, and that if he
or she returns to the property within six (6) months of the advisement he or
she will be subject to arrest. This advisement must be made by the owner, the
owner's agent, the person in lawful possession or a peace officer at the
request of the owner, owner's agent or person in lawful possession. The
advisement shall be documented in writing by the individual making it and shall
include the name of the person advised, the date, approximate time, address and
type of property involved. Such documentation shall be retained for a minimum
period of one (1) year. This Subsection is not violated if a person so advised
enters the property within the designated six (6) month period, if he or she
has been expressly authorized to do so by the owner, the owner's agent or a
person in lawful possession.
   C.   Entry requiring express consent of owner.
      1.   No person shall enter or be present upon private property not open
to the general public without the express consent of the owner or the owner's
agent when that person:
         a.   Has been convicted of any violation of the law involving
narcotics, prostitution, vandalism, weapons, disturbance of the peace,
loitering, threat to commit a violent act, or a violent act, on that same
private property not open to the general public, whether or not such property
is posted in accordance with Subsection F.; and
         b.   Has, subsequent to the conviction been told to leave and not
return to that same property, by the owner, the owner's agent or a peace
officer at the request of the owner or the owner's agent.
      2.   The request to leave must be made within six (6) months of the date
of the conviction and shall be documented in writing by the individual making
the request. The documentation of the request shall include the name of the
person being requested to leave, the date, the approximate time, the address
and the type of property involved.
      3.   This Subsection applies even if the person has the consent of a
person in lawful possession but does not apply to persons who have a right of
lawful possession to the subject property. An individual who has the consent of
the person in lawful possession may not be refused entry by the owner or the
owner's agent for a period exceeding twelve (12) months, computed from the date
of the request.
   D.   No person shall enter or be present upon any private property or
portion of private property open to the general public who within the
immediately preceding twenty-four (24) hours was advised to leave and not
return, and that if he or she returns to the property within twenty-four (24)
hours of the advisement, he or she will be subject to arrest. This advisement
must be made by the owner, the owner's agent, the person in lawful possession
or a peace officer at the request of the owner, owner's agent or the person in
lawful possession. A request to leave may be made only if it is rationally
related to the services performed or the facilities provided.
   E.   The term PRIVATE PROPERTY shall mean any real property, including but
not limited to, buildings, structures, yards, open spaces, walkways,
courtyards, driveways, carports, parking areas and vacant lots, except land
which is used exclusively for agricultural purposes, owned by any person or
legal entity other than the property owner or lawfully possessed by any
governmental entity or agency.
   F.   For purposes of Subsection A., one sign must be printed or posted in a
conspicuous manner at every walkway and driveway entering any enclosed property
or portion thereof and at a minimum of every fifty (50) feet along the boundary
of any unenclosed lot. This requirement is met if at least one sign is
conspicuously printed or posted on the outside of every structure on such
property, so as to be readable from each walkway and driveway entering such
property. The sign shall state as follows:
THIS PROPERTY CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC
No Entry Without Permission
C.C.M.C. §
13.02.105
      The language “THIS PROPERTY CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC No Entry Without
Permission” on said sign shall be at least two (2) inches high.
   G.   When a peace officer's assistance in dealing with a trespass is
requested, the owner, owner's agent, or the person in lawful possession shall
make a separate request to the peace officer on each occasion. However, a
single request for a peace officer's assistance may be made to cover a limited
period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months when such request is made in
writing and provides the specific dates of the authorization period.
   H.   This section shall not apply in any of the following instances: (1)
When its application results in, or is coupled with, any act prohibited by the
Unruh Civil Rights Act, being Cal. Civil Code §§ 51 et seq., or any other
provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person; (2)
when its application results in, or is coupled with, an act prohibited by Cal.
Penal Code § 365, or any other provision of law relating to the duties of
innkeepers; (3) when public officers or employees are acting within the course
and scope of their employment or in the performance of their official duties;
or (4) when persons are engaging in activities protected by the United States
Constitution or the California Constitution or when persons are engaging in
acts which are expressly required or permitted by any provision of law.
   I.   Violation of any of the provisions of this Section shall be a
misdemeanor or an infraction.
   J.   If any part or provision of this Section, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the Section,
including the application of that part or provision to other persons or
circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force
and effect. To this end, the provisions of this Section are severable.
('65 Code, § 23-3.01) (Ord. No. 93-012 § 1)
§ 13.02.110 DWELLING HOUSES, APARTMENTS, CONDOMINIUMS AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall enter or remain upon any private land that is part of a
dwelling house, apartment, condominium or other such place after being notified
by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to keep off or remove
therefrom, except, that this section shall not apply where a public officer or
employee acts within the course and scope of his employment in performance of a
duty imposed by law.
('65 Code, § 23-4) (Ord. No. CS-991 § 1)
§ 13.02.115 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall enter, go upon or remain on publicly owned property that is
closed to the public after having been notified by a sign conspicuously posted
or verbally by a duly authorized representative of the public agency who owns
the property that entry is prohibited, except, that this section shall not
apply to public employees or officers acting within the course and scope of
their employment.
('65 Code, § 23-4.01) (Ord. No. CS-991 § 1)
§ 13.02.120 FORM OF NOTIFICATION.
   Notification as required by §§
13.02.100,
13.02.110, and
13.02.115 by the owner or lessee or other person in charge of the property or
premises may be satisfied by direct verbal communication by any such person or
by his duly authorized agent, including a peace officer or private patrolman,
or by a sign conspicuously posted on the property or premises giving notice of
the prohibited conduct.
('65 Code, § 23-4.02) (Ord. No. CS-991 § 1)
SIGNS
§ 13.02.200 SIGNS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   A.   Signs in the public right-of-way. No person shall construct, affix,
place or post any display or medium of communication, including without
limitation any notice, sign, poster, bill or advertising, on or over any public
right-of-way or upon any fixed object in any public right-of-way, except as
provided in
Chapter 17.330 (Signs) and the following:
      1.   Publication vending machines (news racks) as defined and regulated
by this Code.
      2.   Any display or medium of communication authorized by the laws of the
State, the United States or by duly enacted legislation of this City.
      3.   City-owned signs for regulating traffic or parking.
      4.   City-owned signs identifying or providing directions to public
facilities or public property.
      5.   Temporary emergency signs owned or placed by the City or other
public agency.
   B.   Any unauthorized medium of communication or display on or above any
public right-of-way or upon any fixed object in any public right-of-way is a
public nuisance and the City employees are authorized to abate any such
nuisance.
('65 Code, § 23-50) (Ord. No. CS- 948; Ord. No. 2003-006 § 2; Ord. 2025-010,
Exhibit A (part))
§ 13.02.205 SIGNS ON LOTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of
this Code, no person shall construct, affix, place, post, paint or display any
sign on a lot or cause or permit the same to be done.
('65 Code, § 23-51) (Ord. No. 89-001 § 1; Ord. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 13.02.210 VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of §§
13.02.200 and
13.02.205 shall constitute an infraction punishable pursuant to the provisions
of §
1.01.045 of this Code.
(Ord. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 13.02.215 SIGNS REQUIRED WARNING OF DANGERS OF ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION DURING
PREGNANCY.
   A.   Findings and purpose. Recent research indicates alcohol consumption
during pregnancy may cause irreversible adverse effects on the development of a
fetus, resulting in birth defects, including mental retardation, facial
abnormalities, and other defects involving heart and bone structure. These
adverse effects are known individually as Fetal Alcohol Effects and
collectively as Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. The public should be informed that
consumption of alcohol during pregnancy may be harmful to a fetus and result in
birth defects.
   B.   Duty to post. On and after March 1, 1988, every owner, operator,
manager, or person having control of premises offering for sale or dispensing
for consideration to the public, alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine,
shall clearly and conspicuously post or cause to be posted on the premises a
sign meeting the requirements of Subsection C. of this Section.
   C.   Sign. Each sign required to be displayed pursuant to this Section shall
contain a warning in letters not less than one-inch-tall reading substantially
as follows:
   "PREGNANCY AND ALCOHOL DO NOT MIX. DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, INCLUDING
BEER AND WINE, DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS."
   D.   Placement. A sign required by this Section shall be placed as follows:
      1.   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily intended for consumption on the premises,
at least one sign shall be so placed as to assure it is readable from all
locations at which said sale or dispensing occur.
      2.   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily provided through over-the-counter service,
at least one (1) sign shall be placed to assure it is readable from all counter
locations available to the public.
      3.   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily provided for consumption on the premises
by the public at tables served by food or beverage service persons, at least
one (1) sign shall be placed to assure it is readable by the public entering
the premises; provided, however, that notices may be placed or displayed at
each of the tables in a manner which will assure that the notices are as
readily visible and readable as materials provided to the public which list
food and beverage prices.
   E.   Violations. Any person who violates this Section shall be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a fine not exceeding Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for a
first violation; a fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a
second violation within one (1) year; and a fine not exceeding Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00) for a third violation within one (1) year; except when a
person has been convicted of three (3) or more violations within the twelve
(12) months immediately preceding the violation, it shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor pursuant to §
1.01.040 of this Code. For purposes of this Subsection, each prior violation
which is either admitted by the defendant, alleged in an accusatory pleading,
or where defendant forfeited bail, shall be deemed a conviction of the offense
charged.
(Ord. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
CHAPTER 13.03: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
13.03.005      Games on public streets prohibited
   
13.03.010      Disorderly conduct on public bus
   
13.03.015      Use of certain organic solvent substances prohibited; exception
   
13.03.020      Musical entertainment and dancing - after hours
   
13.03.025      Consumption of alcoholic beverages on streets and public parks
Minors
   
13.03.100      Curfew restrictions for minors
   
13.03.101      Daytime restrictions for minors
   
13.03.102      Penalty
   
13.03.103      Parent's responsibility
   
13.03.110      Amusement proprietor's responsibility
   
13.03.115      Theater curfew
   
13.03.120      Misrepresentation of age
   
13.03.125      Minors attendance in pool rooms prohibited
   
13.03.130      Pool or billiard room proprietor's responsibility
   
13.03.135      Acquisition of school books from minor prohibited
   
13.03.140      Teenage entertainment; permit required
   
13.03.145      Entertainment regulations
   
13.03.150      Minor female dance instructors prohibited
Firearms - Safe Storage, Shooting Requirements and Suicide Prevention
   
13.03.200      Definitions
   
13.03.205      Prohibition
   
13.03.210      Exceptions
   
13.03.215      Lost or stolen firearms
   
13.03.220      Shooting requirements
   
13.03.225      Suicide prevention signage in firearm retailers
Prohibition Against Abusive Solicitation
   
13.03.300      Purpose
   
13.03.305      Definitions
   
13.03.310      Locations where solicitation is prohibited
   
13.03.315      Penalties
Loitering by Criminal Street Gangs
   
13.03.400      Prohibited acts
   
13.03.405      Powers of law enforcement officers not limited
   
13.03.410      Parental control
   
13.03.415      Violations
Cross-reference:
   Charitable solicitations, see
Ch. 11.05
   Games, amusements and entertainments, see
Ch. 11.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13.03.005 GAMES ON PUBLIC STREETS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to play ball or any game of
sport with a ball or football, or throw, cast, shoot or discharge any stone,
pellet, bullet, arrow, or any other missile, in, over, across, along or upon
any street, sidewalk, lane or alley within the city.
('65 Code, § 23-5) (Ord. No. CS-275, Art. II § 3)
§ 13.03.010 DISORDERLY CONDUCT ON PUBLIC BUS.
   While a passenger on a public bus, it shall be unlawful for any person to
carry on unnecessary conversation with the operator of the bus, annoy other
passengers by loud or boisterous conversation or other disorderly conduct,
expectorate, smoke, or drink intoxicating liquor, or refuse to leave the bus
when ordered to do so for non-payment of fare or any other violation.
('65 Code, § 23-6) (Ord. No. CS-275 Art. IV)
§ 13.03.015 USE OF CERTAIN ORGANIC SOLVENT SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   A.   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale, breathe,
ingest, or in any manner use any product or substance or combination thereof
containing organic solvents, which include assemble acetate, xylene, tri-calor
ethylene, acetone or other closely related or similar compounds used as
solvents for products referred to as “glue,” “adhesive cement,” “mucilage,” or
“dope,” with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed,
irrational or in any manner changing, distorting, disturbing the eyesight,
thinking process, balanced or coordination or affecting the central nervous
system of such person.
('65 Code, § 23-29)
   B.   Exception. The provisions of Subsection A. herein shall not pertain to
any person who inhales, breathes or drinks or uses such product or substance
pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon,
dentist, or pediatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
('65 Code, § 23-30) (Ord. No. CS-459)
§ 13.03.020 MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT AND DANCING - AFTER HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, required to be
licensed or otherwise regulated under the provisions of
Chapter 11.01 of this Code, to conduct or in any manner participate in dancing
or musical type entertainment of any kind between the hours of 2:00 a.m. of one
day and 6:00 a.m. of the same day, except by a special permit for one day only,
issued by the City.
('65 Code, § 23-40) (Ord. No. CS-548; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2 (part))
§ 13.03.025 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PARKS.
   A.   No person shall consume any beer, wine or alcoholic beverage while on
any street, sidewalk, alley, highway, public playground or public park.
Possession of any bottle, can or other receptacle, containing any beer, wine or
alcoholic beverage which has been opened or a seal broken, or the contents of
which have been partially removed, while on any street, sidewalk, alley,
highway, public playground or public park creates a rebuttal presumption that
the person possessing the same is consuming its contents. For purposes of this
Section, the interior of the Veterans' Memorial Building or the Ivy Substation
shall not be considered to be within a public playground or park, and the
consumption of alcohol within a duly licensed outdoor dining area shall not be
considered to be on a sidewalk. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
Subsection, the City Council shall have the authority to grant by resolution an
alcohol use permit for the service and consumption of beer and/or wine (as
“beer” and “wine” are defined in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 23006 and 23007, as
amended) in a controlled space at a City-produced or City-sponsored event,
located in Veterans’ Memorial Park, or on any street, sidewalk, alley, or
highway that has been closed for a City produced or City-sponsored event, upon
finding that the issuance of a permit will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or general welfare.
   B.   This Section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts
which are prohibited by any law of the State.
   C.   Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this
Section shall be guilty of an infraction which shall be punishable pursuant to
§ 1.01.045 of this Code; except when a person has been convicted of three (3)
or more violations of this Section within the twelve (12) months immediately
preceding the violation, and then it shall be punishable as a misdemeanor
pursuant to
§ 1.01.040 of this Code. For the purposes of this division, each prior
violation which is either admitted by the defendant or alleged in an accusatory
pleading, or where defendant forfeited bail, shall be deemed a conviction. For
this purpose, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the
offense charged.
('65 Code, § 23-43) (Ord. No. CS-635 § 1; Ord. No. 87-019 § 1; Ord. No. 94-032
§ 2; Ord. No. 2005-004 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-008 § 1)
MINORS
§ 13.03.100 CURFEW RESTRICTIONS FOR MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, to
loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or aimlessly drive or ride about in or upon any
public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or
other public grounds, public place or public building, place of amusement or
eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
on any day and sunrise of the immediately following day; provided that, the
provisions of this Section shall not apply when:
   A.   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal
guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor,
or by his or her spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older;
   B.   The minor is upon an errand directed by his or her parent or parents or
legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the
minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older;
   C.   The minor is returning directly home from a public meeting, or a place
of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school
activity; or
   D.   The presence of such minor in the place or places is connected with or
required with respect to a business, trade, profession or occupation in which
the minor is lawfully engaged.
('65 Code, § 20-1) (Ord. No. 89-002 § 1)
§ 13.03.101 DAYTIME RESTRICTIONS FOR MINORS.
   A.   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years, who is subject
to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to be "absent
from school and found in a public place," as defined in Subsection B. below,
except as provided in Subsection C. below.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, a minor is "absent from school and found
in a public place" if the minor is found idling, wandering, strolling, playing,
or aimlessly driving or riding about in or upon any public street, avenue,
highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground,
public place or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot
or unsupervised place, or any place open to the public during the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 1:30 p.m. of the same day on days when the minor's school is in
session.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply when:
      1.   The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse for absence
from school signed by his or her parent, legal guardian, or other adult person
having legal care or custody;
      2.   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or
other adult person having legal care or custody;
      3.   The minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent,
legal guardian, or other adult person having legal care or custody;
      4.   The minor is going to or returning directly from a medical
appointment;
      5.   The minor has permission to leave campus and has in his or her
possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit;
      6.   The minor is going to or returning directly from a public meeting,
or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance
of school activity; provided, that meeting, event or activity is a school-
approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by personnel of the
minor's school;
      7.   The presence of the minor in that place is connected with or
required by a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession or
occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged; or
      8.   The minor is participating in an authorized home study program.
(Ord. No. 2001-19 § 1 (part))
§ 13.03.102 PENALTY.
   Two or more violations of §
13.03.101 within any 12-month period shall constitute an infraction punishable
by a fine not to exceed $250 for each violation.
(Ord. No. 2001-19 § 1 (part))
§ 13.03.103 PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having the care and custody
of any minor under the age of 18 years to allow or permit such that minor to
violate §
13.03.100 or §
13.03.101.
('65 Code, § 20-2) (Ord. No. CS-225 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-19 § 2)
§ 13.03.110 AMUSEMENT PROPRIETOR'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor of a place of amusement to permit
any minor under the age of 18 years, unaccompanied by an adult person
authorized by such minor's parent or guardian, to loiter or remain in such
place of amusement between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.
('65 Code, § 20-3) (Ord. No. CS-225 § 3)
§ 13.03.115 THEATER CURFEW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow a minor under the age
of 14 to attend any theater between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
the following day, unless accompanied by an authorized adult person.
('65 Code, § 20-4) (Ord. No. CS-225 § 9)
§ 13.03.120 MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent that he is 21 years
or over in order to order and obtain any alcoholic beverage.
('65 Code, § 20-5) (Ord. No. CS-225 § 6)
§ 13.03.125 MINORS ATTENDANCE IN POOL ROOMS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to visit any
billiard or pool room maintained for public patronage where alcoholic beverages
are served.
('65 Code, § 20-6) (Ord. No. CS-536)
§ 13.03.130 POOL OR BILLIARD ROOM PROPRIETOR'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor or manager of any pool or billiard
room maintained for public patronage to permit any person under the age of 18
years to enter or visit such premises where alcoholic beverages are served.
('65 Code, § 20-7) (Ord. No. CS-536)
§ 13.03.135 ACQUISITION OF SCHOOL BOOKS FROM MINOR PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to acquire from any person under the age
of 21 years his necessary school books without first obtaining the written
authorization of such minor's parent or guardian or the principal of the school
attended by such minor.
('65 Code, § 20-8) (Ord. No. CS-225 § 8)
§ 13.03.140 TEENAGE ENTERTAINMENT; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a dance or any
other activity of entertainment for persons under the age of 18 years without
first filing application for a permit with the City Manager of the City in the
form and manner required by him.
('65 Code, § 20-9) (Ord. No. CS-225 § 11; Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 13.03.145 ENTERTAINMENT REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to entertainment conducted for the
benefit of persons under the age of 18 years:
   A.   Lighting. Places where dances are held shall be adequately lighted at
all times when open for dancing, to a degree not less than one foot-candle in
all parts of the building and premises accessible to minor participants.
   B.   Alcoholic beverages prohibited at teen-age dances. It shall be unlawful
to sell or make available or consume alcoholic beverages at any place where a
dance for participants below the age of 18 years is conducted.
   C.   Time limit. No dancing involving participants below the age of 18 shall
be permitted after the hour of 12:00 midnight, unless the permit obtained from
the City Manager specifically authorizes a later hour.
   D.   Participation of adults at teen-age dances prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person 20 years of age or older to attend any teen-age dance
as a participant, unless such person is an authorized chaperon or sponsor.
   E.   Loitering at teen-age dances prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to loiter around the premises at which a teen-age dance is being
conducted.
('65 Code, § 20-10) (Ord. No. 2006-009 §22 (part)
§ 13.03.150 MINOR FEMALE DANCE INSTRUCTORS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person carrying on the business of the
instruction of dancing to employ or permit a female under the age of 21 years
to give instructions in dancing to persons of the opposite sex.
('65 Code, § 20-11) (Ord. No. CS-225)
FIREARMS - SAFE STORAGE,
SHOOTING REQUIREMENTS AND SUICIDE PREVENTION
§ 13.03.200 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Subchapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   FIREARM. A device, designed to be used as a weapon, from which a projectile
is expelled through a barrel, by the force of an explosion or other form of
combustion.
   LOCKED CONTAINER. As defined in Cal. Penal Code § 16850, as amended from
time to time.
   RESIDENCE. Any structure intended or used for human habitation, including
but not limited to houses, condominiums, rooms within a residence, in-law
units, motels, hotels, single room occupancy units, time shares, and
recreational and other vehicles where human habitation occurs.
   TRIGGER LOCK. Listed on the California Department of Justice’s roster of
approved firearms safety devices, and that is identified as appropriate for
that firearm by reference to either the manufacturer and model of the firearm
or to the physical characteristics of the firearm that match those listed on
the roster for use with the device under Cal. Penal Code § 23635, as may be
amended from time to time.
( Ord. No. 2019-012 § 2 (part))
§ 13.03.205 PROHIBITION.
   No person shall keep a firearm within his or her residence unless the
firearm is stored in a locked container or disabled with a trigger lock.
(Ord. No. 2019-012 § 2 (part))
§ 13.03.210 EXCEPTIONS.
   This Subchapter shall not apply in the following circumstances:
   A.   The firearm is carried on the person or within close enough proximity
thereto that the individual can readily retrieve and use the firearm as if
carried on the person.
   B.   The firearm is under the control of a person who is a peace officer
under Cal. Penal Code §§ 830 et seq.
(Ord. No. 2019-012 § 2 (part))
§ 13.03.215 LOST OR STOLEN FIREARMS.
   In order to encourage reports to law enforcement agencies of lost or stolen
firearms, a person who files a report with the Culver City Police Department
pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 25250 notifying the Police Department that a
firearm has been lost or stolen shall not be subject to prosecution for
violation of this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2019-012 § 2 (part))
§ 13.03.220 SHOOTING REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Except as provided herein, no person shall shoot or discharge a firearm
within the City without first having obtained express written consent from the
Chief of Police or his/her designee.
   B.   Subsection A. above shall not apply when such shooting or discharging
is made:
      1.   In lawful defense of persons;
      2.   In making or attempting to make lawful arrests;
      3.   By a law enforcement officer in the performance of his/her duties;
      4.   While done in conjunction with filming activity, as defined in §
11.14.010 of this Code, on property owned and controlled by any company or
corporation holding a current business license or tax certificate from the
City; or, during location filming activity in accordance with Chapter 11.14
pursuant to a current City film permit;
      5.   While engaging in target practice or a properly licensed commercial
shooting gallery;
      6.   While engaging in target practice on the range of a properly
organized target shooting club under the supervision of the proper club
official; and
      7.   While engaging in target practice on a properly constructed range,
on property owned or leased by the shooter provided that such range has been
approved by the City Council, arranged on which target shooting may be
undertaken without damage to persons on adjacent property or on the public
highways.
(Ord. No. 2019-012 § 2 (part))
§ 13.03.225 SUICIDE PREVENTION SIGNAGE IN FIREARM RETAILERS.
   All firearm retailers located in the City shall display information at
point-of-sale giving notice of local firearm laws and providing Los Angeles
County-approved resources for suicide prevention, including suicide warning
signage or posters.
(Ord. No. 2019-012 § 2 (part))
PROHIBITION AGAINST ABUSIVE SOLICITATION
§ 13.03.300 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter to impose reasonable place and manner
limitations on SOLICITATION , as defined herein, in order to protect the safety
of the general public against abusive solicitation while respecting the
constitutional right of free speech.
(Ord. 97-003 § 1(part)
§ 13.03.305 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUSIVE SOLICITATION. To perform one or more of the following acts, either
while engaging in solicitation or immediately thereafter:
      (1)   Coming closer than three feet to the person solicited unless and
until the person solicited indicates he or she wishes to make a donation;
      (2)   Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited;
      (3)   Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or
alongside of him or her after the person solicited declines to make a donation;
      (4)   Threatening, by word or gesture, the person solicited with physical
harm;
      (5)   Abusing the person solicited with words that are offensive and
inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction;
      (6)   Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's
consent; or
      (7)   Engaging in solicitation activity in any of the prohibited places
specified in §
13.03.310.
   DONATION. A gift of money or other item of value, including the purchase of
an item for an amount far exceeding its value under circumstances where a
reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a gift.
   SOLICITATION. Any request made in person seeking an immediate donation of
money or other item of value. A person shall not be deemed to be in the act of
solicitation when he or she passively displays a sign or gives any other
indication that he or she is seeking donations without addressing his or her
solicitation to any specific person, other than in response to an inquiry by
that person.
(Ord. 97-003 § 1(part)
§ 13.03.310 LOCATIONS WHERE SOLICITATION IS PROHIBITED.
   Solicitation shall be prohibited when the person solicited is in any of the
following locations:
   (A)   Bus stops;
   (B)   Public transportation vehicles or facilities;
   (C)   Vehicles on public streets or alleyways;
   (D)   Public parking lots or structures;
   (E)   Outdoor dining areas of restaurants or other dining establishments
serving food for immediate consumption;
   (F)   Within fifty (50) feet of an automated teller machine;
   (G)   A queue of five or more persons waiting to gain admission to a place
or vehicle, or waiting to purchase an item or admission ticket; or
   (H)   Within fifty (50) feet of a gasoline or fuel pump located in a
gasoline service station.
(Ord. 97-003 § 1(part)
§ 13.03.315 PENALTIES.
   Any person who engages in ABUSIVE SOLICITATION , as defined herein, or
solicitation where prohibited, as stated herein, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500,
or shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
(Ord. 97-003 § 1(part)
LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS
§ 13.03.400 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a "criminal street
gang," as that term is defined in Cal. Penal Code § 186.22(f), or who is acting
in concert with a member of a "criminal street gang," to loiter in a public
place under any of the following circumstances:
      1.   With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang's dominance over
certain territory in order to intimidate non-members of the gang from entering,
remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area;
      2.   With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or
other unlawful activity.
   B.   For purposes of this Subchapter, a PUBLIC PLACE means the public way
and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned,
including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road,
curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building,
any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building,
transport facility, shop, or privately owned place of business, to which the
public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment or eating.
Any PUBLIC PLACE also includes the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any
private residence, business or apartment house.
(Ord. No. 2004-003 § 1 (part))
§ 13.03.405 POWERS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS NOT LIMITED.
   Nothing in this Subchapter shall be construed in any way to limit the power
or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention or
arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in the
absence of this Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2004-003 § 1 (part))
§ 13.03.410 PARENTAL CONTROL.
   Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by
said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who
knowingly permits or, by insufficient control, allows a minor to violate the
provisions of this Subchapter is guilty of a criminal act.
(Ord. No. 2004-003 § 1 (part))
§ 13.03.415 VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of this Subchapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, which is
punishable as provided in §
1.01.040 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2004-003 § 1 (part))
TITLE 15: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
15.01.   BENEFIT ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
         
15.02.   BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
         
15.03.   CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD PRONE AREAS
         
15.04.   [RESERVED]
         
15.05.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION PROGRAM
         
15.06.   NEW DEVELOPMENT FEES
         
15.07.   PLANNING
         
15.08.   PROPERTY REPORTS
         
15.09.   RENTAL HOUSING
         
15.10.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
15.11.   PROPERTY-BASED BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
         
15.12.   COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT FINANCING
         
15.13.   MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENCE PROTECTION
CHAPTER 15.01: BENEFIT ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
Section
   
15.01.005   Title
   
15.01.010   Alternative procedure
   
15.01.015   Benefit assessment district
   
15.01.020   Extension of work or district beyond city boundaries
   
15.01.025   Inapplicability of state law
   
15.01.030   Reference to plan or map on file and open to public inspection
   
15.01.035   Liberal construction; validity
   
15.01.040   Acquisition of property and assessment of costs
   
15.01.045   Definitions
   
15.01.050   Notice
   
15.01.055   Reports
   
15.01.060   Formation of the benefit assessment district
   
15.01.065   Changes in organization
   
15.01.070   Levy of annual assessments
   
15.01.075   Completion of proceedings
   
15.01.080   Collection of assessments
   
15.01.085   Financial provisions
   
15.01.090   Annual installment assessments
   
15.01.095   Bonds
   
15.01.100   Assessment of public property
   
15.01.105   Performing the work
   
15.01.110   Limitations of actions and appeal
§ 15.01.005 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Benefit Assessment
District Ordinance.”
('65 Code, § 33I-1) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 91-014 § 2)
§ 15.01.010 ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE.
   This Chapter shall provide a procedure for the formation of a benefit
assessment district as an alternative to any benefit assessment districts found
in the statutes of the State of California. The enactment of this Chapter shall
not preclude the City from utilizing any or all of these statutory procedures
should the City deem them more appropriate.
('65 Code, § 33I-2) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1)
§ 15.01.015 BENEFIT ASSESSMENT DISTRICT.
   A benefit assessment district shall consist of all territory which, as
determined by the City Council, will be benefited by the improvements or
services, or both, and is to be assessed to pay the costs thereof. A benefit
assessment district may consist of contiguous or noncontiguous areas. The
improvements in one (1) area may or may not be of benefit to other areas.
('65 Code, § 33I-3) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 91-014 § 3)
§ 15.01.020 EXTENSION OF WORK OR DISTRICT BEYOND CITY BOUNDARIES.
   The provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§ 5115 et seq., pertaining to the
extension of the work of the benefit assessment district beyond the boundaries
of the City, are incorporated by reference herein.
('65 Code, § 33I-4) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1)
§ 15.01.025 INAPPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.
   A.   The provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code Div. 4 (commencing with §
2800), and Div. 4.5 (commencing with § 3100) shall not apply to this Chapter or
proceedings taken pursuant hereto.
   B.   The provisions of Cal. Health & Safety Code Div. 12, Part 2.7
(commencing with § 13800) shall not apply to this Chapter or proceedings taken
pursuant hereto.
   C.   An assessment levied pursuant to this Chapter is not subject to the
Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931
(Cal. Sts. & High. Code Div. 4 (commencing with § 2800).
('65 Code, § 33I-5) (Ord. No. 91-014 § 4; Ord. No. 2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.030 REFERENCE TO PLAN OR MAP ON FILE AND OPEN TO PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   Any resolution, notice, report, diagram or assessment which is required to
contain a description of the improvements, the boundaries of the benefit
assessment district or any zones therein, or the lines and dimensions of any
lot or parcel of land may, refer to any plan or map on file with the City
Clerk, the County Auditor or the County Assessor and open to public inspection,
for a full and detailed description thereof. The map or plans so referred to
shall govern for all details of the description.
('65 Code, § 33I-6) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1)
§ 15.01.035 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION; VALIDITY.
   This Chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose. Any
proceedings taken pursuant to this Chapter and assessment levy pursuant thereto
shall not be invalidated for failure to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter, if such failure does not substantially and adversely affect the rights
of any person. All determinations made by the City Council pursuant to this
Chapter shall be final and conclusive in the absence of fraud or prejudicial
abuse and discretion.
('65 Code, § 33I-7) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1)
§ 15.01.040 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   In any proceeding for the making of an improvement authorized pursuant to
this Chapter, the City Council may order any acquisition of land, rights-of-way
or easements necessary or appropriate in connection with such improvement, and
assess the cost of such acquisition as a part of the incidental expenses of
such improvement. The City is authorized to advance the costs of such
acquisition from its general funds and thereafter reimburse such general funds
as a part of the incidental expenses of such improvement. As appropriate,
acquisition may be accomplished through the power of eminent domain, commencing
with Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 1230.010.
('65 Code, § 33I-8) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1)
§ 15.01.045 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions contained in this Section govern the construction of this
Chapter unless the context otherwise requires. The definition of a word or
phrase applies to any variants thereof.
   BENEFIT ASSESSMENT DISTRICT. An assessment district formed pursuant to this
Chapter.
   CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Culver City.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Culver City or any other person
designated by the City Council as the engineer for the purposes of this
Chapter, including any officer, board, or employee of the City or any private
person or firm officially employed by the City as engineer for the purposes of
this Chapter.
   FISCAL YEAR. The twelve-month period commencing on July 1 and ending on the
following June 30.
   IMPROVEMENT. The acquisition, installation, construction, operation,
maintenance, servicing or incidental expenses of any public works which the
City is otherwise authorized to construct, install, maintain, or service,
including the whole or any portion, either in length or in width, of any one or
more of the streets, places, public ways, or property, easements, or rights-of-
way, open or dedicated to public use, and any property for which an order for
possession prior to judgment has been obtained, to be improved by or have
constructed therein, over, or thereon, either singly or in any combination
thereof, any of the following:
      1.   The grading or regrading, the paving or repaving, or the graveling
or regravelingthereof.
      2.   The construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, crosswalks, steps,
safety zones, platforms, seats, statuary, fountains, and other ornamental
structures, parks and parkways, recreation areas, including all structures,
buildings, and other facilities necessary to make parks and parkways and
recreation areas useful for the purposes for which intended, culverts, bridges,
walls, curbs, gutters, tunnels, subways, or viaducts.
      3.   Sanitary sewers or instrumentalities of sanitation, together with
the necessary outlets, cesspools, manholes, catch basins, flush tanks, septic
tanks, disposal plants, connecting sewers, ditches, drains, conduits, tunnels,
channels, or other appurtenances.
      4.   Drains, tunnels, sewers, conduits, culverts, and channels for
drainage and/or stormwater and flood control purposes, together with necessary
outlets, cesspools, manholes, catch basins, flush tanks, septic tanks, disposal
plants, connecting sewers, ditches, drains, conduits, channels, and
appurtenances, including systems designed to remove trash or other contaminants
from storm water.
      5.   Poles, posts, wires, pipes, conduits, tunnels, lamps, and other
suitable or necessary appliances for the purpose of lighting the streets,
places, or public ways of the City or property or rights-of-way owned by the
City, or for the purpose of furnishing electricity and electric service,
telephone service or similar utility service to property within the City.
      6.   The conversion of existing overhead electric and communication
facilities to underground locations.
      7.   Pipes, hydrants, and appliances for fire protection.
      8.   Wells, pumps, dams, reservoirs, storage tanks, channels, tunnels,
conduits, pipes, hydrants, meters, or other appurtenances for supplying or
distributing a domestic water supply.
      9.   Mains, services, pipes, fittings, valves, regulators, governors,
meters, drips, drains, tanks, ditches, tunnels, conduits, channels, or other
appurtenances for supplying or distributing a domestic or industrial gas
supply.
      10.   Retaining walls, embankments, buildings, and any other structures
or facilities necessary or suitable in connection with any of the work
mentioned in this Section.
      11.   The installation, replacement or planting of landscaping, trees,
shrubs, or other ornamental vegetation.
      12.   Compaction of land, change of grade or contours, construction of
caissons, retaining walls, drains, and other structures suitable for the
purpose of stabilizing land.
      13.   The installation or construction of public lighting facilities,
including, but not limited to street lighting and traffic signals.
      14.   The installation or construction of any facilities which are
appurtenant to any of the foregoing or which are necessary or convenient for
the maintenance or servicing thereof, including, but not limited to, clearing,
removal of debris, the installation or construction of water, stormwater,
irrigation, drainage, or electrical facilities.
      15.   The installation of park or recreational improvements, including,
but not limited to, all of the following:
         a.   Land preparation, such as grading, leveling, cutting and filling,
sod, landscaping, irrigation systems, sidewalks, and drainage.
         b.   Lights, playground equipment, play courts, and public restrooms.
      16.   The acquisition, construction, maintenance or servicing of any
community center, municipal auditorium or hall, or similar public facility for
the indoor presentation of performances, shows, stage productions, fairs,
conventions, exhibitions, pageants, meetings, parties, or other group events,
activities, or functions, whether those events, activities, or functions are
public or private.
      17.   All other work that may be deemed necessary to maintain, service
and improve the whole or any portion of those streets, places, public ways,
property, parks, easements, or rights-of-way owned by the City including for
the security of public property such as security cameras or other equipment and
security patrols for the deterrence of damage to public property.
      18.   All other work auxiliary to any of the above, which may be required
to carry out the above.
      19.    The acquisition of land or right-of-ways for any of the
improvements above.
   INCIDENTAL EXPENSES. Expenses incurred in conjunction with benefit
assessment districts, and include:
      1.   The cost of preparation of the engineer's report, including plans,
specifications, estimates, diagram and assessment.
      2.   The cost of printing, advertising, and the giving of published,
posted, and mailed notices.
      3.   Compensation payable to the County for collection of assessments.
      4.   Compensation of any engineer, consultant or attorney employed to
render services in proceedings pursuant to this Chapter, as well as City staff
time and any expenses.
      5.   Any other expenses incidental to the construction or installation of
the improvements or to the maintenance and servicing thereof.
      6.   Any expenses incidental to the issuance of bonds or notes pursuant
to §
15.01.095.
      7.   Costs associated with any ballot proceedings held for the approval
of a new or increased assessment.
   INCLUDING. Including without limitation, unless otherwise expressly limited.
   MAINTENENCE. “Maintain” or “maintenance” means the furnishing of services
and materials for the ordinary and usual maintenance, operation, and servicing
of any improvement, including:
      1.   Repair, removal, rehabilitation or replacement of all or any part of
any improvement.
      2.   Providing for the life, growth, health, and beauty of landscaping,
including cultivation, irrigation, trimming, spraying, fertilizing, or treating
for disease or injury.
      3.   The removal of trimmings, rubbish, debris, and other solid waste.
      4.   The cleaning, sandblasting, and painting of walls and other
improvements to remove or cover graffiti.
   NOTICE. Any resolution, order, or other instrument authorized or required by
this Chapter to be published, posted, or mailed subject to the requirements of
the Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act beginning with Cal. Gov't Code §
53750 and Article XIIID of the California State Constitution.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Any person shown as the owner of land on the last equalized
county assessment roll; provided when such person is no longer the owner, then
any person entitled to be shown as owner on the next county assessment roll if
such person is known to the City. Where land is subject to a recorded written
agreement of sale, any person shown therein as purchaser shall be considered as
a property owner if such person is known to the City.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. The State or Federal governments, city, city and county,
county, or other public corporation or body formed pursuant to charter, general
law, or special act, for the performance of governmental or proprietary
functions within limited boundaries, and any department, board, commission,
independent agency, or instrumentality of any of the foregoing.
   PUBLIC PLACES. Any publicly owned property, either in use in the performance
of a public function or to be used in the performance of a public function,
upon which the installation of the improvements herein will take place,
including any public building, street, highway, road, alley, lane, boulevard,
part, or parkway.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any public utility subject to the jurisdiction of and
regulated by the Public Utilities Commission.
   SERVICES. ”Service” or “servicing” includes the cost of maintaining any
facility used to provide any service and the furnishing of:
      1.   Electric current or energy, gas, or other illuminating agent for any
public lighting facilities or for the lighting or operation of any other
improvements.
      2.   Water for the irrigation of any landscaping, the operation of any
fountains, or the maintenance of any other improvements.
      3.   Other utility services as applicable.
   TREASURER. The City Treasurer of the City of Culver City.
   ZONE. All territory within an assessment district which will receive
substantially the same degree of benefit from the improvements.
('65 Code, § 33I-9) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 91-014 § 5; Ord. No. 2012-
004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.050 NOTICE.
   A.   The Clerk shall give notice or cause the same to be given in accordance
with this Chapter.
   B.   Published notice shall be made one time pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §
6061.
   C.   Publication of notice of hearing shall be completed at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of hearing specified therein.
   D.   Posted notices shall be made by posting upon any official bulletin
board customarily used by the City for the posting of notices.
   E.   Mailed notice shall be sent by first-class mail and deposited, postage
prepaid, in the United States mail and shall be deemed given when so deposited.
Mailed notice to property owners shall be given by mailing notice to those
property owners as the term is defined herein.
   F.   Mailed notice may be waived by all property owners who have filed a
written request for inclusion within an existing or proposed assessment
district.
   G.   Prior to levying a new or increased assessment the City Council shall
cause notice of the public hearing to be given pursuant to § 53753 of the
Government Code.
('65 Code, § 33I-10) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.055 REPORTS.
   A.   The engineer shall prepare reports in accordance with this Chapter.
   B.   A report shall be prepared for each fiscal year for which assessments
are to be levied and collected to pay the costs of the improvements or
services, or both, described in the report.
   C.   A report shall refer to the benefit assessment district by its
distinctive designation, specify the fiscal year to which the report applies
and, with respect to that year, shall contain:
      1.   Plans and specifications for the improvements or services, or both.
      2.   An estimate of the costs for the improvements or services, or both.
      3.   A diagram for the benefit assessment district.
      4.   An assessment of the estimated costs of the improvements or
services, or both.
      5.   If bonds or notes will be issued pursuant to § 15.01.095, an
estimate of their principal amount.
   D.   The plans and specifications shall show and describe existing and
proposed improvements, and existing and proposed services. The plans and
specifications need not be detailed, but shall be sufficient if they show or
describe the general nature, location, and extent of the improvements or
services, or both. If the benefit assessment district is divided into zones,
the plans and specifications shall indicate the class and type of improvements
or services to be provided for each such zone. The plans or specifications may
be prepared as separate instruments and either or both may be incorporated in
the diagram as a combined instrument.
   E.   The estimate of costs of the improvements or services, or both, for the
fiscal year shall contain estimates for the following:
      1.   The total improvement costs, being the total costs of constructing
or installing all proposed improvements and of maintaining and servicing all
existing and proposed improvements, including all incidental expenses. This may
include a reserve which shall not exceed the estimated costs of maintenance and
servicing to December 10 of the fiscal year, or whenever the City expects to
receive its apportionment of special assessments and tax collections from the
County, whichever is later.
      2.   The amount of any surplus or deficit in the improvement fund to be
carried over from a previous fiscal year.
      3.   The amount of any contributions to be made from sources other than
assessments levied hereunder.
      4.   The amount, if any, of the voter approved annual inflator to be
applied to the maximum rates. This amount shall comply with the requirements of
the Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act beginning with Gov't Code §
53750 and Article XIIID of the California State Constitution.
      5.   The amount, if any, of the annual installment for the assessment for
the estimated cost of any improvements or services, or both, to be levied and
collected in annual installments.
      6.   The net amount to be assessed upon assessable lands within the
benefit assessment district, being the total costs, as referred to in
Subsection E.1 of this Section, which have been increased or decreased by any
of the amounts referred to in Subsections E.2, E.3, E. 4 or E.5 of this
Section.
   F.   The diagram for a benefit assessment district shall show the exterior
boundaries of the district, the boundaries of any zones within the district and
the lines and dimensions of each lot or parcel of land within the district with
each lot identified by a distinctive number or letter. The diagram may refer to
the County Assessor's maps for a detailed description of the lines and
dimensions of any lots or parcels, in which case those maps shall govern for
all details concerning the lines and dimensions of such lots or parcels.
   G.   The lines and dimensions of each lot or parcel of land shown on the
diagram shall conform to those shown on the County Assessor's maps for the
fiscal year to which the report applies. The diagram may refer to the County
Assessor's maps for a detailed description of the lines and dimensions of any
lots or parcels, in which case those maps shall govern for all details
concerning the lines and dimensions of such lots or parcels.
   H.   The assessment shall refer to the fiscal year to which it applies and
shall:
      1.   State net amount, determined in accordance with Subsection
15.01.055 E.6., to be assessed upon assessable lands within the benefit
assessment district.
      2.   Describe each assessable lot or parcel of lands within the district.
      3.   Assess the net amount upon all assessable lots or parcels of lands
within the district by apportioning that amount among the several lots or
parcels in proportion to the estimated benefits to be received by each lot or
parcel from the improvements as defined in this Chapter.
   I.   The assessment may refer to the County assessment roll for a
description of the lots or parcels, in which case that roll shall govern for
all details concerning the description of the lots or parcels.
   J.   The net amount to be assessed upon lands within a benefit assessment
district may be apportioned by any formula or method which fairly distributes
the net amount among all assessable lots or parcels in proportion to the
estimated benefits to be received by each such lot or parcel from the
improvements.
   K.   The diagram and assessment may classify various areas within a benefit
assessment district into different zones where, by reason of variations in the
nature, location, and extent of such improvements or services, or both, various
areas will receive differing degrees of benefit from the improvements. A zone
shall consist of all territory which will receive substantially the same degree
of benefit from the improvements or services, or both.
('65 Code, § 33I-11) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 91-014 §§ 6—14; Ord. No.
2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.060 FORMATION OF THE BENEFIT ASSESSMENT DISTRICT.
   A.   Proceedings for the formation of a benefit assessment district shall be
initiated by resolution. The Resolution of Initiation shall:
      1.   Propose the formation of a benefit assessment district pursuant to
this Chapter.
      2.   Describe the improvements or services or both.
      3.   Describe the proposed district, and including a distinctive
designation for the district. The descriptions need not be detailed but shall
be sufficient if they enable the engineer to generally identify the nature,
location, and extent of the improvements and the location and extent of the
benefit assessment district.
      4.   Order the engineer to prepare and file a report in accordance with §
15.01.055.
   B.   Upon completion, the engineer shall file a report with the Clerk for
submission to the City Council.
   C.   After the filing of the engineer's report with the City Clerk, the City
Council shall adopt a resolution of intention. The Resolution of Intention
shall:
      1.   Declare the intention of the City Council to order the formation of
a benefit assessment district and to levy and collect assessments pursuant
thereto.
      2.   Approve the report of the engineer. The City Council may approve the
report as filed, or it may modify the report in any particular and approve it
as modified.
      3.   Generally describe the improvements or services or both.
      4.   Refer to the proposed district by its distinctive designation and
indicate the general location of the district.
      5.   Refer to the report of the engineer, on file with the Clerk, for a
full and detailed description of the improvements or services, or both, the
boundaries of the benefit assessment district, and any zones therein, and the
proposed assessments upon assessable lots and parcels of land within the
district.
      6.   If debt is to be issued, declare the necessity for the indebtedness,
the purpose for which the debt is to be incurred, the amount of the proposed
debt, specify the rate or maximum rate of interest which debt shall bear, and
maximum number of years of the debt.
      7.   Give notice of, and fix a time and place for, a hearing by the City
Council on the question of the formation of the assessment district and the
levy of the proposed assessment.
   D.   The Clerk shall give notice of hearing by causing the Resolution of
Intention, or summary thereof, to be published, posted, and mailed as provided
in §
15.01.050.
   E.   Prior to the conclusion of the hearing, any interested person may file
a written protest with the Clerk, or having previously filed a protest, may
file a written withdrawal of that protest. A written protest shall state all
grounds of objection. A protest by a property owner shall contain a description
sufficient to identify the property owned.
   F.   The City Council shall hold the hearing at the time and place fixed in
the Resolution of Intention and in any order continuing the hearing. All
interested persons shall be afforded the opportunity to hear and be heard. The
City Council shall consider all oral statements and all written protests and
communications made or filed by any interested persons.
   G.   During the course or upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City
Council may order changes in any of the matters provided in the engineer's
report, including changes of the improvements or services, or both, the
boundaries of the proposed assessment district and any zones therein, and the
proposed diagram or proposed assessment. The City Council may, without further
notice, order the exclusion of territory from the proposed district, but shall
not order the inclusion of any additional territory within the district except
upon written request by property owner for the inclusion of his or her property
or upon the giving of mailed notice of hearing to affected property owners upon
the question of the inclusion of their property in the district.
   H.   Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall determine
whether a majority protest exists in accordance with the requirements of the
Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act beginning with Gov't Code § 53750
and Article XIIID of the California State Constitution.
   I.   If a majority protest has not been found, the City Council may adopt a
resolution ordering the improvements or services, or both, and the formation of
a benefit assessment district and confirming the diagram and assessment, either
as originally proposed or as changed. The adoption of the resolution shall
constitute the levy of an assessment for the fiscal year referred to in the
assessment.
   J.   Upon the passage of the resolutions provided for in this Section, the
City Clerk shall record the diagram and a notice of assessment as provided for
in Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 3114, whereupon the assessment shall attach as a
lien upon the property assessed, as provided in the Cal. Sts. & High. Code §
3115.
   K.   Whenever a railroad, gas, water or electric utility right-of-way is
included within the benefit assessment district, the railroad, gas, water or
electric utility right-of-way or electric line right-of-way shall be included
in the initiating resolution, the engineer's report, and the resolution of
intention. The railroad, gas, water, or electric utility right-of-way or
electric line right-of-way shall be assessable only if, and to the extent, it
is found it will benefit from the installation and maintenance of the proposed
improvement. Any railroad, gas, water, or electric utility right-of-way or
electric line right-of-way so assessed shall be subject to the same penalties,
and the same procedure and sale, in the event of delinquency as other parcels
in the benefit assessment district. In determining whether or not the railroad,
gas, water, or electric utility right-of-way or electric line right-of-way
benefits, its use as a right-of-way for a railroad, gas, water, or electric
utility shall be presumed to be permanent.
('65 Code, § 33I-12) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 91-014, §§ 15—18; Ord. No.
2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.065 CHANGES IN ORGANIZATION.
   A.   The City Council, either in a single proceeding or by separate
proceedings, may order one (1) or any combination of the following changes of
organization:
      1.   The annexation of territory to an existing district formed pursuant
to this Chapter.
      2.   The detachment of territory from an existing district formed
pursuant to this Chapter.
      3.   The dissolution of an existing district formed pursuant to this
Chapter.
      4.   The consolidation into a single district of two (2) or more existing
districts formed pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   Proceedings for changing organization may be:
      1.   Undertaken subsequent to or concurrently with proceedings for the
formation of the benefit assessment district hereunder. Any or all such
proceedings may be conditioned upon the completion of any or all such
proceedings.
      2.   Combined with proceedings for the formation of a benefit assessment
district hereunder. In such case, any of the several resolutions, reports,
notices, or other instruments provided for in this Chapter may be combined into
a single document.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided herein, proceedings for a charge or
organization shall be initiated, conducted and completed in substantial
compliance with the procedure provided for the formation of a benefit
assessment district.
   D.   In annexation proceedings, the resolutions, report, notices of hearing
and right of majority protests shall be limited to the territory proposed to be
annexed. Notice of hearing shall be provided as in §
15.01.050 governing the formation of the benefit assessment district. Mailed
notice may be waived by all property owners who shall have filed a written
request for annexation of their property.
   E.   If all of the owners of property within the territory proposed to be
formed into a benefit assessment district, or proposed to be annexed to an
existing district, have given written consent to the proposed formation,
consolidation, or annexation, the territory may be formed into a benefit
assessment district, or annexed to or consolidated with an existing district,
as the case may be, without notice.
   F.   In detachment proceedings, the resolutions, report, notices of hearing,
and right of majority protest shall be limited to the territory proposed to be
detached. City Council may dispense with the resolution initiating proceedings
and the engineer's report, and may initiate proceedings by the adoption of the
Resolution of Intention pursuant to Subsection
15.01.060 C. Mailed notice may be waived by all property owners who shall have
filed a written request for detachment of their property.
   G.   The City Council may establish policies and procedures for property
owners to request the dissolution of an assessment district whose proceeds are
not pledged to repay debt service on any bonds or notes issued pursuant to §
15.01.095. In dissolution proceedings, the City Council may dispense with the
resolution initiating proceedings and engineer's report and may initiate
dissolution proceedings by the adoption of a resolution of intention. Mailed
notice may be waived by all property owners who shall have filed a written
request for the dissolution of the assessment district.
   H.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the single benefit
assessment district resulting from a consolidation under this Chapter shall
assume all assets and liabilities of the districts consolidated and shall be
entitled to all of the revenues to which each of the separate districts would
have been entitled had such districts not been so consolidated.
('65 Code, § 33I-13) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.070 LEVY OF ANNUAL ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   This Section shall apply to all annual assessments levied after the
formation of a benefit assessment district, except annual assessments to pay
the principal of, and interest on, previously issued bond debt or notes.
   B.   Proceedings shall be taken pursuant to this Section for any fiscal year
during which an assessment is to be levied and collected within an existing
district.
   C.   The City Council shall adopt a resolution which shall generally
describe any proposed new, or changes in existing, improvements or services, or
both, and order the engineer to prepare and file a report in accordance with §
15.01.055.
   D.   Upon completion, the engineer shall file a report with the Clerk for
submission to the City Council.
   E.   After the filing of the engineer's report, the City Council shall adopt
a Resolution of Intention. The Resolution of Intention shall:
      1.   Declare the intention of the City Council to levy and collect
assessments within the assessment district for the fiscal years stated therein
or as described in §
15.01.090.
      2.   Approve the report of the engineer. The City Council may approve the
report, as filed, or may modify the report in any particular and approve it as
modified so long as the rates to be levied do not increase above the voter
approved maximum rates adjusted by an inflationary formula, if any.
      3.   Generally describe the existing and proposed improvements or
services, or both, and any substantial changes proposed to be made in the
existing improvements or services, or both.
      4.   Refer to the benefit assessment district by its distinctive
designation and indicate the general location of the district.
      5.   Refer to the report of the engineer, on file with the Clerk, for a
full and detailed description of the improvements or services, or both, the
boundaries of the benefit assessment district and any zones therein, and the
proposed assessments upon assessable lots and parcels of land within the
district.
      6.   If debt is to be issued, declare the necessity for the indebtedness,
the purpose for which the debt is to be incurred, the amount of the proposed
debt, specify the rate or maximum rate of interest which debt shall bear, and
maximum number of years of the debt.
      7.   Give notice of the time and place for the hearing by the City
Council on the levy of the proposed assessment.
   F.   The date, hour and place of the hearing is fixed as the date, hour, and
place of any regular meeting, as specified in the Resolution of Intention
adopted pursuant to Subsection
15.01.070 E.
   G.   The Clerk shall give notice of hearing by either of the following
methods:
      1.   If the assessments are to be levied in the same or lesser amounts
than the voter approved maximum rates as adjusted by an inflationary formula,
if any, the Clerk shall give notice by causing a summary of the Resolution of
Intention to be published pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 6061 and Cal. Sts. &
High. Code § 22553.
      2.   If the assessments are to be increased over the voter approved
maximum rates as adjusted by an inflationary formula, if any, the Clerk shall
cause notice to be given pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 53753.
   H.   Any interested person may, prior to the conclusion of the hearing, file
a written protest with the Clerk or, having previously filed the protest, may
file a written withdrawal of that protest. A written protest shall state all
grounds of objection. A protest by a property owner shall contain a description
sufficient to identify the property owned.
   I.   The City Council shall hold the hearing at the time and place specified
in the Resolution of Intention and in any order continuing the hearing. All
interested persons shall be afforded the opportunity to hear and be heard. The
City Council shall consider all oral statements and all written protests made
or filed by any interested person. The City Council may continue the hearing
from time to time, provided, that no continuance shall be made to a date
subsequent to July 31, without the prior consent of the County Auditor.
   J.   During the course or upon the conclusion of a hearing, the City Council
may order changes in any of the matters provided in the report, including
changes in the improvements or services, or both, and any zones within the
district, and the proposed diagram or proposed assessment so long as the
changes do not result in an increase of the rates above the voter approved
maximum rates adjusted by an inflationary formula, if any.
   K.   Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may adopt a
resolution confirming the diagram and assessment, either as originally proposed
or as changed by it. If there is a majority protest against the increased levy
of an annual assessment, the proposed increase shall be abandoned. The adoption
of the resolution shall constitute the levy of an assessment for the fiscal
year referred to in the assessment.
('65 Code, § 33I-14) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 91-014 §§ 19—21; Ord. No.
2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.075 COMPLETION OF PROCEEDINGS.
   A.   Hearings upon the formation of a benefit assessment district, upon a
change of organization for an existing district, or upon the levy of annual
assessments after the formation of a district shall be concluded in a
resolution confirming a diagram and an assessment shall be adopted not later
than:
      1.   July 31 of the fiscal year during which the assessments are to be
collected on the county assessment roll; or
      2.   Such later date as the county auditor may authorize.
   B.   Immediately after the adoption of any resolution confirming a diagram
and assessment, the Clerk shall file the assessment, or a certified copy
thereof, with the County Auditor.
('65 Code, § 33I-15) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.080 COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   After the filing of the assessment, the County Auditor shall enter on
the county assessment roll opposite each lot or parcel of land the amount
assessed thereupon, as shown in the assessment.
   B.   The assessments shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as county taxes are collected, and all laws providing for the collection
and enforcement of county taxes shall apply to the collection and enforcement
of the assessments, except that assessment levied pursuant to §
15.01.095 for which bonds are to be issued may be paid within thirty (30) days
after the date of the public hearing, at which time the engineer shall make and
file with the treasurer a complete list of all unpaid assessments in the manner
required by Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 8620.
   C.   After collection by the county, the net amount of the assessments shall
be paid to the City Treasurer, after deduction of any compensation due to the
county for collection.
('65 Code, § 33I-16) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.085 FINANCIAL PROVISIONS.
   A.   Upon receipt of monies representing assessments collected by the
county, the City Treasurer shall deposit the monies to the credit of an
assessment fund for the benefit assessment district for which they were
collected, and the money shall be expended only for the improvements or
services, or both, authorized for such district.
   B.   If there is a surplus or a deficit in the assessment fund of a district
at the end of any fiscal year, the surplus or deficit shall be carried forward
to the next annual assessment to be levied within such district and applied as
a credit or debit, as the case may be, against the next annual assessment. This
amount shall be adjusted based upon the required balance in the reserves and
may not exceed the amount that can be collected based upon the voter approved
maximum rates as adjusted by any applicable inflator.
   C.   If there is a deficit in the assessment fund of a district during any
fiscal year, the City Council, from any available and unencumbered funds of the
City is not obligated to but may provide for the following adjustments to funds
or services:
      1.   A contribution to the assessment fund.
      2.   A temporary advance to the assessment fund and direct that the
advance be repaid from future annual assessments levied and collected within
the district.
      3.   Reduce levels of service provided to accommodate available funds.
   D.   The City Council may accept contributions from any source toward
payment of the costs of the improvements or services. The City Council, at any
time either before or after the confirmation of the assessment, may provide for
contributions toward payment of such costs from the funds of the City. All
contributions shall be deposited in the assessment fund of the district for
which the contribution was provided.
   E.   All contributions authorized prior to confirmation of an assessment
shall be deducted from the total assessment costs to be assessed within the
district. Temporary advances shall not be so deducted.
('65 Code, § 33I-17) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 91-014 §§ 22, 23; Ord. No.
2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.090 ANNUAL INSTALLMENT ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   The City Council may, by resolution, determine that the estimated costs
of any proposed improvements are greater than can be conveniently raised from a
single annual assessment and order that the estimated costs shall be raised by
an assessment levied and collected in installments over a period to be defined
in the resolution pursuant to §
15.01.070 E.
   B.   The resolution adopted pursuant to Subdivision A. shall generally
describe the proposed improvements, set forth the estimated costs thereof,
specify the number of annual installments and the fiscal years during which
they are to be collected, and
fix or determine the maximum amount of each annual assessment.
   C.   After adoption of a resolution providing for annual installment
assessments, the engineer, in preparing the reports required by this Chapter,
shall include in the estimate an assessment for each fiscal year specified in
the resolution the total amount of the annual installment fixed or determined
for such year.
   D.   If a resolution providing for annual installment payments has been
adopted, in the resolution or subsequent thereto, the City Council may do any
or a combination of the following:
      1.   Provide for the accumulation of monies collected from the annual
installments in the improvement fund until there are sufficient monies to pay
all or part of the costs of the improvement described in the resolution.
      2.   Provide for a temporary advance to the improvement fund from any
available and unencumbered funds of the City to pay all or part of the costs of
the improvements described in the resolution, and direct that the advance be
repaid from the annual installments levied and collected during the fiscal
years designated in the resolution.
      3.   Borrow an amount necessary to finance the estimated costs of the
proposed improvements. The amount borrowed, except for the amount borrowed
pursuant to § 15.01.095 shall not exceed the amount of revenue estimated to be
raised from the annual assessments.
('65 Code, § 33I-18) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.095 BONDS.
   A.   The City Council may, by resolution, determine and declare that bonds
shall be issued to finance the estimated acquisition, construction and
installation costs of the proposed capital improvements, other than costs of
maintenance and servicing, under either the Improvement Bond Act of 1915, Cal.
Sts. & High. Code Div. 10, commencing with § 8500 or the Marks-Roos Local Bond
pooling Act of 1985, Cal. Gov't Code Div. 7, commencing with § 6584. Either
Cal. Sts. & High. Code Div. 10, (commencing with § 8500) or Cal. Gov't Code
Div. 7 (commencing with § 6584), as the case may be, shall govern all
proceedings relating to the issuance of those bonds. Alternatively, the City
may determine and declare that notes shall be issued for the same purposes for
which bonds may be issued. The maximum term to maturity of any notes issued
shall not exceed ten (10) years.
   B.   The resolution pursuant to Subsection A. of this Section shall
generally describe the proposed improvements, other than the costs of
maintenance and servicing, specify the number of annual installments and the
fiscal years during which they are to be collected, and fix or determine the
maximum amount of each annual installment necessary to retire the bonds or any
notes issued. The amount of debt service to retire the bonds or notes shall not
exceed the period of the bonds or notes.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, assessments levied
to pay the principal of, and interest on, any bond or note issued pursuant to
this Section, shall not be reduced or terminated if doing so would interfere
with the timely retirement of the debt.
('65 Code, § 33I-19) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.100 ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Parcels within a benefit assessment district that are owned or used by any
public agency, the State of California or the United States shall not be exempt
unless those parcels receive no special benefit.
('65 Code, § 33I-20) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.105 PERFORMING THE WORK.
   A.   The City Council, by contract or otherwise, shall provide for the
performance of all work or services ordered by it pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   The City Council may provide for the construction, installation, or
ownership of any improvements, or for the furnishing of services by contract
with a public agency or public utility. Any such contract shall conform to all
laws applicable to the other public agency and to the City. Any contract with a
public utility shall comply with all tariffs, rules, and rate schedules
approved by the Public Utilities Commission.
   C.   The City Council may:
      1.   Provide for the acquisition, construction or installation of any
improvements, purchase of equipment or furnishing of services authorized by
this Chapter through proceedings taken pursuant to any other special assessment
law, or any procedural regulation or law of the City; and
      2.   Provide for the operation, maintenance or servicing of such
improvements or equipment, or continuation of services, through proceedings
taken pursuant to this Chapter.
   D.   The proceedings referred to in Subsection C. may be taken separately or
combined. If combined, any of the several resolutions, reports, notices or
other instruments provided for in this Chapter may be combined with those
provided for in the other proceedings.
('65 Code, § 33I-21) (Ord. No. 87-012 § 1; Ord. No. 91-014 § 24; Ord. No. 2012-
004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.01.110 LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS AND APPEAL.
   The validity of an assessment levied under this Chapter for the purpose of
raising revenue necessary to pay the debt service on bonds issued pursuant to §
15.01.095 shall not be contested in any action or proceeding, unless the action
or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the initial assessment
is levied. Any appeal from a final judgment in the action or proceeding shall
be perfected within thirty (30) days after the entry of judgment.
(Ord. No. 2012-004 § 2)
CHAPTER 15.02: BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
15.02.005   Violations and penalties
   
15.02.010   Purposes of California Codes and this chapter
   
15.02.015   Administrative authority
   
15.02.020   Tax certificate required
   
15.02.025   Contractor transparency requirements
Adoption of State Codes
   
15.02.100   California Building Standards Administrative Code adopted by
reference
   
15.02.105   California Building Code adopted by reference with local amendments
   
15.02.110   Reserved
   
15.02.115   California Residential Building Code adopted by reference
   
15.02.120   California Electrical Code adopted by reference
   
15.02.125   California Mechanical Code adopted by reference with local
amendments
   
15.02.130   California Plumbing Code adopted by reference with local amendments
   
15.02.135   California Energy Code adopted by reference
   
15.02.140   California Historical Building Code adopted by reference with local
amendments
   
15.02.145   California Existing Building Code adopted by reference with local
amendments
   
15.02.150   California Green Building Standards Code adopted by reference with
local amendments
   
15.02.155   California Reference Standards Code adopted by reference
   
15.02.160   International Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference with
local amendments
Gender Neutral Public Restroom Facilities in New Construction
   
15.02.400   Gender neutral public restroom facilities required
   
15.02.410   Applicability
   
15.02.420   Definitions
   
15.02.430   Gender neutral public restroom facilities and design
Mandatory Seismic Provisions for Existing Wood-Frame Buildings
with Soft, Weak or Open-Front Walls
   
15.02.500   Purpose
   
15.02.505   Scope
   
15.02.510   Definitions
   
15.02.515   Compliance requirements
   
15.02.520   Time period for compliance/ priority designation
   
15.02.525   Administration
   
15.02.530   Occupancy and tenant advisory
   
15.02.535   Historical buildings
   
15.02.540   Analysis and design
   
15.02.545   Information required on plans
   
15.02.550   Quality assurance
   
15.02.555   Violation and penalty
   
15.02.560   Applicability
Antennas
   
15.02.600   Definitions
   
15.02.605   Compliance with regulations required
   
15.02.610   Noncommercial nonparabolic antennas
   
15.02.615   Development standards
   
15.02.620   Application for approval
   
15.02.625   Enforcement
Post-Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction
   
15.02.700   Purpose
   
15.02.705   Applicability
   
15.02.710   Definitions
   
15.02.715   Placards
   
15.02.720   Criteria for demolition of dangerous buildings
   
15.02.725   Demolition of historic buildings or structures
   
15.02.730   Repair criteria for damaged buildings
   
15.02.735   Repair criteria for chimneys
   
15.02.740   Repair criteria for essential services facilities
   
15.02.745   Repair criteria for historic buildings or structures
   
15.02.800   Reserved
Administrative Assessment Cost Recovery
   
15.02.900   Administrative Assessment Cost Recovery Program
   
15.02.905   Imposition of assessments
   
15.02.910   Appeals
   
15.02.915   Remedies not exclusive
 
   
15.02.1000   Reserved
Local Amendments to the Green Building Standards Code, Building Code and
Residential Building Code, to Establish Reach Codes Standards
   
15.02.1100   Establishment and purpose of Reach Code standards
   
15.02.1105   Definitions
   
15.02.1110   Reserved
   
15.02.1115   Reserved
   
15.02.1120   Water permeable surfaces
   
15.02.1125   Gray water
   
15.02.1130   Landscape irrigation controls
   
15.02.1135   Light pollution reduction
   
15.02.1140   Enhanced construction waste reduction
   
15.02.1145   Defensible space in Wildland- Urban Interface (WUI) areas
   
15.02.1150   Fire-resistant roof assemblies in Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI)
areas
   
15.02.1155   Reserved
   
15.02.1160   Shower facilities for bicycle parking
   
15.02.1165   Reserved
   
15.02.1170   Reserved
   
15.02.1175   Reserved
   
15.02.1180   Inspections and enforcement
 
   
15.02.1200   Reserved
 
   
Appendix   Hillside drainage diagrams
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 15.02.005   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   1.   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve remove, convert, demolish, install, replace, equip, use, occupy,
maintain or relocate any building or structure or fixture or equipment or
property, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of any
California Code herein adopted, or in violation of any provisions of this
Chapter, and no person shall fail to comply with any lawful order made there
under.
      2.   Any such violation or failure to comply shall be a misdemeanor,
which shall be punishable in accordance with §
1.01.040 of this Code.
   B.   Any violation of, or failure to comply with this Chapter shall
constitute a separate offense for each and every day, during any portion of
which any such violation or failure is committed, continued or permitted, and
shall be punishable accordingly.
   C.   At the discretion of the City Attorney, any violation of this Chapter
may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or as an infraction.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.010 PURPOSES OF CALIFORNIA CODES AND THIS CHAPTER.
   It is the purpose of the provisions of Chapters
15.02 and
15.03 of this Code and theCalifornia Code to provide minimum standards and
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, property and
public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, operation,
construction, installation, replacement, quality of materials, use, occupancy,
location and maintenance of buildings and structures, signs and sign
structures, heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators
and other heat-producing appliances, plumbing systems, and solar systems and
rainwater drainage systems within the City.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.015 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The Building Official shall be the administrative authority for each of the
Codes.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.020 TAX CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   No permit required by this Chapter or Chapter
15.03 shall be issued to an applicant who is required by Chapter
11.01 of this Code to have a business tax certificate, unless the applicant has
a valid, current tax certificate.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.025 CONTRACTOR TRANSPARENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   No permit required by this Chapter or
Chapter 15.03 shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant complies
with this section.
   B.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions apply:
      CONTRACTOR. Any person except a licensed architect or a registered civil
engineer acting solely in his or her professional capacity, who in any capacity
other than as the employee of another with wages or salary as his or her sole
compensation, undertakes to, or offers to undertake, or purports to have the
capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or herself or by
or through others construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve,
move, wreck, or demolish any building, or other structure, project,
development, improvement, or any part thereof, including the erection of
scaffolding or other structures or work in connection therewith. The contractor
shall include a subcontractor or specialty contractor but shall not include
anyone who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating them into
or consuming them in the performance of the work of the contractor.
      PERMIT. A building permit issued under this Chapter or
Chapter 15.03.
      PERSON. Any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee,
trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, partnership, joint venture, club,
company, joint stock company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
      PROJECT. Any development project within the City consisting of twenty
(20) or more new or added residential dwelling units or the addition of twenty
thousand (20,000) or more square feet of commercial or industrial development.
   C.   No Person shall be issued a Permit unless the Person is:
      1.   A licensed Contractor licensed by the California Contractors State
License Board;
      2.   An employee, agent or authorized representative of a licensed
Contractor;
      3.   The property owner performing his or her own work; or
      4.   An agent of the property owner.
   D.   A Person applying for a Permit shall submit the following information
prior to Permit issuance:
      1.   A list of all subcontractors and verification of each
subcontractor's state contractor license and license category, and City
business license. No Person shall contract or subcontract construction work
without a valid Contractor's license pursuant to applicable provisions of the
California Business and Professions Code.
      2.   Whether there are any pending or final determinations pertaining to
state or federal labor violations and whether any penalties were paid to any
government agencies related to such violations within the prior five (5) years,
for Contractor and all proposed subcontractors.
      3.   A certification that the information submitted as required by
Subsection D is true and correct.
   E.   In the event that the applicant cannot provide a list of valid
subcontractors and the information required above prior to Permit issuance, the
applicant shall provide to the City, prior to commencement of any work pursuant
to said Permit, all information required by Subsection D.
   F.   Failure to provide all information required under Subsection D,
including valid and current subcontractor listings prior to commencing work, or
failure to comply with Subsection G, shall result in one or more of the
following:
      1.   Issuance of a Stop Work Order;
      2.   Revocation of the Permit; and
      3.   The Permit applicant paying a penalty for default to the City in an
amount equal to the original Permit fee for each violation in order to defray
City costs of enforcement of this section.
   G.   The information required by Subsection D shall be required at the time
any new Contractor or subcontractor is added to the Permit. If at any time
after Permit issuance a change occurs in any information submitted to the City
pursuant to this section, including addition of a subcontractor, Contractor
shall submit updated information to the City within 72 hours of Contractor
acquiring knowledge of such change, excluding weekends and national holidays.
If a Contractor is a subcontractor, the subcontractor must submit updated
information to the Contractor within 72 hours of subcontractor acquiring
knowledge of such change, excluding weekends and national holidays.
   H.   Any work performed prior to satisfying the requirements of this section
shall be deemed performed without the required Permit.
(Ord. No. 2025-005 § 1)
ADOPTION OF STATE CODES
§ 15.02.100 CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.
   A.   The 2025 Edition of the California Building Standards Administrative
Code, published by the International Code Council, and all appendices,
amendments, supplements and errata thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and
shall be applicable to the City of Culver City, and referred to as the
"Building Standards Administrative Code of the City of Culver City.
   B.   One copy of the Building Standards Administrative Code of the City of
Culver City shall be kept on file in the Building Official's office for public
inspection.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 3; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 3;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 3 (part))
§ 15.02.105 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE WITH LOCAL
AMENDMENTS.
   A.   Adoption of California Building Code, 2025 Edition.
      1.   Pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2, the
California Building Code, 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 2, of the
California Code of Regulations, including Appendices F, G, H, I, J, N and P
("CBC") is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and
deletions set forth below.
      2.   One true copy of the CBC is on file in the office of the Building
Official and is available for public inspection as required by law.
   B.   Amendments to the 2025 California Building Code.
   SECTION 105.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   105.1 Permit Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a
building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the
installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to
be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the
required permit. Parking lots shall not be paved, improved, striped, or
restriped unless a separate permit for each parking lot has first been obtained
from the building official.
   Exception: A separate permit shall not be required to pave, improve, stripe,
or restripe a parking lot when such work is included in the scope of another
project for which a building permit has been issued and when the design of such
parking lot was included in the plan check review of such project.
   Subsection 14 is added to § 105.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC as follows:
   105.2  Work exempt from permit.
   Building:
   14. Block wall and concrete wall not over 3 feet 6 inches high.
   Subsection 105.3.1.1 is added to Section 105.3.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC as
follows:
   105.3.1.1 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations Permitting
   105.3.1.1.1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote
and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited,
streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while
promoting public health, safety and welfare and preventing specific adverse
impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This Chapter is
also adopted to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7.
   105.3.1.1.2 Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION or CHARGING STATION. Any level of
electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in
compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on
the effective date of this Chapter; and delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
      ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following:
         1.   Electronic mail or email.
         2.   The internet.
         3.   Facsimile.
      SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.
   105.3.1.1.3 Expedited Permitting Process. Consistent with Government Code
Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall implement an expedited,
streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and
adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging
stations shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited,
streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations
contained in the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in
California: Community Readiness Guidebook" as published by the Governor's
Office of Planning and Research. The City's adopted checklist shall be
published on the City's website.
   105.3.1.1.4 Permit Application Processing.
   A.   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall
verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not
have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building
occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to:
electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and
overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station
equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and
vehicle parking.
   B.   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the
City's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed.
Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and
supporting documents meets the requirements of the City adopted checklist; and
is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the
Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7,
approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not
authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging
station until approval is granted by the City. If the Building Official
determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a
written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the
application and any additional information required to be eligible for
expedited permit issuance.
   C.   Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official
shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this
Chapter and associated supporting documentation. In accepting such permit
applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on
all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by
any applicant.
   D.   No fee shall be imposed on the applicant for the filing and processing
of a permit application for installation of an electric vehicle charging
station.
   105.3.1.1.5 Technical Review.
   A.   It is the intent of this Chapter to encourage the installation of
electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for
charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building
Official's authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the
Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the
electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the
public health or safety, as defined in this Chapter, the City may require the
applicant to apply for a use permit.
   B.   In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with
Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition the
approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of
such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section
4080.
   105.3.1.1.6 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations Installation Requirements
   A.   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements
of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the
National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing
laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public
Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety
and reliability.
   B.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated
wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall
meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the
California Electrical Code.
   C.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code.
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.
   D.   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle
charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or
Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the
manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall
not adversely affect building elements.
   Section 105.3.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   105.3.2 Expiration of Plan Check. An application for a permit for any
proposed work is deemed abandoned 12 months after the application date, unless
such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit issued. Unless
otherwise provided, after expiration of the application, the City may not issue
a permit until the plans are rechecked and approved, and a new fee is paid.
   Exception: The Building Official may grant extensions of time for additional
periods not exceeding one year each if a permit applicant submits in writing
sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or circumstances precluded the
securing of the permit within the allocated time.
   Section 105.5 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   105.5 Expiration of Permits. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless
the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 12 months
after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is
commenced. Work shall be considered suspended or abandoned if the building
official determines that substantial work has not been performed within the
time specified above. Substantial work shall be constructed to mean:
   1.   Measurable work such as, but not limited to, the addition of footings,
structural members, flooring, wall covering, etc.
   2.   The work mentioned in subsection 1 of this Section 105.5 above must
constitute 20% of the value of the work for which the permit was issued in any
180-day period for Group R, Division 3 occupancies and 10% for all other
occupancies.
   Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to
do so, and the fee therefore shall be one half the amount required for a new
permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the
original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that such
suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action
on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new permit fee and may
be required to comply with all applicable new regulations at the time of
issuance. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than one year each. The extension
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Except as
otherwise provided, every permit issued by the City is valid for a period of
three (3) years.
   Exception: The Building Official may grant extensions of time and permit
renewal if a permit applicant submits in writing sufficient evidence that
unusual conditions or circumstances precluded from the work being completed. An
extension of time may require conditions of approval and additional fees.
   Section 105.8 Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   105.8 Responsibility of permittee. Building permits shall be presumed by the
City to incorporate all of the work that the applicant, the applicant's agent,
employees and/or contractors shall carry out. Said proposed work shall be in
accordance with the approved plans and with all requirements of this code and
any other laws or regulations applicable thereto. No city approval shall
relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the
provisions of this code nor shall any vested rights be created for any work
performed in violation of this code.
   Section 109.4 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any
work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system
before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee in addition to
the normally established permit fee, equal to 100% of such normally established
permit fee, or as otherwise determined by the building official.
   Section 109.6.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   109.6.1  Plan check fees refund. No portion of the plan check fee shall be
refunded unless plan review has not been performed, in which case 80 percent of
the plan check fee shall be refunded upon written application for refund
submitted by the person who made original payment of such fee and with the
written consent of the owner of the real property on which the work was
proposed to be done. The Building Official shall determine, in such official's
discretion, whether an applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 180
days have elapsed from the date of the submittal for plan check, no plan check
fees shall be refunded. In the event subsequent application for plan check is
made by a person who has received a refund, the full amount of all required
fees shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this chapter.
   Section 109.6.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   109.6.2 Permit fees refund. In the event any person shall have obtained a
building permit and no portion of the work or construction covered by such
permit shall have commenced, nor any inspection performed by any City employee,
and notice of abandonment has been received from the owner of the real property
on which such work would have been performed, the permittee, upon presentation
to the Building Official of a written request for refund, shall be entitled to
a refund in an amount equal to 80 percent of the building permit fee actually
paid for such permit. The Building Official shall determine, in such official's
discretion, whether an applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 180
days have elapsed from the date of the issuance of the permit, no permit fees
shall be refunded. In the event subsequent application for a permit is made by
a person who has received a refund, the full amount of all required fees shall
be paid as elsewhere provided in this chapter.
   Exception:
   1.   If a permit has been issued for a project located in an area outside
the jurisdiction of the City, 100 percent of the permit and plan checking fee
may be refunded.
   2.   If a duplicate permit has been erroneously issued, 100 percent of the
duplicated permit and plan checking fee may be refunded.
   Section 109.7 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   109.7 Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee in the amount set by City Council
resolution may be assessed or each inspection or re-inspection when such
portion of work for which inspection is called is incomplete or when required
corrections are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring
re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with
the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for
inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. Re-
inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted
or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily
available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which
inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of
the building official. In instances where re-inspection fees have been
assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until required
fees have been paid.
   Section 110.1.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   110.1.1 Setback Certification required. A California State licensed surveyor
is required to certify the location of the new construction when it is within 3
feet of a setback line or property line prior to the first foundation
inspection. A copy of the certification shall be available to the Building
Safety Division inspector for the job file prior to the first inspection.
   Exception: Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of this section, the Building Official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases.
   Section 113.4 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   113.4 Access Board of Appeals.
   A.   There shall be a Disability Access Board of Appeals ("Access Board of
Appeals") to consist of five members. Each member shall be appointed and hold
office in accordance with procedures established by resolution of the City
Council. Three of the five members shall be members of the Building Board of
Appeals and shall be co-appointed by the City Council to be a member of the
Building Board of Appeals and the Access Board of Appeals. Two of the five
members shall be "physically handicapped persons" (as defined by California
Health and Safety Code Section 19957.5).
   B.   The Access Board of Appeals shall be considered a "standing committee"
with a continuing subject matter jurisdiction. Thus, the Access Board of
Appeals shall be subject to the requirements of the Brown Act (California
Government Code Section 54950 et seq.); however, the Access Board of Appeals
shall have no regular meetings, and all meetings shall be special meetings
noticed pursuant to California Government Code Section 54956. The Access Board
of Appeals shall conduct its meetings in accordance with procedures established
by resolution of the City Council. The Access Board of Appeals may establish
its own rules of procedure or by-laws consistent with City Council resolutions
and ordinances.
   C.   Any person aggrieved by a determination made by the Building Official
or Fire Code Official in administering or enforcing the portions of this
chapter related to access to "public accommodations or facilities" (pursuant to
California Health and Safety Code Section 19955, et seq.) may appeal the
determination to the Access Board of Appeals. The appeal shall be filed with
the Building Official no later than 10 days after receipt of written notice of
the determination and the appeal provisions of this section. Upon receipt of an
appeal by the Building Official, a hearing shall be scheduled before the Access
Board of Appeals. The Access Board of Appeals shall consider relevant evidence
presented at the hearing and shall render a final written decision within a
reasonably prompt time after conducting the hearing. The authority of the
Access Board of Appeals to render a written decision shall be limited to the
scope of authority of the Building Official, and the Access Board of Appeals
shall have no authority to waive a requirement of this chapter.
   D.   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Access Board of Appeals may
request an administrative hearing within 10 days of the issuance of the final
written decision. Any such request shall be made and heard in the same manner
as an administrative hearing related to an administrative citation, in
accordance with City of Culver City Municipal Code.
   E.   Failure to timely request an appeal to the Access Board of Appeals
(pursuant to subsection C), or to an administrative hearing officer (pursuant
to subsection D) constitutes a waiver of the hearing and a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
   F.   Unless otherwise designated by the City Manager, the Building Official
shall be the principal city staff liaison to the Access Board of Appeals, and
the Building Official shall appoint a secretary to the Access Board of Appeals
to comply with all procedural requirements related to the Brown Act.
   G.   The Building Official may request a special meeting of the Access Board
of Appeals in order to request advisory comments from the Access Board of
Appeals regarding issues related to this chapter, such as the potential
adoption of new codes, proposed code changes, or alternate methods and
materials.
   Section 117 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   117 Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
   117.1 Definitions. Terms defined herein shall have the following meanings
when used in this Section:
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official of the City of Culver City or
his or her designee.
      CALIFORNIA ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS. The California Energy Efficiency
Standards set forth in Title 24, Part 6, of the California Code of Regulations.
      CITY. The City of Culver City.
      DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the City of Culver City
or his or her designee.
      SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM. A system that generates electricity from the
sun.
   117.1 Requirements. All new buildings of 10,000 square feet or more of gross
floor area, additions equal to 10,000 square feet or more of gross floor area,
and major renovations to existing buildings of 10,000 square feet or more of
gross floor area, where such renovation is equal to at least fifty percent
(50%) of the valuation of the existing building, shall be equipped with a one
kilowatt (1 kw) solar photovoltaic system per each 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area, or fraction thereof.
   A.   Except as otherwise expressly provided, this Section shall not apply to
one- and two-family residences, parking structures, garages, and renovations or
additions to existing buildings.
   B.   For qualifying projects, the number of panels required for any given
system shall be the total required energy production of the project, divided by
the energy production capability of a single panel as specified on the project.
   C.   When calculating the number of panels required, fractional panels equal
to or greater than one half shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number;
fractional panels less than one half shall be rounded down to the nearest whole
number.
   117.2 Exceptions. Upon the written approval of the Director, an applicant
who is unable to install the required solar photovoltaic system, due to the
configuration of the proposed construction project, shall comply with one of
the following options in order to satisfy the requirements set forth in § 117.1
:
   A.   In-lieu fee.
      1.   An applicant shall pay an in-lieu fee in an amount equal to the cost
of a solar photovoltaic system installed in a comparable project.
      2.   Fees generated from in lieu payments pursuant to this Subsection
shall be appropriated and disbursed only for solar photovoltaic designs and
installations on City buildings or facilities.
      3.   The amount and process for the collection, utilization and return of
fees contemplated by this Section shall be established by resolution of the
City Council.
   B.   Alternate location. An applicant shall install a solar photovoltaic
system equivalent to a system installed in a comparable project on another
building owned by the applicant and located in Culver City.
   117.3 Building Permit Fees and Inspections.
   A.   Plan check and permit fees in an amount not to exceed Five Thousand
Dollars ($5,000) shall be waived for solar photovoltaic installations. This
subsection, 117.3.A, shall remain in effect until May 23, 2028, and as of that
date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, enacted before May 23, 2028,
deletes or extends that date.
   B.   The value of the required solar photovoltaic system shall not be
required to be included in the overall construction valuation of the project
for the purposes of determining building permit fees.
   C.   No final inspection shall be approved for a construction project
subject to the requirements of this Subchapter, nor shall a temporary or final
certificate of occupancy be issued for such project, prior to the installation
of the solar photovoltaic system being completed, inspected and fully
operational, unless otherwise excepted pursuant to § 117.2.
   Section 118 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows.
   118 Sandblasting. The purpose of this Section is to prevent the dust and
debris that occurs in sandblasting operations from spreading throughout the
neighborhood creating a public health hazard.
   118.1 Permit Required; Compliance with Regulations.
   A.   No person shall sandblast or cause to be sandblasted the outside or
inside of any building or structure within the City without first paying the
fee and obtaining a permit from the Division of Building and Safety and without
complying with regulations adopted by the City Council which are reasonable
necessary to protect the public health and safety and property from damage
which may result from sandblasting.
   B.   No permit for dry sandblasting shall be issued unless the Building
Official determines that extraordinary reasons exist for the use of such a
process and that adequate measures will be taken to protect the public health
and safety from the effect of such dry sandblasting.
   118.2 Enforcement.
   A.   The Building Official shall have the power to revoke without prior
notice any sandblasting permit for failure to comply with any such regulations.
   B.   No person shall do any sandblasting after a permit therefore has been
revoked.
   Section 1006.3.5 is added to Chapter 10 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1006.3.5 Single-exit buildings with Group R-2 dwelling units with an
occupied 20 floor or roof above the third story. Single-exit, Group R-
2 occupancy buildings with an occupied floor or roof above the third story are
hereby permitted within the City of Culver City so long as they strictly comply
with all of the following in addition to the requirements of this Code, and the
CBC where specified, other than CBC Section 1006.3.4:
   1.   All dwelling units or accessory dwelling units shall meet the
definitions of dwelling units or accessory dwelling units as defined in Chapter
2, and no other type of unit shall be permitted within the building. 2. Group
R-2 occupancies, as defined in CBC Section 310.3, within the building shall be
limited to apartment houses. Group R-2.1 and Group R-2.2 occupancies shall not
be permitted.
   2.   The building is not classified as a high-rise building as defined in
Chapter 2.
   3.   The floor area of each floor (story or basement) shall not exceed 4,000
net habitable square feet (371.6 m2).
   4.   There shall be no more than two single exit stairway conditions on the
same property.
   5.   Single-exit buildings over three stories are not permitted in any area
designated as a Fire Hazard Severity Zone pursuant to Section 9.02.400.
   6.   The building shall be of VA (four stories maximum), IVA, IVB, IVG,
IIIA, IIA, IB, or IA type of construction.
   7.   Recycling, waste, and linen chute access shall be located within a
separate room and shall not be accessible from the interior stairway. The
separate chute access room shall have no horizontal dimension less than five
feet (1.53 m) nor be less than 25 square feet (2.32 m2) in area.
   8.   Each dwelling unit and each accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to
a maximum of six habitable spaces as defined in Chapter 2.
   9.   An elevator is required for buildings that are five or six stories in
height. All stories must be served by the elevator. When an elevator is
provided, it shall comply with CBC Section 3002.4A, general stretcher
requirements.
   10.   When an elevator is provided, it shall have a pressurized shaft or
pressurized hoistway that at all times must remain pressurized in accordance
with CBC Section 909.21 at a minimum positive pressure of 0.10 inch of water
(25Pa) and a maximum positive pressure of 0.25 inch of water (67Pa) with
respect to all adjacent areas on all floors, or shall open into elevator
lobbies constructed to comply with CBC Section 3006.
   11.   No more than 20 feet (6.10 m) of travel distance to the exit stairway
as measured from the entry/exit door of any dwelling unit to the exit stairway
door or related passageway door shall be permissible.
   12.   Other occupancies are permitted in the same building provided they
separately comply with all the requirements of this Code. Other occupancies
shall not communicate with the Group R occupancy portion of the building and
shall be provided with a separate means of egress, distinct from the single-
exit serving the Group R-2 occupancy.
      Exception: Parking garages accessory to the Group R-2 occupancy are
permitted to use the single-exit stairway.
   13.   Private roof decks up to 150 square feet (13.9 m2) per unit are
permitted at or below the sixth story. The private roof deck must be accessible
only through that individual unit. Individual roof decks shall be separated
from other private roof decks and any other areas by a minimum 42-inch (1067
mm) tall guardrail or walls.
   14.   No more than a total of four dwelling units (including accessory
dwelling units) shall be permitted on each story or basement level.
   15.   The building shall not exceed six stories, not more than 5 stories of
Group R-2 occupancy are permitted to be served by a single exit stairway.
Basement levels shall be counted as stories for the purpose of this limit.
   16.   Exit access doors shall swing in the direction of egress travel at the
exterior or interior exit stairway, associated passageway, or vestibule,
regardless of the occupant load served. Door swing shall not reduce or encroach
into the required stair landing. Landings shall not be reduced by any amount
when the door is in any position. Reductions in the minimum required landing
dimensions, as allowed per CBC Section 1010.1.5 and CBC Section 1011.6, shall
not be permitted.
   17.   The maximum exit access travel distance, measured in accordance with
CBC Section 1017, shall not exceed 125 feet (38.1 m).
   18.   A corridor complying with CBC Section 1020 or an egress balcony
complying with CBC Section 1021 shall separate each dwelling unit entry/exit
door from the exit stairway, including any related passageway, on each floor.
Corridor and egress balcony walls shall be of not less than 1-hour fire-
resistance-rated construction. The egress balcony shall be separated from the
interior of the building by walls and opening protectives as required for 1-
hour fire-resistance-rated corridors.
   19.   Dwelling units, elevators, equipment rooms, storage rooms, trash
rooms, and other similar rooms or spaces shall not open into the interior exit
stairway enclosure.
   20.   An exterior exit stairway or interior exit stairway shall be provided.
The interior exit stairway, including any related passageways, shall be a
smoke-proof enclosure in compliance with CBC Section 909.20.
   21.   Electrical receptacles shall be prohibited in an interior exit
stairway.
   22.   Dwelling unit doors are permitted to open onto an exterior exit
stairway as long as the dwelling unit doors do not encroach into the stairs and
required stairway landings. Reductions in the minimum required landing
dimensions, as allowed per CBC Section 1010.1.5 and CBC Section 1011.6, shall
not be permitted.
   23.   Exits shall terminate directly onto a public way that is 15 feet wide
minimum or onto an egress court where the width of the egress court is equal to
or exceeds the court length and terminates at a public way that is no less than
15 feet wide.
   24.   The total horizontal travel distance from the edge of the roadway to
the farthest unit door (at any level), excluding the vertical rise within a
stairway (and associated landings), shall be less than 250 feet.
   25.   Notwithstanding CBC Section 1031.2, all basement levels and sleeping
rooms within any story or basement shall have not fewer than one emergency
escape and rescue opening in accordance with CBC Section 1031.
   26.   The building shall be provided with a sprinkler system in accordance
with NFPA-13 as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission and
amended by the City of Culver City.
   27.   A manual fire alarm system and automatic smoke detection system that
activates the occupant notification system in accordance with CBC Section 907.5
shall be provided. Smoke detectors shall be located in common spaces outside of
dwelling units, including but not limited to gathering areas, laundry rooms,
mechanical equipment rooms, storage rooms, interior corridors, interior exit
stairway, and passageways.
   28.   Compliance with these requirements does not exempt Single-exit, Group
R-2 occupancy buildings with an occupied floor or roof above the third story
from any other applicable requirements of the City of Culver City Fire Code or
the State Fire Code.
   29.   There shall be 20 feet of width in both the front and rear of the
building for fire department access and operations, specifically with regard to
aerial ladder usage. For purposes of the rear requirement, a public alley,
designated egress court, or other approved form of public access may be used to
satisfy all or part of the required 20 feet.
   Section 1507.3.1 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1507.3.1 Deck requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only
over solid sheathing.
   Exception: Spaced lumber shall be permitted in Seismic Design Categories A,
B, and C.
   Sections 1613.5 and 1613.5.1 are added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read
as follows:
   1613.5 Amendments to ASCE 7. The provisions of Section 1613.5 shall be
permitted as an amendment to the relevant provisions of ASCE 7.
   1613.5.1 Values for vertical combinations. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.2.3.1
Exception 3 as follows:
      3.   Detached one- and two-family dwellings up to two stories in height
of light frame construction.
   Section 1613.5.2 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.5.2 Wood Diaphragms. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.11.2.2.3 as follows:
   12.11.2.2.3 Wood Diaphragms.
In wood diaphragms, the continuous ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm
sheathing. Anchorage shall not be accomplished by use of toe nails or nails
subject to withdrawal nor shall wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain
bending or cross-grain tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall not be considered
effective as providing ties or struts required by this section.
   For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, wood
diaphragms supporting concrete or masonry walls shall comply with the
following:
      1.   The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40 feet. Added
chords of diaphragms may be used to form sub-diaphragms to transmit the
anchorage forces to the main continuous crossties.
      2.   The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the depth of the sub-
diaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm shear.
   Section 1613.5.3 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.5.3 Structural separation. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.12.3 Equation
12.12-1 as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5062.png]
 
   Section 1613.6 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.6 Seismic design provisions for hillside buildings.
   1613.6.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum
regulations for the design and construction of new buildings and additions to
existing buildings when constructing such buildings on or into slopes steeper
than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%). These regulations
establish minimum standards for seismic force resistance to reduce the risk of
injury or loss of life in the event of earthquakes.
   1613.6.2 Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of
the lateral-force-resisting system for hillside buildings at and below the base
level diaphragm. The design of the lateral- force-resisting system above the
base level diaphragm shall be in accordance with the provisions for seismic and
wind design as required elsewhere in this division.
   Exception: Non-habitable accessory buildings and decks not supporting or
supported from the main building are exempt from these regulations.
   1613.6.3 Definitions. For the purposes of this section certain terms are
defined as follows:
      BASE LEVEL DIAPHRAGM is the floor at, or closest to, the top of the
highest 26 level of the foundation.
      DIAPHRAGM ANCHORS are assemblies that connect a diaphragm to the adjacent
foundation at the uphill diaphragm edge.
      DOWNHILL DIRECTION is the descending direction of the slope approximately
perpendicular to the slope contours.
      FOUNDATION is concrete or masonry which supports a building, including
footings, stem walls, retaining walls, and grade beams.
      FOUNDATION EXTENDING IN THE DOWNHILL DIRECTION is a foundation running
downhill and approximately perpendicular to the uphill foundation.
      HILLSIDE BUILDING is any building or portion thereof constructed on or
into a slope steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%).
If only a portion of the building is supported on or into the slope, these
regulations apply to the entire building.
      PRIMARY ANCHORS are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a direct
connection as described in Sections 1613.6.5 and 1613.6.7.3 between the
diaphragm and the uphill foundation.
      SECONDARY ANCHORS are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a
redundant diaphragm to foundation connection, as described in Sections 1613.6.6
and 1613.6.7.4.
      UPHILL DIAPHRAGM EDGE is the edge of the diaphragm adjacent and closest
to the highest ground level at the perimeter of the diaphragm.
      UPHILL FOUNDATION is the foundation parallel and closest to the uphill
diaphragm edge.
   1613.6.4 Analysis and design.
   1613.6.4.1 General. Every hillside building within the scope of this section
shall be analyzed, designed, and constructed in accordance with the provisions
of this division. When the code-prescribed wind design produces greater
effects, the wind design shall govern, but detailing requirements and
limitations prescribed in this and referenced sections shall be followed.
   1613.6.4.2 Base level diaphragm-downhill direction. The following provisions
shall apply to the seismic analysis and design of the connections for the base
level diaphragm in the downhill direction.
   1613.6.4.2.1 Base for lateral force design defined. For seismic forces
acting in the downhill direction, the base of the building shall be the floor
at or closest to the top of the highest level of the foundation.
   1613.6.4.2.2 Base shear. In developing the base shear for seismic design,
the response modification coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall
and building frame systems. The total base shear shall include the forces
tributary to the base level diaphragm including forces from the base level
diaphragm.
   1613.6.5 Base shear resistance-primary anchors.
   1613.6.5.1 General. The base shear in the downhill direction shall be
resisted through primary anchors from diaphragm struts provided in the base
level diaphragm to the foundation.
   1613.6.5.2 Location of primary anchors. A primary anchor and diaphragm strut
shall be provided in line with each foundation extending in the downhill
direction. Primary anchors and diaphragm struts shall also be provided where
interior vertical lateral-force-resisting elements occur above and in contact
with the base level diaphragm. The spacing of primary anchors and diaphragm
struts or collectors shall in no case exceed 30 feet (9144 mm).
   1613.6.5.3 Design of primary anchors and diaphragm struts. Primary anchors
and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of
Section 1613.6.8.
   1613.6.5.4 Limitations. The following lateral-force-resisting elements shall
not be designed to resist seismic forces below the base level diaphragm in the
downhill direction:
      1.   Wood structural panel wall sheathing,
      2.   Cement plaster and lath,
      3.   Gypsum wallboard, and
      4.   Tension only braced frames.
   Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of Section
2205.2.1.2 may be used to transfer forces from the primary anchors and
diaphragm struts to the foundation provided lateral forces do not induce
flexural stresses in any member of the frame or in the diaphragm struts.
Deflections of frames shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal
members when the frame is not rectangular.
   1613.6.6 Base shear resistance-secondary anchors.
   1613.6.6.1 General. In addition to the primary anchors required by Section
15 1613.6.5, the base shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted through
secondary anchors in the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in the
base level diaphragm.
   Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending in
the downhill direction spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm) on center
extend up to and are directly connected to the base level diaphragm for at
least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
   1613.6.6.2 Secondary anchor capacity and spacing. Secondary anchors at the
base level diaphragm shall be designed for a minimum force equal to the base
shear, including forces tributary to the base level diaphragm, but not less
than 600 pounds per lineal foot (8.76 kN/m) based on Allowable Stress Design
(ASD) levels. The secondary anchors shall be uniformly distributed along the
uphill diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on
center.
   1613.6.6.3 Design. Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed
in accordance with Section 1613.6.8.
   1613.6.7 Diaphragms below the base level-downhill direction. The following
provisions shall apply to the lateral analysis and design of the connections
for all diaphragms below the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction.
   1613.6.7.1 Diaphragm defined. Every floor level below the base level
diaphragm shall be designed as a diaphragm.
   1613.6.7.2 Design force.Each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall
be designed for all tributary loads at that level using a minimum seismic force
factor not less than the base shear coefficient.
   1613.6.7.3 Design force resistance-primary anchors. The design force
described in Section 1613.6.7.2 shall be resisted through primary anchors from
diaphragm struts provided in each diaphragm to the foundation. Primary anchors
shall be provided and designed in accordance with the requirements and
limitations of Section 1613.6.5.
   1613.6.7.4 Design force resistance-secondary anchors.
   1613.6.7.4.1 General. In addition to the primary anchors required in Section
1613.6.7.3, the design force in the downhill direction shall be resisted
through secondary anchors in the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm
struts in each diaphragm below the base level.
   Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending in
the downhill direction, spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm) on center,
extend up to and are directly connected to each diaphragm below the base level
for at least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
   1613.6.7.4.2 Secondary anchor capacity. Secondary anchors at each diaphragm
below the base level diaphragm shall be designed for a minimum force equal to
the design force but not less than 300 pounds per lineal foot (4.38 kN/m) based
on Allowable Stress Design (ASD) levels. The secondary anchors shall be
uniformly distributed along the uphill diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a
maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
   1613.6.7.4.3 Design. Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be
designed in accordance with Section 1613.6.8.
   1613.6.8 Primary and secondary anchorage and diaphragm strut design.
   Primary and secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in
accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Fasteners. All bolted fasteners used to develop connections to wood
members shall be provided with square plate washers at all bolt heads and nuts.
Washers shall be minimum 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm
by 76 mm) in size. Nuts shall be tightened to finger tight plus one half (1/2)
wrench turn prior to covering the framing.
      2.   Fastening. The diaphragm to foundation anchorage shall not be
accomplished by the use of toenailing, nails subject to withdrawal, or wood in
cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension.
      3.   Size of Wood Members. Wood diaphragm struts collectors, and other
wood members connected to primary anchors shall not be less than 3 inch (76 mm)
nominal width. The effects of eccentricity on wood members shall be evaluated
as required per Item 9.
      4.   Design. Primary and secondary anchorage, including diaphragm struts,
splices, and collectors shall be designed for 125% of the tributary force.
      5.   Allowable Stress Increase. The one-third allowable stress increase
permitted under Section 1605.3.2 shall not be taken when the working
(allowable) stress design method is used.
      6.   Steel Element of Structural Wall Anchorage System. The strength
design forces for steel elements of the structural wall anchorage system, with
the exception of anchor bolts and reinforcing steel, shall be increased by 1.4
times the forces otherwise required.
      7.   Primary Anchors. The load path for primary anchors and diaphragm
struts shall be fully developed into the diaphragm and into the foundation. The
foundation must be shown to be adequate to resist the concentrated loads from
the primary anchors.
      8.   Secondary Anchors. The load path for secondary anchors and diaphragm
struts shall be fully developed in the diaphragm but need not be developed
beyond the connection to the foundation.
      9.   Symmetry. All lateral force foundation anchorage and diaphragm strut
connections shall be symmetrical. Eccentric connections may be permitted when
demonstrated by calculation or tests that all components of force have been
provided for in the structural analysis or tests.
      10.   Wood Ledgers. Wood ledgers shall not be used to resist cross-grain
bending or cross-grain tension.
   1613.6.9 Lateral-force-resisting elements normal to the downhill direction.
   1613.6.9.1 General. In the direction normal to the downhill direction,
lateral-force-resisting elements shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
   1613.6.9.2 Base shear. In developing the base shear for seismic design, the
response modification coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall and
building frame systems.
   1613.6.9.3 Vertical distribution of seismic forces. For seismic forces
acting normal to the downhill direction the distribution of seismic forces over
the height of the building using Section 12.8.3 of ASCE 7 shall be determined
using the height measured from the top of the lowest level of the building
foundation.
   1613.6.9.4 Drift limitations. The story drift below the base level diaphragm
shall not exceed 0.007 times the story height at strength design force level.
The total drift from the base level diaphragm to the top of the foundation
shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19 mm). Where the story height or the height from
the base level diaphragm to the top of the foundation varies because of a
stepped footing or story offset, the height shall be measured from the average
height of the top of the foundation. The story drift shall not be reduced by
the effect of horizontal diaphragm stiffness.
   1613.6.9.5 Distribution of lateral forces.
   1613.6.9.5.1 General. The design lateral force shall be distributed to
lateral-force-resisting elements of varying heights in accordance with the
stiffness of each individual element.
   1613.6.9.5.2 Wood structural panel sheathed walls. The stiffness of a
stepped wood structural panel shear wall may be determined by dividing the wall
into adjacent rectangular elements, subject to the same top of wall deflection.
Deflections of shear walls may be estimated by AWC SDPWS Section 4.3.2.
Sheathing and fastening requirements for the stiffest section shall be used for
the entire wall. Each section of wall shall be anchored for shear and uplift at
each step. The minimum horizontal length of a step shall be 8 feet (2438 mm)
and the maximum vertical height of a step shall be 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm).
   1613.6.9.5.3 Reinforced concrete or masonry shear walls. Reinforced concrete
or masonry shear walls shall have forces distributed in proportion to the
rigidity of each section of the wall.
   1613.6.9.6 Limitations. The following lateral force-resisting-elements shall
not be designed to resist lateral forces below the base level diaphragm in the
direction normal to the downhill direction:
      1.   Cement plaster and lath,
      2.   Gypsum wallboard, and
      3.   Tension-only braced frames.
   Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of Section
2205.2.1.2 of this Code may be designed as lateral-force-resisting elements in
the direction normal to the downhill direction, provided lateral forces do not
induce flexural stresses in any member of the frame. Deflections of frames
shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal members when the frame is
not rectangular.
   1613.6.10 Specific design provisions.
   1613.6.10.1 Footings and grade beams.
   All footings and grade beams shall 8 comply with the following:
      1.   Grade beams shall extend at least 12 inches (305 mm) below the
lowest adjacent grade and provide a minimum 24-inch (610 mm) distance
horizontally from the bottom outside face of the grade beam to the face of the
descending slope.
      2.   Continuous footings shall be reinforced with at least two No. 4
reinforcing bars at the top and two No. 4 reinforcing bars at the bottom.
      3.   All main footing and grade beam reinforcement steel shall be bent
into the intersecting footing and fully developed around each corner and
intersection.
      4.   All concrete stem walls shall extend from the foundation and
reinforced as required for concrete or masonry walls.
   1613.6.10.2 Protection against decay and termites.
   All wood to earth separation shall comply with the following:
      1.   Where a footing or grade beam extends across a descending slope, the
stem wall, grade beam, or footing shall extend up to a minimum 18 inches (457
mm) above the highest adjacent grade.
         Exception: At paved garage and doorway entrances to the building, the
stem wall need only extend to the finished concrete slab, provided the wood
framing is protected with a moisture proof barrier.
      2.   Wood ledgers supporting a vertical load of more than 100 pounds per
lineal foot (1.46 kN/m) based on Allowable Stress Design (ASD) levels and
located within 48 inches (1219 mm) of adjacent grade are prohibited. Galvanized
steel ledgers and anchor bolts, with or without wood nailers, or treated or
decay resistant sill plates supported on a concrete or masonry seat, may be
used.
   1613.6.10.3 Sill plates.
   All sill plates and anchorage shall comply with the following:
      1.   All wood framed walls, including nonbearing walls, when resting on a
footing, foundation, or grade beam stem wall, shall be supported on wood sill
plates bearing on a level surface.
      2.   Power-driven fasteners shall not be used to anchor sill plates
except at interior nonbearing walls not designed as shear walls.
   1613.6.10.4 Column base plate anchorage.
   The base of isolated wood posts (not framed into a stud wall) supporting a
vertical load of 4,000 pounds (17.8 kN) based on Allowable Stress Design (ASD)
levels or more and the base plate for a steel column shall comply with the
following:
      1.   When the post or column is supported on a pedestal extending above
the top of a footing or grade beam, the pedestal shall be designed and
reinforced as required for concrete or masonry columns. The pedestal shall be
reinforced with a minimum of four No. 4 bars extending to the bottom of the
footing or grade beam. The top of exterior pedestals shall be sloped for
positive drainage.
      2.   The base plate anchor bolts or the embedded portion of the post
base, and the vertical reinforcing bars for the pedestal, shall be confined
with two No. 4 or three No. 3 ties within the top 5 inches (127 mm) of the
concrete or masonry pedestal. The base plate anchor bolts shall be embedded a
minimum of 20 bolt diameters into the concrete or masonry pedestal. The base
plate anchor bolts and post bases shall be galvanized, and each anchor bolt
shall have at least 2 galvanized nuts above the base plate.
   1613.6.10.5 Steel beam to column supports. All steel beam to column supports
shall be positively braced in each direction. Steel beams shall have stiffener
plates installed on each side of the beam web at the column. The stiffener
plates shall be welded to each beam flange and the beam web. Each brace
connection or structural member shall consist of at least two 5/8 inch (15.9
mm) diameter machine bolts.
   Section 1613.8 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.8 Suspended Ceilings. Minimum design and installation standards for
suspended ceilings shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of
Section 2506.2.1 of this Code and this section.
   1613.8.1 Scope. This part contains special requirements for suspended
ceilings and lighting systems. Provisions of Section 13.5.6 of ASCE 7 shall
apply except as modified herein.
   1613.8.2 General. The suspended ceilings and lighting systems shall be
limited to 6 feet (1828 mm) below the structural deck unless the lateral
bracing is designed by a licensed engineer or architect.
   1613.8.3 Sprinkler Heads. All sprinkler heads (drops) except fire-
resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, shall be designed to
allow for free movement of the sprinkler pipes with oversize rings, sleeves or
adaptors through the ceiling tile. Sprinkler heads and other penetrations shall
have a 2-inch (50mm) oversize ring, sleeve, or adapter through the ceiling tile
to allow for free movement of at least 1 inch (25mm) in all horizontal
directions. Alternatively, a swing joint that can accommodate 1 inch (25 mm) of
ceiling movement in all horizontal directions is permitted to be provided at
the top of the sprinkler head extension.
   Sprinkler heads penetrating fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/
ceiling assemblies shall comply with Section 714 of this Code.
   1613.8.4 Special Requirements for Means of Egress. Suspended ceiling
assemblies located along means of egress serving an occupant load of 30 or more
shall comply with the following provisions.
   1613.8.4.1 General. Ceiling suspension systems shall be connected and braced
with vertical hangers attached directly to the structural deck along the means
of egress serving an occupant load of 30 or more and at lobbies accessory to
Group A Occupancies. Spacing of vertical hangers shall not exceed 2 feet (610
mm) on center along the entire length of the suspended ceiling assembly located
along the means of egress or at the lobby.
   1613.8.4.2 Assembly Device. All lay-in panels shall be secured to the
suspension ceiling assembly with two hold-down clips minimum for each tile
within a 4-foot (1219 mm) radius of the exit lights and exit signs.
   1613.8.4.3 Emergency Systems. Independent supports and braces shall be
provided for light fixtures required for exit illumination. Power supply for
exit illumination shall comply with the requirements of Section 1008.3 of this
Code.
   1613.8.4.4 Supports for Appendage. Separate support from the structural deck
shall be provided for all appendages such as light fixtures, air diffusers,
exit signs, and similar elements.
   Section 1704.6 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1704.6 Structural observations.
   Where required by the provisions of Section 1704.6.1, 1704.6.2 or 1704.6.3,
the owner or the owner's authorized agent shall employ a structural observer to
perform structural observations. Structural observation does not include or
waive the responsibility for the inspections in Section 110 or the special
inspections in Section 1705 or other sections of this code. The structural
observer shall be one of the following individuals:
      1.   The registered design professional responsible for the structural
design, or
      2.   A registered design professional designated by the registered design
professional responsible for the structural design.
   Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural observer shall
submit to the building official a written statement identifying the frequency
and extent of structural observations.
   The owner or owner's authorized agent shall coordinate and call a
preconstruction meeting between the structural observer, contractors, affected
subcontractors and special inspectors. The structural observer shall preside
over the meeting. The purpose of the meeting shall be to identify the major
structural elements and connections that affect the vertical and lateral load
resisting systems of the structure and to review scheduling of the required
observations. A record of the meeting shall be included in the report submitted
to the building official.
   Observed deficiencies shall be reported in writing to the owner or owner's
authorized agent, special inspector, contractor and the building official. Upon
the form prescribed by the building official, the structural observer shall
submit to the building official a written statement at each significant
construction stage stating that the site visits have been made and identifying
any reported deficiencies which, to the best of the structural observer's
knowledge, have not been resolved. A final report by the structural observer
which states that all observed deficiencies have been resolved is required
before acceptance of the work by the building official.
   Section 1704.6.2 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1704.6.2 Structural observations for seismic resistance. Structural
observations shall be provided for those structures assigned to Seismic Design
Category D, E or F where one or more of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The structure is classified as Risk Category III or IV.
      2.   The structure is classified as Risk Category I or II, and a lateral
design is required for the structure or portion thereof.
   Exception: One-story wood framed Group R-3 and Group U Occupancies less than
2,000 square feet in area, provided the adjacent grade is not steeper than 1
unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% sloped), assigned to Seismic Design
Category D.
   Section 1705.3 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1705.3 Concrete construction. The special inspections and tests for concrete
construction shall be performed in accordance with this section and Table
1705.3.
   Exceptions: Special inspections and tests shall not be required for:
      1.   Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less
above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock where the
structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength,
fc, not more than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa) regardless of
the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in the
footing construction.
      2.   Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three
stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock
where:
      2.1.   The footings support walls of light-frame construction;
      2.2.   The footings are designed in accordance with Table 1809.7; or
      2.3.   The structural design of the footing is based on a specified
compressive strength, fc, not more than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi)
(17.2 Mpa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the
construction documents or used in the footing construction.
      3.   Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground,
including prestressed slabs on grade, where the effective prestress in the
concrete is less than 150 psi (1.03 Mpa).
      4.   Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.
   Exception 3 of Section 1705.13 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as
follows:
   1705.13 Special inspections for seismic resistance.
   Special inspections for seismic resistance shall be required as specified in
Sections 1705.12.1 through 1705.12.9, unless exempted by the exceptions of
Section 1704.2.
   Exception: The special inspections specified in Sections 1705.12.1 through
1705.12.9 are not required for structures designed and constructed in
accordance with one of the following:
      1.   The structure consists of light-frame construction; the design
spectral response acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in Section
1613.3.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does
not exceed 35 feet (10668 mm)
      2.   The seismic force-resisting system of the structure consists of
reinforced masonry or reinforced concrete; the design spectral response
acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in Section 1613.3.4, does not
exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does not exceed 25 feet
(7620 mm)
      3.   The structure is a detached one- or two-family dwelling not
exceeding two stories above grade plane, is not assigned to Seismic Design
Category D, E or F and does not have any of the following horizontal or
vertical irregularities in accordance with Section 12.3 of ASCE 7:
      3.1   Torsional or extreme torsional irregularity.
      3.2   Nonparallel systems irregularity.
      3.3   Stiffness-soft story or stiffness-extreme soft story irregularity.
      3.4   Discontinuity in lateral strength-weak story irregularity.
   Section 1807.1.4 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1807.1.4 Permanent wood foundation systems. Permanent wood foundation
systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with AWC PWF. Lumber and
plywood shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A,
Use Category 4B and Section 5.2) and shall be identified in accordance with
Section 2303.1.9.1. Permanent wood foundation systems shall not be used for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
   Section 1807.1.6 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls.
Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top
and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with
this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
   Section 1807.2 of the 2025 Edition of the California Building Code is
amended to read as follows:
   1807.2 Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be designed in accordance with
Section 1807.2.1 through 1807.2.3. Retaining walls assigned to Seismic Design
Category D, E or F shall not be partially or wholly constructed of wood.
   Section 1807.3.1 of the 2025 Edition of the California Building Code is
amended to read as follows:
   1807.3.1 Limitations.
   The design procedures outlined in this section are subject to the following
limitations:
      1.   The frictional resistance for structural walls and slabs on silts
and clays shall be limited to one-half of the normal force imposed on the soils
by the weight of the fooling or slab.
      2.   Posts embedded in earth shall not be used to provide lateral support
for structural or nonstructural materials such as plaster, masonry or concrete
unless bracing is provided that develops the limited deflection required.
   Wood poles shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for sawn timber posts
(Commodity Specification A, Use Category 48) and for round timber posts
(Commodity Specification 8, Use Category 48). Wood poles and posts embedded in
direct contact with soil shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category D, E or F.
   Exception: Wood poles and posts embedded in direct contact with soil may be
used to support non-habitable, non-occupiable structures such as fences when
approved by the building official.
   Section 1809.3 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1809.3 Stepped footings. The top surface of footings shall be level. The
bottom surface of footings shall be permitted to have a slope not exceeding one
unit vertical in 10 units horizontal ( 10-percent slope). Footings shall be
stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the
footing or where the surface of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical
in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
   For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, the stepping
requirement shall also apply to the top surface of grade beams supporting
walls. Footings shall be reinforced with four No. 4 bars. Two bars shall be
place at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure 1809.3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5064.png]
FIGURE 1809.3 - STEPPED FOOTING
   Section 1809.7 and Table 1809.7 of the 2025 CBC are amended to read as
follows:
   1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction. Where a specific
design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings supporting walls of
light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with
Table 1809.7. Light-frame construction using prescriptive footings in Table
1809.7 shall not exceed one story above grade plane for structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
TABLE 1809.7
PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTIONa, b, c, d, e
 
NUMBER OF FLOORS SUPPORTED WIDTH OF FOOTING (inches) THICKNESS OF FOOTING
BY THE FOOTINGf                                      (inches)
1                          12                        6
2                          15                        6
3                          18                        8
 
      For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
      a.   Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.
      b.   The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the
elevation of the top of the footing.
      c.   Not Adopted.
      d.   See Section 1905 for additional requirements for concrete footings
of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.
      e.   For thickness of foundation walls, see Section 1807.1.6.
      f.   Footings shall be permitted to support a roof addition to the
stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required
for supporting one floor.
   Section 1809.12 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1809.12 Timber footings. Timber footings shall be permitted for buildings of
Type V construction and as otherwise approved by the building official. Such
footings shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification
A, Use Category 4B). Treated timbers are not required where placed entirely
below permanent water level, or where used as capping for wood piles that
project above the water level over submerged or marsh lands. The compressive
stresses perpendicular to grain in untreated timber footing supported upon
treated piles shall not exceed 70 percent of the allowable stresses for the
species and grade of timber as specified in the ANSI/AWC NOS. Timber footings
shall not be used in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
   Section 1810.3.2.4 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1810.3.2.4 Timber. Timber deep foundation elements shall be designed as
piles or poles in accordance with ANSI/AWC NOS. Round timber elements shall
conform to ASTM D 25. Sawn timber elements shall conform to DOC PS-20. Timber
deep foundation elements shall not be used in structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category D, E or F.
   Section 1905.1.7 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1905.1.7 ACI 318, Section 14.1.4. Delete ACI 318, Section 14.1.4, and
replace with the following:
      14.1.4 - Plain concrete in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category
C, D, E or F.
      14.1.4.1 - Structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F
shall not have elements of structural plain concrete, except as follows:
      (a)   Concrete used for fill with a minimum cement content of two (2)
sacks of Portland cement or Cementous material per cubic yard.
      (b)   Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns
are permitted, provided the projection of the footing beyond the face of the
supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.
      (c)   Plain concrete footings supporting walls are permitted provided the
footings have at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars shall
not be smaller than No. 4 and shall have a total area of not less than 0.002
times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing. A minimum of one bar shall
be provided at the top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement
shall be provided at corners and intersections.
   Exceptions: Detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in
height and constructed with stud-bearing walls, are permitted to have plain
concrete footings with at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars
not smaller than No. 4 are permitted to have a total area of less than 0.002
times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing.
   Section 1905.1 is amended and Sections 1905.1.9 thru 1905.1.11 are added to
Chapter 19 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   1905.1 General. The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as indicated in
Sections 1905.1.1 through 1905.1.11 .
   1905.1.9 ACI 318, Section 18.7.5. Modify ACI 318, Section 18.7.5, by adding
Section 18.7.5.8 and 18.7.5.9 as follows:
   Where the calculated point of contraflexure is not within the middle half of
the member clear height, provide transverse reinforcement as specified in ACI
318 Sections 18.7.5.1, Items (a) through (c), over the full height of the
member.
   18.7.5.9 At any section where the design strength, Pn, of the column is less
than the sum of the shears Ve computed in accordance with ACI 318 Sections
18.7.6.1 and 18.6.5.1 for all the beams framing into the column above the level
under consideration, transverse reinforcement as specified in ACI 318 Sections
18.7.5.1 through 18.7.5.3 shall be provided. For beams framing into opposite
sides of the column, the moment components are permitted to be assumed to be of
opposite sign. For the determination of the design strength, Pn, of the column,
these moments are permitted to be assumed to result from the deformation of the
frame in any one principal axis.
   1905.1.10 ACI 318, Section 18.10.4. Modify ACI 318, Section 18.10.4, by
adding Section 18.10.4.7 as follows:
   18.10.4.7 Walls and portions of walls with Po > 0.35Po shall not be
considered to contribute to the calculated shear strength of the structure for
resisting earthquake-induced forces. Such walls shall conform to the
requirements of ACI 318 Section 18.14.
   1905.1.11 ACI 318, Section 18.12.6. Modify ACI 318, by adding Section
18.12.6.2 as follows:
   18.12.6.2 Collector and boundary elements in topping slabs placed over
precast floor and roof elements shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) or 6 db
in thickness, where db is the diameter of the largest reinforcement in the
topping slab.
   Section 2304.10.2 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2304.10.2 Fastener requirements. Connections for wood members shall be
designed in accordance with the appropriate methodology in Section 2301.2. The
number and size of fasteners connecting wood members shall not be less than
that set forth in Table 2304.10.1. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.1 shall
not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
   Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the
allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the
building official.
   Section 2304.10.3.1 is added to Chapter 23 of the 2025 CBC to read as
follows:
   2304.10.3.1 Quality of Nails. In Seismic Design Category D, E or F,
mechanically driven nails used in wood structural panel shear walls shall meet
the same dimensions as that required for hand-driven nails, including diameter,
minimum length and minimum head diameter. Clipped head or box nails are not
permitted in new construction. The allowable design value for clipped head
nails in existing construction may be taken at no more than the nail-head-area
ratio of that of the same size hand-driven nails.
   Section 2304.12.2.8 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2304.12.2.8 Wood used in retaining walls and cribs. In Seismic Design
Category D, E or F, mechanically driven nails used in wood structural panel
shear walls shall meet the same dimensions as that required for hand-driven
nails, including diameter, minimum length and minimum head diameter. Clipped
head or box nails are not permitted in new construction. The allowable design
value for clipped head nails in existing construction may be taken at no more
than the nail-head-area ratio of that of the same size hand-driven nails.
   Section 2305.4 is added to Chapter 23 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   2305.4 Hold-down connectors. 
   In Seismic Design Category D, E or F, hold-down connectors shall be designed
to resist shear wall overturning moments using approved cyclic load values or
75 percent of the allowable seismic load values that do not consider cyclic
loading of the product. Connector bolts into wood framing shall require steel
plate washers on the post on the opposite side of the anchorage device. Plate
size shall be a minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm
by 76 mm) in size. Hold-down connectors shall be tightened to finger tight plus
one half (1/2) wrench turn just prior to covering the wall framing.
   Section 2306.2 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2306.2 Wood-frame diaphragms. Wood-frame diaphragms shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing
members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met
and the allowable shear values set forth in Table 2306.2(1) or 2306.2(2) shall
only be permitted for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or
C.
   Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing
members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by cyclic
testing and approved by the building official.
   The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.2(1) and 2306.2(2) are permitted
to be increased 40 percent for wind design.
   Wood structural panel diaphragms used to resist seismic forces in structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F shall be applied directly to the
framing members.
   Exception: Wood structural panel diaphragms are permitted to be fastened
over solid lumber planking or laminated decking, provided the panel joints and
lumber planking or laminated decking joints do not coincide.
   Section 2306.3 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2306.3 Wood-frame shear walls.
   Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
AWC SDPWS. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F,
application of Tables 4.3A and 4.3B of AWC SDPWS shall include the following:
      1.   Wood structural panel thickness for shear walls shall not be less
than 3/8 inch thick and studs shall not be spaced at more than 16 inches on
center.
      2.   The maximum nominal unit shear capacities for 3/8 inch wood
structural panels resisting seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category D, E or F is 400 pounds per linear foot (pit).
         Exception: Other nominal unit shear capacities may be permitted if
such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building
official.
      3.   Nails shall be placed not less than 1/2 inch in from the panel edges
and not less than 3/8 inch from the edge of the connecting members for shear
greater than 350 pit using ASD or 500 pit using LRFD. Nails shall be placed not
less than 3/8 inch from panel edges and not less than 1/4 inch from the edge of
the connecting members for shears of 350 pit or less using ASD or 500 pit or
less using LRFD.
      4.   Table 4.3B application is not allowed for structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E, or F.
   For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, application of Table
4.3C of AWC SDPWS shall not be used below the top level in a multi-level
building.
   Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and
limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth
in Table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall only be permitted for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.
   Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing
members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by cyclic
testing and approved by the building official.
   The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3(2) are permitted
to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with ANSI/APA PRP-
210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood Siding in the AWC
SDPWS.
   Section 2307.2 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   2307.2 Wood-frame shear walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with Section 2307.2 as applicable.
   Table 2308.6.1 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5067.png]
 
For S1: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
   NP = Not Permitted.
   a.   This table specifies minimum requirements for braced wall panels along
interior or exterior braced wall lines.
   b.   See Section 2308.6.3 for fall description of bracing methods.
   c.   For Method GB, gypsum wallboard applied to framing supports that are
spaced at 16 inches on center.
   d.   The required lengths shall be doubled for fypsum board applied to only
one face of a braced wall panel.
   e.   Percentage shown represents the minimum amount of bracing required
along the building length (or wall length if the structure has an irregular
shape).
   f.   DWB, SFB, PBS, and HPS wall braces are not permitted in Seismic Design
Categories D or E.
   g.   Minimum length of panel bracing of one face of the wall for WSP
sheathing shall be at least 4'-0" long or both faces of the wall for GB or PCP
sheathing shall be at least 8'-0" long; h/w ratio shall not exceed 2:1. Wall
framing to which sheathing used for bracing is applied shall be nominal 2 inch
wide [actual 1 1/2 inch (38 mm)] or larger members and spaced a maximum of 16
inches on center. Braced wall panel construction types shall not be mixed
within a braced wall line.
   h.   WSP sheathing shall be a minimum of 15/32" thick nailed with 8d common
placed 3/8 inches from panel edges and spaced not more than 6 inches on center
and 12 inches on center along intermediate framing members.
   Section 2308.6.5, 2308.6.5.1, and 2308,6.5.2 and Figures 2308.6.5.1 and
2308.6.5.1 of the 2025 CBC are amended to read as follows:
   2308.6.5 Alternative bracing. An alternate braced wall (ABW) or a portal
frame with hold-downs (PFH) described in this section is permitted to
substitute for a 48-inch (1219 mm) braced wall panel of Method DWB, WSP, SFB,
PBS, PCP or HPS. For Method GB, each 96-inch (2438 mm) section (applied to one
face) or 48-inch (1219 mm) section (applied to both faces) or portion thereof
required by Table 2308.6.1 is permitted to be replaced by one panel constructed
in accordance with Method ABW or PFH.
   2308.6.5.1 Alternate braced wall (ABW).
   An ABW shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure
2308.6.5.1. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less
than 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm).
Each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 3/8-inch (3.2 mm) minimum-
thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized
box nails in accordance with Table 2304.10.1 and blocked at wood structural
panel edges. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, each
panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm)
wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on
panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports. Two anchor bolts installed in
accordance with Section 2308.3.1 shall be provided in each panel. Anchor bolts
shall be placed at each panel outside quarter points. Each panel end stud shall
have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation, capable of providing an
approved uplift capacity of not less than 1,800 pounds (8006 N). The hold-down
device shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations. The ABW shall be supported directly on a foundation or on
floor framing supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the
entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with
not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is
required to have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by
12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing is permitted at door openings in
the braced wall line. This continuous footing shall be reinforced with not less
than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped 24 inches
(610 mm) with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located
directly under the braced wall line.
   Where the ABW is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, the
wood structural panel sheathing shall be provided on both faces, three anchor
bolts shall be placed at one-quarter points and tie-down device uplift capacity
shall be not less than 3,000 pounds (13 344 N).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5073.png]
FIGURE 2308.6.5.1
ALTERNATE BRACED WALL PANEL (ABW)
   2308.6.5.2 Portal frame with hold-downs (PFH)..
   A PFH shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure
2308.6.5.2. The adjacent door or window opening shall have a full-length
header.
   In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 16
inches (406 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each panel
shall be sheathed on one face with a single layer of 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) minimum-
thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized
box nails in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. For structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D or E, each panel shall be sheathed on one face with
15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm) wood structural panel sheathing nailed
with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate
supports and in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. The wood structural panel
sheathing shall extend up over the solid sawn or glued-laminated header and
shall be nailed in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. A built-up header
consisting of at least two 2-inch by 12-inch (51 mm by 305 mm) boards, fastened
in accordance with Item 24 of Table 2304.10.1 shall be permitted to be used. A
spacer, if used, shall be placed on the side of the built-up beam opposite the
wood structural panel sheathing. The header shall extend between the inside
faces of the first full-length outer studs of each panel. The clear span of the
header between the inner studs of each panel shall be not less than 6 feet
(1829 mm) and not more than 18 feet (5486 mm) in length. A strap with an uplift
capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4,400 N) shall fasten the header to the
inner studs opposite the sheathing. One anchor bolt not less than 5/8-inch
(15.9 mm) diameter and installed in accordance with Section 2308.3.1 shall be
provided in the center of each sill plate. The studs at each end of the panel
shall have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift
capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds (15570 N).
   Where a panel is located on one side of the opening, the header shall extend
between the inside face of the first full-length stud of the panel and the
bearing studs at the other end of the opening. A strap with an uplift capacity
of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N) shall fasten the header to the bearing
studs. The bearing studs shall also have a hold-down device fastened to the
foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N). The
hold-down devices shall be an embedded strap type, installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's recommendations. The PFH panels shall be supported directly
on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall
line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top
and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater
than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm)
continuous footing is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This
continuous footing shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and
bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped not less than 24 inches (610 mm)
with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly
under the braced wall line.
   Where a PFH is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, each
panel shall have a length of not less than 24 inches (610 mm).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5071.png]
FIGURE 2308.6.5.2
PORTAL FRAME WITH HOLD-DOWNS (PFH)
   Section 2308.6.8.1 of Chapter 23 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as
follows:
   2308.6.8.1 Foundation requirements. Braced wall lines shall be supported by
continuous foundations.
   Exception: For structures with a maximum plan dimension not more than 50
feet (15240 mm), continuous foundations are required at exterior walls only for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C. For structures in
Seismic Design Categories D and E, exterior braced wall panels shall be in the
same plane vertically with the foundation or the portion of the structure
containing the offset shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering
practice and Section 2308.1.1.
   Section 2308.6.9 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2308.6.9 Attachment of sheathing.
   Fastening of braced wall panel sheathing shall not be less than that
prescribed in Tables 2308.6.1 or 2304.10.1. Wall sheathing shall not be
attached to framing members by adhesives. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.1
shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned
to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
   Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the
allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the
building official.
   All braced wall panels shall extend to the roof sheathing and shall be
attached to parallel roof rafters or blocking above with framing clips (18-
gauge minimum) spaced at maximum 24 inches (6096 mm) on center with four 8d
nails per leg (total eight 8d nails per clip). Braced wall panels shall be
laterally braced at each top corner and at maximum 24 inches (6096 mm)
intervals along the top plate of discontinuous vertical framing.
   Section 3307 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:
   SECTION 3307 - Protection of Adjoining and Nearby Property and Persons.
   3307.1 Adjoining and nearby public and private property and persons making
lawful use of such property shall be protected from damage during construction,
remodeling and demolition work. Protection must be provided for footings,
foundations, party walls, chimneys, skylights and roofs. Provisions shall be
made to control water runoff and erosion during construction or demolition
activities. At the outset of new construction activities or major remodeling
projects, or at the otherwise earliest time it is feasible in the opinion of
the Building Official, and notwithstanding the provisions of Title 17 of the
Culver City Municipal Code (the "Zoning Code"), a protective screen or fence no
less than six (6) feet in height shall be erected to the satisfaction of the
Building Official between the construction site and immediately adjoining
properties, unless the Building Official determines that erection of a screen
is not feasible or would serve no practical purpose.
   3307.2 The Building Official shall have the authority to stop the
construction work at any time that in his or her opinion said construction work
has caused, is causing, or is about to cause, damage to adjacent or nearby
properties. Said work shall not recommence until the time that the necessary
corrections have been made so that no further damage will occur to the affected
property (unless the Building Official determines that the damage will be
corrected as provided in Section 3307.3) and written approval is obtained from
the Building Official that said work may recommence.
   3307.3
   A.   If construction work causes damage to adjacent or nearby properties,
the Building Division shall withhold inspections of said work and stop work
until (i) the damage to the affected property is repaired (or repair work has
commenced and is continued to be performed with due diligence until completed),
or (ii) the affected property owner is compensated the cost of repair, or (iii)
a documented agreement satisfactory to the Building Official is executed to
assure repair of the damage at a more appropriate phase of the construction.
   B.   If there is a bona fide dispute between the owner of the damaged
property and the party alleged to have caused said damage, as to the cause of
the damage, the method or scope of repair or the cost of the repair, work may
resume and inspections provided only if the party performing the construction
work posts a bond or cash deposit with the City in an amount that the Building
Official reasonably determines is sufficient to cover the cost of repair. Where
there exists a bona fide dispute, the issues in contention are a civil matter
beyond the authority of the City to resolve.
   3307.4 The bond called for in Section 3307.3 shall be approved as to form by
the City Attorney. The bond or the cash deposit will be held by the City until
the dispute is resolved between the parties or by a court of competent
jurisdiction. In the event that the aggrieved party does not submit proof to
the City that an action has in fact been filed within one (1) year after the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, then the City shall, unless good
cause is shown, release the bond or deposit. The City shall provide thirty (30)
days' written notice to the aggrieved party of its intent to release the bond
or deposit.
   3307.5
   A.   Prior to the commencement of new construction or major remodeling
projects, including but not limited to demolition of exterior walls or roofs,
excavation that requires shoring, sandblasting or other exterior construction
activities that require a building permit, the owner or contractor shall mail
written notice to the property owners and occupants located within one hundred
(100) feet of the construction site that construction will occur, along with a
copy of this Section 3307. Said notice shall be mailed to the affected property
owners and occupants at least ten (10) days prior to any 26 construction taking
place. The notice shall contain the following information:
      1.   Address where construction will occur;
      2.   Date(s) and approximate times construction will occur;
      3.   Name, address, telephone number and state license number of
contractor;
      4.   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property on
which construction is to occur.
      If the owner or the contractor fails to provide the required notice, the
Building Official shall have the authority to stop the work until the notice is
provided, in addition to any other remedies provided by this Code.
   B.   In addition to the Notice provided for above, the contractor or
building shall post a Notice at the construction site, which shall include as a
minimum the date(s) and approximate times construction will occur, the name and
contact information of the contractor, and the contact information for the
City's Building Safety Division.
   3307.6  Prior to approval of temporary shoring a geotechnical report shall
be provided certifying that the temporary shoring has been installed according
the shoring plan and specifying the time period for the integrity of the
temporary shoring.
   3307.7  The Building Official shall promulgate policies and procedures to
effectuate the provisions of this Section.
   Section J101.3 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.3 Hazards.
      1.   Whenever the building official determines that any land or any
existing excavation or fill has, from any cause, become a menace to life or
limb, or endangers public or private property, or adversely affects the safety,
use or stability of public or private property, the owner or other person in
legal control of the property concerned shall, upon receipt of a written notice
thereof from the building official, correct such condition in accordance with
the provisions of this appendix and the requirements and conditions set forth
in the notice so as to eliminate such condition. The owner or other person in
legal control of the property shall immediately comply with the provisions set
forth in the notice and shall complete the work within 180 days from the date
of the notice unless a shorter period of time for completion has been specified
in the notice in which case the owner shall comply with the shorter period of
time. Upon written application and good cause shown, the building official may
approve the request for an extension of time to complete the work required by
the notice.
      2.   If the above condition is not eliminated within the specified time
period, the building official may file with the Office of the Los Angeles
County Recorder a certificate stating that the property is deemed substandard
and that the owner thereof has been so notified to correct the substandard
condition. Said certificate shall specify the conditions creating the
substandard classification.
      3.   When the above conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of
the building official, upon receiving a fee from the owner or his agent, the
building official shall file with the Office of the Los Angeles County
Recorder, within a reasonable period of time, a certificate specifying that the
conditions creating the substandard classification have been corrected and that
the property is no longer considered substandard.
   Section J101.4 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.4 Safety Precautions.
      1.   General.
         a)   If at any stage of work on an excavation or fill, the building
official determines that the work has become or is likely to become dangerous
to any person, or is likely to endanger any property, public or private, the
building official must be authorized to require safety precautions to be
immediately taken by the property owner as a condition to continuing such
permitted work or to require cessation thereof forthwith unless and until it is
made safe and to amend the plans for such work.
         b)   Safety precautions may include, without limitation, specifying a
flatter exposed slope or construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
terracing, compaction, cribbing, retaining walls or buttress fills, slough
walls, desilting basins, check dams, benching, wire mesh and guniting, rock
fences, revetments or diversion walls.
         c)   Upon the determination of the building official that such safety
precautions during grading are necessary, the building official must provide a
notice and order to the permittee to implement same. After receiving such
notice, oral or written, it is unlawful for the permittee or any person to
proceed with such work contrary to such order.
      2.   Removal of Ground Cover.
         a)   The existing vegetative ground cover of any watershed in any
hillside area cannot be destroyed, removed or damaged except for routine
maintenance pursuant to lawful grading, use or occupancy of the property or to
clear hazardous vegetation near structures and roads.
         b)   Whenever ground cover is removed or damaged pursuant to a validly
issued grading permit, the permittee must restore and maintain the affected
area with an approved ground cover, or must accomplish such other erosion
control protection measures as may be approved by the building official. Such
erosion control must be completed within thirty days after cessation of the
grading work or other work pursuant to a validly issued building permit.
      3.   Maintenance of Protective Devices. All devices used to protect
hillside areas from erosion or landslide damage including, without limitation,
retaining walls, cribbing, terracing, surface and subsurface drainage
structures, interceptor drains, check dams, and riprap must be maintained in
good condition and repair as approved by the building official at the time of
completion of construction thereof.
   Section J101.5 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.5 Protection of Utilities. The owner and permittee of any property on
which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit must be
responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services.
   Section J101.6 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.6 Protection of Adjacent Properties. The owner and permittee of any
property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit
is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property and no person
must excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any
adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property
without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or
other damage that might result. Special precautions approved by the building
official must be made to prevent imported or exported materials from being
deposited on the adjacent public way and/or drainage courses. A 30-day
excavation notice must be provided as required by California Civil Code Section
829-834 when the excavation is of sufficient depth and proximity to adjacent
lot structures.
   Section J101.7 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.7 Storm water control measures. The owner and permittee of any property
on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit under
Section J103 shall put into effect and maintain all precautionary measures
necessary to protect adjacent water courses and public private property from
damage by erosion, flooding, and deposition of mud, debris and construction-
related pollutants originating from the site during, and after, grading and
related construction activities. Furthermore, the owner and permittee shall be
responsible for putting into effect and maintaining appropriate measures
necessary to prevent any change in cross-lot surface drainage that may
adversely affect any adjoining property as a result of grading and/or
construction-related activities. Such measures to prevent any adverse cross-lot
surface drainage effects on adjoining property shall be required whether shown
on approved grading plans or not.
   Section J101.8 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.8 Conditions of approval. In granting any permit under this code, the
building official may include such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to
prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to public or private property. Such
conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
      1.   Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of
this code.
      2.   Requirements for fencing of excavations or fills which would
otherwise be hazardous.
   Section J101.9 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.9 Rules and regulations.
   J101.9.1 Rules. The permissive provisions of this chapter shall not be
presumed to waive any regulations imposed by other statutes or other ordinances
of the State of California or the City of Culver City.
   J101.9.2 Regulations. If two or more pertinent regulations are not
identical, those regulations shall prevail which are more restrictive, or which
afford greater safety to life, limb, health, property or welfare. For the
purposes of these regulations, grading permits shall be considered as building
permits and shall be subject to the administrative provisions of this code,
unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter.
   Section J103.2 is amended to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J103.2 Exemptions. A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
      1.   When approved by the building official, grading in an isolated,
self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such
grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
      2.   Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code
where the excavation is limited to within the volume of the proposed structure.
      3.   Cemetery graves.
      4.   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
      5.   Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.
      6.   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand,
aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do
not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil
and adjoining properties.
      7.   Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a
registered soils engineer or engineering geologist. This shall not exempt
grading of access roads or pads created for exploratory excavations.
Exploratory excavations must not create a hazardous condition to adjacent
properties or the public in accordance with Section J101.3. Exploratory
excavations must be restored to existing conditions, unless approved by the
building official.
      8.   An excavation that does not exceed 100 cubic yards (38.3 m") and
complies with one of the following conditions:
         (1)   is less than 3 feet (0.6 m) in depth.
         (2)   does not create a cut slope greater than 5 feet (1.5 m) measured
vertically upward from the cut surface to the surface of the natural grade and
is not steeper than 4 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (25 percent slope).
      9.   A fill not intended to support a structure, that does not obstruct a
drainage course and complies with one of the following conditions:
         (a)   is less than 1 foot (0.3 m) in depth and is placed on natural
terrain with a slope flatter than 5 units horizontal to I unit vertical (20
percent slope).
         (b)   is less than 3 feet (0.9 m) in depth at its deepest point
measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does
not exceed 100 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than 4 units
horizontal to 1 unit vertical (25 percent slope).
         (c)   is less than 5 feet (1.5 m) in depth at its deepest point
measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does
not exceed 20 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than 4 units
horizontal to 1 unit vertical (25 percent slope).
      Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction.
   Section J103.3 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J103.3 Permit issuance.
      1.   The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization
to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for
the permit or on the grading plans and specifications approved by the building
official at the time of issuance.
      2.   Jurisdiction of other agencies. Permits issued under the
requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for
securing required permits for work to be accomplished which is regulated by any
other code, department or division of the governing agency.
      3.   Conditions of permit. The building official, upon recommendation of
the city traffic and transportation administrator, may impose such regulations
with respect to access routes to and from grading sites in hillside areas as
the building official shall determine are required in the interest of safety
precautions involving pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      4.   Consent of adjacent property owner. Whenever any excavation or fill
requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permit applicant
shall obtain the written consent or legal easements or other property rights of
the adjacent property owner or their authorized representative, and shall file
a signed and duly notarized copy of such consent with the building official,
and no permit for such grading work may be issued unless and until all
necessary consent documents are so filed. The consent shall be in a form
acceptable to the building official.
   Section J103.4 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J103.4 Grading fees.
      1.   Fees for grading plan check and for grading permits shall be
established or modified by resolution of the city council. The schedule of such
fees shall remain on file and be available in the office of the building
official. The building official shall, with the approval of the city manager,
recommend changes to the council when the costs to provide grading plan check
and grading inspection services make it appropriate.
      2.   The applicant shall pay a plan check fee prior to acceptance of
grading plans and specifications for checking by the city.
      3.   Whenever the applicant submits a grading plan for plan check that is
substantially different in design of the earthwork as compared to previously
submitted grading plans, the submittal shall be considered an original and a
new grading plan check fee shall be determined and paid to the city as provided
in this section.
      4.   The applicant shall pay a grading permit fee prior to the issuance
of a grading permit by the city. The fee shall be based on the total volume of
excavation and fill, on the site. If, during grading operations, the plans and
specifications for the grading project are revised increasing the volume of
excavation, fill, or a combination thereof above the volume that was used to
determine the grading permit fee, the applicant shall pay to the city the
difference between the original grading permit fee and the recalculated fee
before work may resume under the grading permit.
      5.   Whenever grading operations are commenced without an approved
grading permit, a penalty shall be added to all unpaid fees for grading plan
check and grading permits. The penalty shall be three hundred percent of all
fees due the city.
   Section J104.2.1 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J104.2.1 Grading Designation. Grading in hilly terrain in Hillside "H"
designated area and all grading in excess of 2,000 cubic yards shall be
performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a registered
civil engineer, and shall be designated as "engineered grading." Grading
involving less than 2,000 cubic yards and not located in an area of hilly
terrain shall be designated as "regular grading" unless the permittee chooses
to have the grading performed as engineered grading, or the building official
determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case
grading shall conform to the requirements for engineered grading.
   Section J104.2.2 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J104.2.2 Regular grading requirements. In addition to the provisions of
Section 20106, and Section 104.2, Chapter 1, Division 11, an application for a
regular grading permit shall be accompanied by plans in sufficient clarity to
indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans shall give the location
of the work, the name of the owner, and the name of the person who prepared the
plan. If the slope of the grade exceeds 3 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical
or as required by the building official, the plans and specifications shall be
prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such
plans or specifications. The plan shall include the following information:
      1.   General vicinity of the proposed site.
      2.   Limits and depths of cut and fill.
      3.   Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be
performed, and the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet (4.6
m) of the proposed grading.
      4.   Contours, flow areas, elevations, or slopes which define existing
and proposed drainage patterns.
      5.   Stormwater provisions in accordance with the requirements of
Appendix J and Title 5 Chapter 5.04 of the City of Culver City Municipal Code.
      6.   Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities,
and recorded public and private easements and use restricted use areas.
      7.   Location of all Special Flood Hazard Areas as designated and defined
in Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations.
   Section J104.2.3 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J104.2.3 Engineered grading requirements. In addition to the provisions of
Chapter 1 Division II, Section 107 and Appendix J Section J104.2, an
application for an engineered grading permit shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report
and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared
and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or
specifications when required by the building official. Specifications shall
contain information covering structures and material requirements. Plans shall
be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and
extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give location of the
work, the name and address of the owner, and the person by whom they were
prepared. The plans shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
information:
   1.   General vicinity of the proposed site.
   2.   Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of
terrain and area drainage.
   3.   Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finish contours to be achieved by
the grading, proposed drainage channels, and related structures.
   4.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls,
cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a
part of, the proposed work. A map showing the drainage area and the estimated
runoff of the area served by any drains shall also be provided.
   5.   Location of any existing or proposed buildings or structures on the
property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or
structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet (4.6 m) of the
property or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations.
   6.   Recommendations in the geotechnical engineering report and the
engineering geology report shall be incorporated into the grading plans or
specifications. When approved by the building official, specific
recommendations contained in the geotechnical engineering report and the
engineering geology report, that are applicable to grading, may be included by
reference.
   7.   The dates of the geotechnical engineering and engineering geology
reports together with the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the firms
or individuals who prepared the reports.
   8.   A statement of the earthwork quantities of materials to be excavated
and/or filled. Earthwork quantities shall include quantities for geotechnical
and geological remediation. In addition, a statement of material to be imported
or exported from the site.
   9.   A statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for work
covered by the permit.
   10.   A statement signed by the owner acknowledging that a field engineer,
geotechnical engineer and engineering geologist, when appropriate, will be
employed to perform the services required by this code, whenever approval of
the plans and issuance of the permit are to be based on the condition that such
professional persons be so employed. These acknowledgments shall be on a form
furnished by the building official.
   11.   Storm water provisions are required to be shown on the grading plan in
accordance with Appendix J Section J and Title 5 Chapter 5.04 of the CCMC.
   12.   A drainage plan for that portion of a lot or parcel to be utilized as
a building site (building pad), including elevation of floors with respect to
finish site grade and locations of existing and proposed stoops, slabs, fences
or other features that may affect drainage.
   13.   Location and type of any existing or proposed private sewage disposal
system.
   14.   Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities, and
recorded public and private easements.
   15.   Location of all recorded floodways.
   16.   Location of all Special Flood Hazard Areas as designated and defined
in Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations.
   Section J109.5 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J109.5 Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters
to the nearest practicable street, storm drain, or natural watercourse drainage
way approved by the building official or other appropriate governmental agency
jurisdiction provided it is a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of
ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-
erosive down drains or other devices. Desilting basins, filter barriers or
other methods, as approved by the building official, shall be utilized to
remove sediments from surface waters before such waters are allowed to enter
streets, storm drains, or natural watercourses. If the drainage device
discharges onto natural ground, riprap or a similar energy dissipater may be
required. Building pads shall have a minimum drainage gradient of 2 percent
toward approved drainage facilities, a public street or drainage structure
approved to receive storm waters unless waived by the building official. A
lesser slope may be approved by the building official for sites graded in
relatively flat terrain, or where special drainage provisions are made, when
the building official finds such modification will not result in unfavorable
drainage conditions.
   Section J112 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J112 HILLSIDE GRADING REQUIREMENTS AND PERMITTING
   J112.1 DEFINITIONS.  For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS. A component of a grading plan
submittal which indicates the methods for mitigating erosion and surficial
movement of soils during rainy seasons.
      FINAL GRADING APPROVAL. Building Official approval that the proposed
grading conforms to the project plans.
      HILLSIDE "H" GRADING DESIGNATION. Refers to a lot where the existing
slope on any portion of the lot is equal to or steeper than 15% and may be
subject to the requirement for a grading permit.
      SIGNIFICANT TREE. Trees that are well established with a minimum caliper
size of ten (10) inches or more and/or a tree height and canopy spread of
twenty (20) feet or greater, and are required to be noted in the Slope
Protection and Fire Prevention Landscape Plan.
      SLOPE PROTECTION AND FIRE PREVENTION LANDSCAPE PLAN. A landscape plan
prepared by a licensed landscape architect with all significant trees noted on
the project site, designed to minimize erosion and surficial sliding and
maximize fire prevention, and includes proposed ground cover, shrub, tree
planting, and proposed water conserving irrigation, including fire resistant
planting.
      SPECIAL REPORT 152. The report prepared in 1982 by the California
Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology titled Special Report
152, Slope Stability and Geology of the Baldwin Hills, Los Angeles County,
California.
   J112.2 HILLSIDE "H" GRADING DESIGNATION.
   A.   All properties shown on the Hillside "H" Grading Designation Area map
(below) and other hillside properties that are subject to the requirements of
this Subchapter shall have the Hillside "H" Grading Designation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5075.png]
   B.   The Hillside "H" Grading Designation requires that hillside properties
are designed and constructed in accordance with appropriate grading and
drainage standards. The Hillside "H" Grading Designation:
      1.   Applies to a hillside lot where the existing slope on any portion of
the lot is equal to or steeper than 15%;
      2.   Is recorded on City building records;
      3.   Requires a topographic survey with project plan submittal;
      4.   Requires a geotechnical and geological report with grading plan
submittal; and allows a property owner to appeal the Hillside "H" Grading
Designation to the Planning Commission where it can be shown, with a detailed
topographic survey prepared by a licensed civil engineer or land surveyor, that
said lot does not contain any slope equal to or in excess of 15%.
   J712.3 GRADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, total grading (cut and
fill) on a lot shall be limited as outlined in § 15.02.1320 herein. No grading
permit shall be issued until a building permit is approved. All grading plans
shall be subject to third party review, with commensurate plan review fees
applied consistent with the City's fee schedule.
   J712.4 THRESHOLDS FOR A GRADING PERMIT.
   A.   A hillside grading plan and a grading permit issued by the Building
Official is required when the grading exceeds one hundred (100) cubic yards cut
or fill and involves either:
      1.   A cut or fill of more than three (3) feet in vertical height below
or above natural ground;
      2.   Cumulative cut and fill which amounts to more than five (5) feet; or
      3.   An area where the natural gradient of the project site is more than
4:1 (horizontal to vertical) or 25% slope.
   B.   Grading plans that do not exceed the thresholds set forth in §
15.02.1315.A are subject to a building permit only, and do not require a
grading permit. The building permit application shall include earth work
calculations with cross sections.
   J712.4 MAXIMUM GRADING QUANTITIES.
   A.   Grading for all projects on properties with a Hillside "H" Grading
Designation shall be limited to a maximum amount of cut and fill. The
cumulative quantity of grading or the total combined value of both cut and fill
or incremental cut and fill for a project shall be limited to a base maximum of
five hundred (500) cubic yards plus the numeric value equal to 5% of the total
lot size in cubic yards.
      Example: A 5,000 square-foot lot would have a maximum grading amount of
750 cubic yards (500 cubic yards for the base amount + 250 cubic yards for the
5% lot size).
   B.   For projects where there is a maximum slope of 50% (2:1) or greater
and/or where there is an excavation or fill that exceeds a 50% (2:1) or greater
slope, no grading permit shall be issued without Building Official review and
approval.
   C.   The maximum grading quantities, grading percentage for cut of fill or
maximum allowable slope for grading may be appealed to the Planning Commission,
where specific findings can be made. Such findings shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
   J712.5 SLOPE STABILIZATION.
   A.   When a grading permit is required and the project exceeds 50% of the
replacement value for the structure, as determined by the Building Official,
the owner shall also be required to increase standards of care and safety for
grading, excavations, fills, soil placement and foundations by implementing
slope stabilization measures for the entire lot. A geotechnical engineer or
engineering geologist shall establish prescriptive measures for slope
stabilization, which shall be subject to third party review, with commensurate
plan review fees applied consistent with the City's fee schedule.
   B.   Notwithstanding the above, the Building Official, in his or her sole
discretion, may require slope stabilization measures for any project, if such
measures are determined to be necessary in the interest of public health,
safety or welfare.
   J712.6 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT REVIEW.
   All grading projects of one (1) acre or greater are subject to Public Works
Department approvals for National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES), Storm Water Pollution Protection Plan (SWPPP) and Low Impact
Development (LID) requirements.
   J712.7 GEOTECHNICAL AND GEOLOGY REPORT.
   All projects involving properties with a Hillside "H" Grading Designation
and subject to a grading permit shall be required to prepare and submit a
geotechnical report and a geology report as follows:
   A.   Geotechnical report. A geotechnical report shall be prepared by a
licensed geotechnical engineer and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Building Official (based upon third party review by a City approved civil
engineer, geotechnical engineer and/or engineering geologist) that the project
is properly located and designed to address site specific geotechnical
conditions. Every geotechnical report shall:
      1.   Include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of
existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures, design
criteria and corrective measures, the impact of proposed grading as affected by
soils, engineering factors and the design stability of slopes;
      2.   Include data from test borings for subsurface explorations of
appropriate number and depth to allow for the evaluation of earth materials
related to: (a) impacts to the project; (b) impacts to adjacent properties
within 15 feet of the project site, or properties which may be impacted by
proposed grading operations; (c) impacts to designated routes of ingress and
egress for hauling and staging; and (d) impacts created by the immediately
previous rainy season;
      3.   Require professional inspection of grading operations by the civil
engineer, geotechnical engineer and engineering geologist retained for the
project; and
      4.   Include review of Special Report 152 and related records on existing
hazards in the Hillside "H" Grading Designation Area.
   B.   Geology report. A geology report shall be prepared by a licensed
engineering geologist and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Building
Official (based upon third party review by a City approved civil engineer,
soils engineer and/or engineering geologist) that the project is properly
located and designed to address site specific soil conditions. Every geology
report shall:
      1.   Make findings that the project and grading will not adversely affect
the stability of the adjacent properties;
      2.   Include a description of the geology of the project site, and
conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions and
geologic factors on the project and the proposed grading;
      3.   Include data from test borings for subsurface explorations of
appropriate number and depth to allow for the evaluation of earth materials
related to: (a) impacts to the project; (b) impacts to adjacent properties
within fifteen (15) feet of the project site, or properties which may be
impacted by proposed grading operations; (c) impacts to designated routes of
ingress and egress for hauling and staging; and (d) impacts created by the
immediately previous rainy season; and
      4.   Include review of Special Report 152 and related records on existing
hazards in the Hillside "H" Grading Designation Area.
   J112.8 DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   All projects shall be designed to include appropriate drainage control
devices such as interceptor terraces, diverter terraces, berms, vee channels,
inlet structures, down drains, outlet structures, drainage dispersal walls,
sub-drains, gutters, site drainage, drainage around buildings; and shall
include a plan for maintenance of drainage devices to ensure proper site
drainage. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be prepared to address
site drainage conditions during project construction. The Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan must be updated each year, prior to October 15, to reflect the
conditions of the site during the immediately previous rainy season.
   J112.9 POST CONSTRUCTION DRAINAGE REPORTS AND MAINTENANCE COVENANT.
   Annually, or when required by plan check, a drainage report shall be
submitted to the Building Official indicating the condition of all drainage
structures, acceptance of water from off-site properties and drainage to
adjacent properties. A maintenance covenant, approved as to form by the City
Attorney, shall be prepared to address required maintenance for all drainage
structures. The drainage report shall include:
   A.   Hydrology map showing the drainage basin(s), the site of proposed
grading, and any proposed drainage structures;
   B.   Summary of the hydrology and any proposed drainage structure conditions
checked; and
   C.   Hydrology calculations for storm intensity requirements (up to twenty-
five (25) year storm) for all drainage facilities.
   J112.10 LANDSCAPE PLAN.
   All projects located on properties with a Hillside "H" Grading Designation
or other property subject to the requirements of this Subchapter shall provide
a Slope Protection and Fire Prevention Landscape Plan prepared by a licensed
landscape architect that minimizes erosion and surficial sliding and maximizes
fire prevention. This plan shall be prepared pursuant to § J112.13 of this
Subchapter and indicate proposed ground cover, shrub, tree planting, proposed
water conserving irrigation, including automatic shut off valves, and fire-
resistant planting.
   J112.11 SIGNIFICANT TREE REMOVAL.
   A.   All significant trees as defined in § J112.1 of this Subchapter shall
be identified by a licensed landscape architect and shown on the grading plan
and Slope Protection and Fire Prevention Landscape Plan with a note of intent
to either remove or protect such trees.
   B.   Before any significant tree is removed, an application to remove
significant trees must be filed with the current Planning Division for
approval, which shall indicate the reason for such removal and alternative
planting to substitute for the significant tree(s) removed. The grading plan
and Slope Protection and Fire Prevention Landscape Plan shall be reviewed by
the current Planning Division to verify that the significant trees marked for
removal are in conformance with the approved application.
   C.   The application to remove significant trees must be approved prior to
approval of the grading plan.
   J112.12 GRADING PROCEDURES.
   A.   Bonds. Security will be required for all hillside grading and shall be
provided in the form of a surety bond, letter of credit or cash deposit. The
grading bond will be based on 50% of the cost of moving the largest amount of
either cut or fill and include the cost of landscaping the slopes per the
approved Slope Protection and Fire Prevention Landscape Plan. To obtain release
of the bond, the landscape architect must submit a letter of certification that
the soils, additives and amendments, weed control, planting of the slopes and
the installation of the irrigation system comply with all approved plans and
applicable requirements of this Code. The bond will be released one (1) year
after receipt of this certification if an inspection of the site determines
that the landscaping has become permanently established.
   B.   Agreements. Agreements with adjacent property owners will be required
for all of the following activities occurring outside the property boundaries
of a project: grading, drainage, ingress and egress, community driveways, or
encroachment outside the property boundaries. All agreements must be in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney, shall be recorded, and a conformed copy of the
recorded document shall be submitted prior to approval of the grading plan.
   J112.13 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Additional project plan submittal requirements, including requirements for a
grading plan, Erosion Sediment and Control Plan and/or Slope Protection and
Fire Prevention Landscape Plan, may be established by resolution of the City
Council.
   Section J113 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J113. HILLSIDE DRAINAGE
   J113.1 Drainage System Required in Hillside Area.
   A.   It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person owning or
occupying any lot or parcel of property within the area designated "Hillside
Area" on either Diagram "A" or "B," set forth in the Appendix following this
Chapter, to fail to have installed and maintain:
      1.   In good working condition a system, consisting of either roof
gutters, downspouts and connecting pipes or structures, or a combination
thereof, which is capable of carrying rainwater falling on any roof on the
property to the gutter of a street abutting the property; or
      2.   A system on the lot or parcel of property for draining the entire
building pad to an abutting street.
   B.   The drainage system shall consist of a continuous one percent (1%)
grade, or more, on all parts of the pad sloping down to the nearest street, or
drainage structures, or a combination of such structures and grading, designed
to drain water falling on the pad to an abutting street.
   C.   This Section shall apply to all property shown on the diagrams, whether
or not previously improved; provided that this Section shall not apply to a
particular lot or parcel of property, when the City Engineer has determined
that the lack of all such systems on the property does not create any hazard to
adjacent property.
APPENDIX: HILLSIDE DRAINAGE; DIAGRAMS
DIAGRAM “A”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5077.png]
DIAGRAM “B”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5079.png]
   Section J114 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
   J114 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Compliance.
J114.1 General. All grading plans and permits shall comply with the provisions
of this section for NPDES compliance including the owner of any property on
which grading has been performed and which requires a grading permit under
Appendix J Section J103. Sites which have been graded and which require a
grading permit under Appendix J Section J103 are subject to penalties and
fines. All best management practices shall be installed before grading begins
or as instructed in writing by the building official for unpermitted grading as
defined by Section J103.3. As grading progresses, all best management practices
shall be updated as necessary to prevent erosion and control structures related
pollutants from discharging from the site. All best management practices shall
be maintained in good working order to the satisfaction of the building
official unless final grading approval has been granted by the building
official and all permanent drainage and erosion control systems, if required,
are in place.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 4; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 4;
Ord. 2025-013, § 1; Ord. No. 2025-015 § 4)
§ 15.02.110 RESERVED.
§ 15.02.115 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE WITH
LOCAL AMENDMENTS.
   A.   Adoption of California Residential Code, 2025 Edition. Pursuant to
California Government Code § 50022.2, the California Residential Code (CRC),
2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 2.5, of the California Code of
Regulations, and Appendices AH, Al, AJ, AK, AO, AQ, and AX, AZ. of the
California Residential Code, 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 2.5, of
the California Code of Regulations are adopted by reference, subject to the
amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of the CRC
is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available for public
inspection as required by law.
   B.   Amendments to the California Residential Code.
   CRC Section R105.1.1 Sandblasting is hereby added as follows:
   R105.1.1 Sandblasting. The purpose of this Section is to prevent the dust
and debris that occurs in sandblasting operations from spreading throughout the
neighborhood creating a public health hazard.
   R105.1.1.1 Permit Required; Compliance with Regulations.
   A.   No person shall sandblast or cause to be sandblasted the outside or
inside of any building or structure within the City without first paying the
fee and obtaining a permit from the Division of Building and Safety and without
complying with regulations adopted by the City Council which are reasonable
necessary to protect the public health and safety and property from damage
which may result from sandblasting.
   B.   No permit for dry sandblasting shall be issued unless the Building
Official determines that extraordinary reasons exist for the use of such a
process and that adequate measures will be taken to protect the public health
and safety from the effect of such dry sandblasting.
   R105.1.1.2 Enforcement.
   A.   The Building Official shall have the power to revoke without prior
notice any sandblasting permit for failure to comply with any such regulations.
   B.   No person shall do any sandblasting after a permit therefore has been
revoked.
   Subsection 11 is added to § R105.2 of the CRC as follows:
   R105.2 Work exempt from permit.
   Building
   11. Block wall and concrete fences not over 3 feet 6 inches high.
   Section R105.3.1.1 Expedited Streamlined Permitting Process for Small
Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems is added to the CRC as follows:
   R105.3.1.1 Expedited Review Process. Consistent with Government Code Section
65850.5, the Building Official shall implement an expedited administrative
permit review process for small rooftop solar energy systems and adopt a
checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems
shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited
administrative permit review process and checklist shall substantially conform
to the recommended process and checklist prescribed by the California Solar
Permitting Guidebook as adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and
Research. The City's adopted checklist shall be published on the City's
website.
   R105.3.1.1.1 Electronic Submittals. Consistent with Government Code Section
65850.5, the Building Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit
applications covered by this Ordinance and associated supporting
documentations. In accepting such permit applications, the Building Official
shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other
documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant.
   R105.3.1.1.2 Association Approval. Consistent with Government Code Section
65850.5, the Building Official shall not condition the approval for any solar
energy system permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as
that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080.
   R105.3.1.1.3 Permit Application Process. A permit application that satisfies
the information requirements in the City's adopted checklist shall be deemed
complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official
that the permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of
the City's adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws, the
Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.5,
approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not
authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system
to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible
for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. If
the Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he
or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be
eligible for expedited permit issuance.
   R105.3.1.1.4 Inspection Requirements. The Building Official shall require
only one inspection for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible
for expedited review as provided by this Ordinance. Such inspection shall be
performed in a timely manner. If the small rooftop solar energy system fails
the single inspection, subsequent inspections shall be authorized.
   Section R105.3.1.2 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations Permitting is added to
the CRC as follows:
   R105.3.1.2 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations Permitting
   R105.3.1.2.1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote
and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited,
streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while
promoting public health, safety and welfare and preventing specific adverse
impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This Chapter is
also adopted to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7.
   R105.3.1.2.2 Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION or CHARGING STATION. Any level of
electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in
compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on
the effective date of this Chapter, and delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
      ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL.  The utilization of one or more of the following:
      1.   Electronic mail or email.
      2.   The internet.
      3.   Facsimile.
      SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.
   R105.3.1.2.3 Expedited Permitting Process. Consistent with Government Code
Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall implement an expedited,
streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and
adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging
stations shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited,
streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations
contained in the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in
California: Community Readiness Guidebook" as published by the Governor's
Office of Planning and Research. The City's adopted checklist shall be
published on the City's website.
   R105.3.1.2.4 Permit Application Processing.
   A.   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall
verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not
have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building
occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to:
electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and
overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station
equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and
vehicle parking.
   B.   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the
City's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed.
Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and
supporting documents meets the requirements of the City adopted checklist, and
is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the
Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7,
approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not
authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging
station until approval is granted by the City. If the Building Official
determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a
written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the
application and any additional information required to be eligible for
expedited permit issuance.
   C.   Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official
shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this
Chapter and associated supporting documentation. In accepting such permit
applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on
all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by
any applicant.
   D.   No fee shall be imposed on the applicant for the filing and processing
of a permit application for installation of an electric vehicle charging
station.
   R105.3.1.2.5 Technical Review.
   A.   It is the intent of this Chapter to encourage the installation of
electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for
charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building
Official's authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the
Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the
electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the
public health or safety, as defined in this Chapter, the City may require the
applicant to apply for a use permit.
   B.   In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with
Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition the
approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of
such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section
4080.
   R105.3.1.2.6 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations Installation Requirements.
   A.   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements
of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the
National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing
laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public
Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety
and reliability.
   B.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated
wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall
meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the
California Electrical Code.
   C.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code.
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.
   D.   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle
charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or
Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the
manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall
not adversely affect building elements.
   Section R105.3.2 of the CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   R105.3.2 Expiration of Plan Check. An application for a permit for any
proposed work is deemed to have been abandoned 12 months after the application
date. Unless otherwise provided, after expiration of the application, the City
will not issue a permit until the plans are rechecked and approved and a new
fee is paid.
   Exception: The Building Official may grant extensions of time for additional
periods not exceeding 90 days each if a permit applicant submits in writing
sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or circumstances precluded the
securing of the permit within the allocated time.
   Section R105.5 of Chapter 1 of the CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   R105.5 Expiration of Permits. Every permit issued shall become invalid
unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 12
months after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit
is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is
commenced. Work shall be considered suspended or abandoned if the building
official determines that substantial work has not been performed within the
time specified above. Substantial work shall be constructed to mean:
      1.   Measurable work such as, but not limited to, the addition of
footings, structural members, flooring, wall covering, etc.
      2.   The work mentioned in subsection 1 of this Section [A] 105.5 above
must constitute 20% of the value of the work for which the permit was issued in
any 180 day period for Group R, Division 3 occupancies and 10% for all other
occupancies.
         Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first
obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one half the amount required
for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be
made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided
further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order
to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new
permit fee and may be required to comply with all applicable new regulations at
the time of issuance. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing,
one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
      Except as otherwise provided, every permit issued by the City is valid
for a period of three (3) years.
         Exception: The Building Official may grant extensions of time if a
permit applicant submits in writing sufficient evidence that unusual conditions
or circumstances precluded from the work being completed. An extension of time
may require conditions of approval and additional fees.
   Section R105.8 of Chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
   R105.8 Responsibility of permittee. Building permits shall be presumed by
the city to incorporate all of the work that the applicant, the applicant's
agent, employees and/or contractors shall carry out. Said proposed work shall
be in accordance with the approved plans and with all requirements of this code
and any other laws or regulations applicable thereto. No city approval shall
relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the
provisions of this code nor shall any vested rights be created for any work
performed in violation of this code.
   Section R109.5.1 of Chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
   R108.5.1 Plan check fees refund. No portion of the plan check fee shall be
refunded unless plan review has not been performed, in which case 80 percent of
the plan check fee shall be refunded upon written application for refund
submitted by the person who made original payment of such fee and with the
written consent of the owner of the real property on which the work was
proposed to be done. The Building Official shall determine, in such official's
discretion, whether an applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 180
days have elapsed from the date of the submittal for plan check, no plan check
fees shall be refunded. In the event subsequent application for plan check is
made by a person who has received a refund, the full amount of all required
fees shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this chapter.
   Section R108.5.2 of Chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
   R108.5.2 Permit fees refund. 
In the event any person shall have obtained a building permit and no portion of
the work or construction covered by such permit shall have commenced, nor any
inspection performed by any City employee, and notice of abandonment has been
received from the owner of the real property on which such work would have been
performed, the permittee, upon presentation to the Building Official of a
written request for refund, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to
80 percent of the building permit fee actually paid for such permit. The
Building Official shall determine, in such official's discretion, whether an
applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from
the date of the issuance of the permit, no permit fees shall be refunded. In
the event subsequent application for a permit is made by a person who has
received a refund, the full amount of all required fees shall be paid as
elsewhere provided in this chapter.
   Exception:
      1.   If a permit has been issued for a project located in an area outside
the jurisdiction of the City, 100 percent of the permit and plan checking fee
may be refunded.
      2.   If a duplicate permit has been erroneously issued, 100 percent of
the duplicated permit and plan checking fee may be refunded.
   Section 108.6 of Chapter 1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any
work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system
before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee in addition to
the normally established permit fee, equal to 100% of such normally established
permit fee, or as otherwise determined by the building official.
   Section 110.1.1 of Chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
   R109.1.7 Setback Certification required. A California State licensed
surveyor is required to certify the location of the new construction when it is
within 3 feet of a setback line or property line prior to the first foundation
inspection. A copy of the certification shall be available to the Building
Division inspector for the job file prior to the first inspection.
   Exception: Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of this section, the Building Official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases.
   Section R109.5 of Chapter 1 of the CRC is hereby added to read as follows:
   R109.5 Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee in the amount set by the City
Council resolution may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when
such portion of work for which inspection is called is incomplete or when
required corrections called are not made. This section is not to be interpreted
as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to
comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of
calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-
inspection. Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card
is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are
not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the
date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring
the approval of the building official. In instances where re-inspection fees
have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed
until required fees have been paid.
   Section R301.1.3.2 of Chapter 3 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as
follows:
   R301.1.3.2 Wood frame structures. The building official shall require
construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed
architect or engineer for all dwellings of wood frame construction more than
two stories and basement in height located in Seismic Design Category A, B or
C. Notwithstanding other sections of law; the law establishing these provisions
is found in Business and Professions Code Sections 5537 and 6737.1.
   The building official shall require construction documents to be approved
and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of
wood frame construction more than one story in height or with a basement
located in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, or D2.
   Section R301.1.5 is added to Chapter 3 of the CRC to read as follows.
   R301.1.5 Seismic design provisions for buildings constructed on or into
slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3 percent
slope). The design and construction of new buildings and additions to existing
buildings when constructed on or into slopes steeper than one unit vertical in
three units horizontal (33.3 percent slope) shall comply with Section 1613.6 of
the California Building Code.
   Items 1, 3 and 5 of Section R301.2.2.6 of the CRC are amended to read as
follows.
      1.   Shear wall or braced wall offsets out of plane. Conditions where
exterior shear wall lines or braced wall panels are not in one plane vertically
from the foundation to the uppermost story in which they are required.
      3.   Shear wall or braced wall offsets in plane. Conditions where the end
of a braced wall panel occurs over an opening in the wall below.
      5.   Floor level offset. Conditions where portions of a floor level are
vertically offset.
   Section R301.2.2.11 is added to Chapter 3 of the CRC to read as follows.
   R301.2.2.11 Anchorage of Mechanical, Electrical, or Plumbing Components and
Equipment. Mechanical, electrical, or plumbing components and equipment shall
be anchored to the structure. Anchorage of the components and equipment shall
be designed to resist loads in accordance with the California Residential Code
and ASCE 7, except where the component is positively attached to the structure
and flexible connections are provided between the component and associated
ductwork, piping, and conduit; and either
      1.   The component weighs 400 lbs. (1,780 N) or less and has a center of
mass located 4 ft. (1.22 m) or less above the supporting structure; or
      2.   The component weighs 20 lbs. (89 N) or less or, in the case of a
distributed system, 5 lb/ft. (73 N/m) or less.
   Section R401.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R401.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design
and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for buildings. In
addition to the provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of
foundations in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) shall meet
the provisions of Section R322. Wood foundations shall be designed and
installed in accordance with AWC PWF.
   Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be used for
wood foundations only in the following situations:
      1.   In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof.
      2.   When interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at
intervals not exceeding 50 feet (15240 mm). Wood foundations in Seismic Design
Category D0, D1, or D2 shall not be permitted.
   Exception: In non-occupied, single-story, detached storage sheds and similar
uses other than carport or garage, provided the gross floor area does not
exceed 200 square feet, the plate height does not exceed 12 feet in height
above the grade plane at any point, and the maximum roof projection does not
exceed 24 inches.
   Section R401.5 of the 2025 CRC, is hereby added to read as follows:
   R401.5 Grading. Grading requirements shall be in compliance with Appendix J
of the Amended CBC of this Code.
   Sections R403.1.2, R403.1.3.6 and R403.1.5 of the CRC are amended to read as
follows:
   R403.1.2 Continuous footing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.
Exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2
shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete
footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings located in
Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be supported on continuous
foundations.
   R403.1.3.6 Isolated concrete footings. In detached one- and two-family
dwellings located in Seismic Design Category A, B, or C, that are three stories
or less in height, and constructed with stud bearing walls, isolated plain
concrete footings supporting columns or pedestals are permitted.
   R403.1.5 Slope. The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom
surface of footings shall not have a slope exceeding one unit vertical in 10
units horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is
necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footings or where
the slope of the bottom surface of the footings will exceed one unit vertical
in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
   For structures assigned to Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 or D2, stepped
footings shall be reinforced with four No. 4 rebar. Two bars shall be place at
the top and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure R403.1.5.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5081.png]
FIGURE R403.1.5 - STEPPED FOOTING
   Section R404.2 of the CRC is amended to read as follows.
   R404.2 Wood foundation walls. Wood foundation walls shall be constructed in
accordance with the provisions of Sections R404.2.1 through R404.2.6 and with
the details shown in Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3). Wood foundation walls
shall not be used for structures located in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or
D2.
   Section R501.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R501.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design
and construction of the floors for buildings, including the floors of attic
spaces used to house mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment. Mechanical
or plumbing fixtures and equipment shall be attached (or anchored) to the
structure in accordance with Section R301.2.2.11.
   Section R503.2.4 is added to Chapter 5 of the CRC to read as follows:
   R503.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms. Openings in horizontal
diaphragms with a dimension perpendicular to the joist that is greater than 4
feet (1.2 m) shall be constructed in accordance with Figure R503.2.4.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5083.png]
FIGURE R503.2.4 - OPENINGS IN HORIZONTAL DIAPHRAGMS
Lines 20, 21, 24, and 34 - 37 of Table R602.3(1) of the 2025 CRC are amended to
read as follows:
TABLE R602.3(1) - continued FASTENING SCHEDULE
                                                                                                                         SPACING
ITEM DESCRIPTION OF BUILDING ELEMENTS     NUMBER AND TYPE OF FASTENERa, b, c                                             AND
                                                                                                                         LOCATION
20k  1" x 6" sheathing to each bearing    3-8d box (2½" x 0.113"); or 2-8d common (2½" x 0.131"); or 2-10d box (3" x   Face
                                          0.128"; or 2 staples, 1" crown, 16 ga., 1¾" long                              nail
                                          3-8d box (2½" x 0.113"); or 3-8d common (2½" x 0.131"); or 3-10d box (3" x
     1" x 8" and wider sheathing to each  0.128"; or 3 staples, 1" crown, 16 ga., 1¾" long                              Face
21k  bearing                              Wider than 1" x 8"                                                             nail
                                          4-8d box (2½" x 0.131"); or 3-8d box (3" x 0.128"); or 4 staples, 1" crown, 16
                                          ga., 1¾" long
Floor
24k  1" x 6" subfloor or less to each     3-8d box (2½" x 0.113"); or 2-8d common (2½" x 0.131"); or 3-10d box (3" x   Face
     joist                                0.128"; or 2 staples, 1" crown, 16 ga., 1¾" long                              nail
Other wall sheathing
34k  ½" structural cellulosic fiberboard 1½" galvanized roofing nail, 7/16" head diameter, or 1¼" long 16 ga. staple  3 6
     sheathing                            with 7/16" or 1" crown
35k  25/32" structural cellulosic         1¾" galvanized roofing nail, 7/16" head diameter, or 1½" long 16 ga. staple  3 6
     fiberboard sheathing                 with 7/16" or 1" crown
36k  ½" gypsum sheathingd                1½" galvanized roofing nail; staple galvanize, 1½" long; 1¼" screws, Type W 7r7
                                          S
37k  " gypsum sheathingd                  1¾" galvanized roofing nail; staple galvanize, 1" long; 1" screws, Type W or S7 7
   For SI: 1 inch - 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s; 1
ksi = 6.895 MPa.
TABLE R602.3(1)- FASTENING SCHEDULE
   a.   Nails are smooth-common, box or deformed shanks except where otherwise
stated. Nails used for framing and sheathing connections shall have minimum
average bending yield strengths as shown: 80 ksi for shank diameter of 0.192
inch (20d common nail), 90 ksi for shank diameters larger than 0.142 inch but
not larger than 0.177 inch, and 100 ksi for shank diameters of 0.142 inch or
less.
   b.   Staples are 16 gage wire and have a minimum 7116-inch on diameter crown
width.
   c.   Nails shall be spaced at not more than 6 inches on center at all
supports where spans are 48 inches or greater.
   d.   Four-foot by 8-foot or 4-foot by 9-foot panels shall be applied
vertically.
   e.   Spacing of fasteners not included in this table shall be based on Table
R602.3(2).
   f.   For wood structural panel roof sheathing attached to gable end roof
framing and to intermediate supports within 48 inches of roof edges and ridges,
nails shall be spaced at 6 inches on center where the ultimate design wind
speed is less than 130 mph and shall be spaced 4 inches on center where the
ultimate design wind speed is 130 mph or greater but less than 140 mph.
   g.   Gypsum sheathing shall conform to ASTM C1396 and shall be installed in
accordance with GA 253. Fiberboard sheathing shall conform to ASTM C208.
   h.   Spacing of fasteners on floor sheathing panel edges applies to panel
edges supported by framing members and required blocking and at floor
perimeters only. Spacing of fasteners on roof sheathing panel edges applies to
panel edges supported by framing members and required blocking. Blocking of
roof or floor sheathing panel edges perpendicular to the framing members need
not be provided except as required by other provisions of this code. Floor
perimeter shall be supported by framing members or solid blocking.
   i.   Where a rafter is fastened to an adjacent parallel ceiling joist in
accordance with this schedule, provide two toe nails on one side of the rafter
and toe nails from the ceiling joist to top plate in accordance with this
schedule. The toe nail on the opposite side of the rafter shall not be
required.
   j.   RSRS-01 is a Roof Sheathing Ring Shank nail meeting the specifications
in ASTM F1667.
   k.   Use of staples in braced wall panels shall be prohibited in Seismic
Design Category D0, D1, or D2.
   Exception of Section R602.3.2 and Table R602.3.2 of the 2025 Edition of the
CRC is amended to read as follows:
Table R602.3.2
   Exception: In other than Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2, a single top
plate used as an alternative to a double top plate shall comply with the
following:
      1.   The single top plate shall be tied at corners, intersecting walls,
and at in-line splices in straight wall lines in accordance with Table
R602.3.2.
      2.   The rafters or joists shall be centered over the studs with a
tolerance of not more than 1 inch (25 mm).
      3.   Omission of the top plate is permitted over headers where the
headers are adequately tied to adjacent wall sections in accordance with Table
R602.3.2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5093.png]
Table R602.3(2)
   b. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16-inch on diameter except
as noted. Use of staples in roof, floor, subfloor, and braced wall panels shall
be prohibited in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, or D2.
   Section R602.10.2.3 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R602.10.2.3 Minimum number of braced wall panels. Braced wall lines with a
length of 16 feet (4877 mm) or less shall have a minimum of two braced wall
panels of any length or one braced wall panel equal to 48 inches (1219 mm) or
more. Braced wall lines greater than 16 feet (4877 mm) shall have a minimum of
two braced wall panels. No braced wall panel shall be less than 48 inches in
length in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, or D2.
   Table R602.10.3(3) of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5089.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5091.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5095.png]
   Table R602.10.4 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5097.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5099.png]
   Table R602.10.5 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5103.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5105.png]
   Figure R602.10.6.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5107.png]
   Figure R602.10.6.2 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5109.png]
   Figure R602.10.6.4 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5111.png]
 
   Section R606.4.4 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R606.4.4 Parapet walls. Unreinforced solid masonry parapet walls shall not
be less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick and their height shall not exceed four
times their thickness. Unreinforced hollow unit masonry parapet walls shall be
not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick, and their height shall not exceed three
times their thickness. Masonry parapet walls in areas subject to wind loads of
30 pounds per square foot (1.44 kPa) or located in Seismic Design Category Do,
D1 or D2, or on townhouses in Seismic Design Category C shall be reinforced in
accordance with Section R606.12.
   Section R606.12.2.2.3 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R606.12.2.2.3 Reinforcement requirements for masonry elements. Masonry
elements listed in Section R606.12.2.2.2 shall be reinforced in either the
horizontal or vertical direction as shown in Figure R606.11(2) and in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Horizontal reinforcement. Horizontal joint reinforcement shall
consist of at least one No. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm).
Horizontal reinforcement shall be provided within 16 inches (406 mm) of the top
and bottom of these masonry elements.
      2.   Vertical reinforcement. Vertical reinforcement shall consist of at
least one No.4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm). Vertical
reinforcement shall be within 8 inches (203 mm) of the ends of masonry walls.
   Section R803.2.4 is added to Chapter 8 of the CRC to read as follows:
   R803.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms. Openings in horizontal
diaphragms shall conform with Section R503.2.4.
   Section R905.3.1 of the 2025 Edition of the CRC is amended to read as
follows:
   R905.3.1 Deck requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only
over solid sheathing.
   Exception: Spaced lumber shall be permitted in Seismic Design Categories A,
B, and C.
   Section R1001.3.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R1001.3.1 Vertical reinforcing. For chimneys up to 40 inches (1016 mm) wide,
four No. 4 continuous vertical bars adequately anchored into the concrete
foundation shall be placed between wythes of solid masonry or within the cells
of hollow unit masonry and grouted in accordance with Section R606. Grout shall
be prevented from bonding with the flue liner so that the flue liner is free to
move with thermal expansion. For chimneys more than 40 inches (1016 mm) wide,
two additional No. 4 vertical bars adequately anchored into the concrete
foundation shall be provided for each additional flue incorporated into the
chimney or for each additional 40 inches (1016 mm) in width or fraction
thereof.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 5; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 5;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 5)
§ 15.02.120 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Pursuant to California Government Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California
Electrical Code, 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 3, of the California
Code of Regulations, including Annexes A thru J ("CEC") is adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below.
One true copy of the CEC is on file in the office of the Building Official and
is available for public inspection as required bylaw.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 6; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 6;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 6)
§ 15.02.125 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE WITH LOCAL
AMENDMENTS.
   A.   Adoption of California Mechanical Code, 2025 Edition. Pursuant to
California Government Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California Mechanical
Code, 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 4, of the California Code of
Regulations, including Appendices A through G ("CMC") is adopted by reference,
subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true
copy of the CMC, is on file in the office of the Building Official and is
available for public inspection as required by law.
   B.   Amendments to the Code.
   Section 104.0 of the CMC is hereby amended as follows:
   CMC Section 104.0 Permits is deleted in its entirety. The 2025 California
Building Code, as incorporated into the Culver City Municipal Code, will govern
the administration of the CMC.
   Section 104.5 of the CMC is hereby amended as follows:
   CMC Section 104.5 Fees is deleted in its entirety. The 2025 California
Building Code, as incorporated into the Culver City Municipal Code, will govern
the administration of the CMC.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 7; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 7;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 7)
§ 15.02.130 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE WITH LOCAL
AMENDMENTS.
   A. Adoption of California Plumbing Code, 2025 Edition. Pursuant to
California Government Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California Plumbing Code,
2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 5, of the California Code of
Regulations, including Appendices A, B, D, H, I, and L ("CPC") is adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below.
One true copy of the CPC is on file in the office of the Building Official and
is available for public inspection as required by law.
   B.   Amendments to the Code.
   CPC Section 104.4.3 (Expiration) and Section 104.4.4 (Extensions) are
deleted in its entirety. The 2025 California Building Code, as incorporated
into the Culver City Municipal Code, will govern the administration of the CPC.
   CPC Section 1208.13.1 Seismic Gas Shutoff Valves is added to the 2025 CPC to
read as follows:
   1208.13.1 Seismic Gas Shutoff Valves.
   1208.13.1.1 Scope. A seismic gas shutoff valve shall be installed in
compliance with the requirements of this section on each gas fuel line in the
following:
   1208.13.1.1.1 Any building or structure for which a building permit was
first issued on or after January 9, 2020.
   1208.13.1.1.2 Any building or structure which is altered or expanded under a
building permit first issued on or after January 9, 2020, when such alteration
or addition is valued at more than $10,000.
   1208.13.1.1.3  Any building or structure sold on or after January 9, 2020.
However, when an individual condominium unit is sold in a building that has
multiple gas lines, then the requirements of this section shall apply only to
the line or lines serving the condominium unit that has been sold.
   1208.13.1.2 Maintenance. Where the installation of a seismic gas shutoff
valve is required by this section in any building or structure, that seismic
gas shutoff valve shall be maintained for the life of that building or
structure or shall be replaced with a valve complying with the requirements of
this section.
   1208.13.1.3 General Requirements. Where the installation of a seismic gas
shutoff valve on a fuel line is required by this section, that valve must:
   1208.13.1.3.1  Be mounted rigidly to the exterior of the building or
structure containing the fuel line unless the building official determines that
the seismic gas shutoff valve has been tested and listed for an alternate
method of installation.
   1208.13.1.3.2  Be installed downstream of the gas utility meter, except that
a valve may be installed upstream of the gas utility meter at the discretion of
the gas utility if the valve would otherwise meet the requirements of this
section.
   1208.13.1.3.3  Be listed by an approved testing laboratory and certified by
the Office of the State Architect.
   1208.13.1.3.4 Have a thirty-year warranty which warrants that the valve is
free from defects and will continue to properly operate for thirty years from
the date of operation.
   1208.13.1.4 Critical Facilities. The requirements of this Section shall not
apply to any building that is used by any public agency for the provision of
emergency services, including fire, police, and similar public safety services.
   1208.13.1.5 Definitions. For purposes of this section, certain terms shall
be defined as follows:
   1208.13.1.5.1 DOWNSTREAM OF THE GAS UTILITY METER. Shall refer to all
customer owned gas piping.
   1208.13.1.5.2 SEISMIC GAS SHUTOFF VALVE. Shall mean a system consisting of a
seismic sensing means and actuating means designed to automatically actuate a
companion gas shutoff means installed in a gas piping system in order to shut
off the gas downstream of the location of the gas shutoff means in the event of
a severe seismic disturbance. The system may consist of separable components or
may incorporate all functions in a single body. The terms "seismically
activated gas shutoff valves" and "earthquake sensitive gas shutoff valves,"
are synonymous.
   1208.13.1.5.3 UPSTREAM OF THE GAS UTILITY METER. Shall refer to all gas
piping installed by the utility up to and including the meter and the utility's
bypass toe at the connection to the customer owned piping.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 8; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 8;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 8)
§ 15.02.135 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Pursuant to California Government Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California
Energy Code ("CEC"), 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 6, of the
California Code of Regulations. One true copy of the CEC, is on file in the
office of the Building Official and is available for public inspection as
required by law.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 9; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 9;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 9)
§ 15.02.140 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Pursuant to California Government Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California
Historical Building Code ("CHBC"),2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 8,
of the California Code of Regulations. One true copy of the HBC is on file in
the office of the Building Official and is available for public inspection as
required by law.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 10; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 10;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 10)
§ 15.02.145 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE WITH LOCAL
AMENDMENTS.
   A.   Adoption of California Existing Building Code, 2025 Edition. Pursuant
to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California Existing
Building Code ("CEBC"), 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 10, of the
California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference, subject to the
amendments, additions and deletions set forth below.
   Appendix A (Guidelines for Seismic Retrofit of Existing Buildings) with
Chapters A1, A2, A3 is also adopted as Voluntary Earthquake Hazard Reduction
Measures in Existing Buildings (Voluntary Seismic Retrofit). One true copy of
the CEBC, is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available
for public inspection as required by law.
   B.   Amendments to the Code.
   Amendments are located in Subchapter 15.02.500 Mandatory Seismic Provisions
15 for Wood-Frame Buildings with Soft, Weak or Open-Front Walls.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 11; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 11;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 11)
§ 15.02.150 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE WITH
LOCAL AMENDMENTS.
   Adoption of California Green Building Standards Code, 2025 Edition.
   Pursuant to California Government Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California
Green Building Standards Code, 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 11, of
the California Code of Regulations ("CGBSC") is adopted by reference, subject
to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of
the CGBSC, is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available
for public inspection as required by law.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 12; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 12;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 12)
§ 15.02.155 CALIFORNIA REFERENCE STANDARDS CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The 2025 Edition of the California Reference Standards Code, published by
the International Code Council, and all appendices, amendments, supplements,
and errata thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be applicable to
the City of Culver City, and referred to as the "Reference Standards Code of
the City of Culver City." One copy of the Reference Standards Code of the City
of Culver City shall be kept on file in the Building Official's office for
public inspection.
(Ord. No. 2016-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 13; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 13;
Ord. No. 2025-015 § 13)
§ 15.02.160 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE WITH
LOCAL AMENDMENTS.
   A.   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 Edition.
Pursuant to California Government Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8, the International
Property Maintenance Code ("IPMC"), 2021 Edition, promulgated and published by
the International Code Council, including Appendix A, is adopted by reference,
subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true
copy of the IPMC, is on file in the office of the Building Official and is
available for public inspection as required by law."
   B.   Amendments to the Code.
   Section [A] 111.2 of the IPMC is hereby amended as follows:
   IPMC Section [A] 111.2 Membership of board, is deleted in its entirety. The
2025 California Building Code, as incorporated into the Culver City Municipal
Code, will govern the administration of the IPMC.
   Sections[A]111.2.1 through [A]111.8 of the IPMC are hereby deleted.
(Ord. No. 2019-015 § 14; Ord. No. 2022-007 § 14; Ord. No. 2025-015 § 14)
GENDER NEUTRAL PUBLIC RESTROOM FACILITIES IN NEW CONSTRUCTION
§ 15.02.400 GENDER NEUTRAL PUBLIC RESTROOM FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   All newly constructed buildings shall be required to provide gender neutral
public restroom facilities.
(Ord. No. 2024-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.410 APPLICABILITY.
   A.   The requirements of this subchapter shall apply to public restroom
facilities of all newly constructed buildings.
   B.   An applicant may voluntarily retrofit public restroom facilities of
existing buildings as described in this subchapter.
   C.   The requirements of this subchapter shall not apply to any restroom
inside a residential unit.
   D.   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code § 118507, this subchapter
requires that public restrooms constructed in newly constructed buildings
within the City comply with specific requirements designed to serve all genders
instead of complying with the standards set forth in the California Plumbing
Code.
   E.   This subchapter shall become inoperative and repealed on the date that
standards that address all-gender, multi-user facilities take effect in the
California Building Standards Code (Title 24 of the Cal. Code of Regulations).
(Ord. No. 2024-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.420 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the following meanings:
   GENDER NEUTRAL PUBLIC TOILET FACILITY. A public restroom whose access shall
not be restricted to persons of a specific sex, an individual's gender
expression, or an individual's gender identity.
   NEWLY CONSTRUCTED BUILDING. A new structure that has never before been used
or occupied for any purpose, or removal and replacement of an existing
structure.
(Ord. No. 2024-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.430 GENDER NEUTRAL PUBLIC RESTROOM FACILITIES AND DESIGN.
   A.   Single-user facilities. Shall be designed and constructed with single-
user toilet compartments and identified for use by all genders instead of the
design standards for separate facilities for male and female found in the
applicable provisions in Chapter 4 of the California Plumbing Code.
   B.   Multi-user facilities. Shall be designed with lavatories located either
within toilet rooms or grouped in an immediately adjacent common use area
accessible to all users. The following accepable designs are proded for example
purposes only.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4873.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4875.png]
 
   C.   Signage. Signage indicating that public toilet facilities are
accessible to all users, and not restricted to persons of a specific sex or
gender identity, shall comply with Part 5 of Title 24 of the Cal. Code of
Regulations, and be clearly and conspicuously posted on all entrances to such
public restroom facility or facilities. An example of signage that may be used
is depicted below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4877.png]
 
   D.   Design. Gender neutral public restroom facilities shall be designed to
serve all genders and shall adhere to the following criteria:
      1.   The location of facilities shall be along common and open
circulation paths that will maintain privacy and allow for high visibility for
security.
      2.   The main entrance to the space or area where public restroom
facilities are located shall not have a door that will obstruct or prevent
visual security.
      3.   Water closets shall be designed as single-user compartments and
designated for use by no more than one occupant at a time or for family or
assisted use.
      4.   Water closets shall be enclosed on all sides by walls or partitions
extending from up to one inch above the floor and/or from the ceiling, and a
door enclosing the fixture for privacy.
      5.   Lavatories may be located in the same compartment as a water closet
or grouped in an immediately adjacent common use area accessible to all users.
      6.   Urinals shall be located in an area visually separated from the
remainder of the facility or in an individual compartment(s).
      7.   The door to each individual compartment containing a water closet,
urinal, or both, shall have a locking mechanism controlled by the occupant. The
lock shall visually indicate to outside occupants that the compartment is
occupied.
      8.   Adequate light and ventilation shall be provided within each
compartment and each area of the facility.
      9.   Windows or glazing used in the compartment enclosures shall be
opaque to provide for privacy.
      10.   The substitution of a water closet for each urinal shall be
permitted provided the total number of fixtures installed complies with the
California Plumbing Code.
   E.   Relation to other rules and regulations. The design standards contained
in this subchapter shall not be construed as requiring or authorizing:
      1.   A reduction in the number of fixtures or toilet facilities that are
required by Title 24, Part 5 of the Cal. Code of Regulations; or
      2.   A reduction in the number of fixtures or toilet facilities
accessible to persons with disabilities that are otherwise required under
either Title 24 of the Cal. Code of Regulations or the Federal Americans with
Disability Act.
   F.   Alternate designs. Gender neutral public toilet facilities may be
further designed in any manner that provides the greatest access, equivalency,
and privacy for patrons, and maximizes space, with shared washbasins, enclosed
lavatories, enclosed urinals and/or toilets, or other design features that
promote the purposes herein promulgated in accordance with the California
Building Code § 104.10.
(Ord. No. 2024-003 § 1 (part))
MANDATORY SEISMIC PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING WOOD-FRAME BUILDINGS WITH SOFT, WEAK
OR OPEN-FRONT WALLS
§ 15.02.500 PURPOSE.
   The provisions of this Subchapter are intended to promote the public welfare
and safety by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the
effects of earthquakes on existing wood-framed multi-story buildings with soft,
weak or open-front walls. Generally, this type of structure consists of partial
tuck-under parking on the first-floor level with single or multi-family living
space in the floors above. In past earthquakes many of these types of
structures have performed poorly and collapsed, causing loss of life, personal
injury, and substantial property damage. This Subchapter is considered an
amendment to the California Building Code and creates minimum standards
intended to reduce the risk of collapse and improve the performance of these
buildings during earthquakes, but not necessarily prevent, the loss of life,
injury and damage to property.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.505 SCOPE.
   A.   The provisions of this Subchapter shall apply to all existing buildings
of wood-frame construction, or wood-frame portions thereof, where:
      1.   A permit for construction of a new building was applied for before
October 23, 1978, or if no permit can be located, the structure is determined
by the Building Official to have been built under Building Code standards
enacted prior to October 23, 1978; and
      2.   The ground floor or basement portion of the structure contains
parking or other similar open floor space that causes soft, weak, open-front
wall lines, or the majority of the ground floor or basement portion of the
structure contains an open floor space, and there exists one or more stories
above.
   B.   Exceptions. The provisions of this Subchapter shall not apply to
detached single-family dwelling units and detached single-family dwelling units
with an Accessory Dwelling Unit as defined in §
17.400.095.
   C.   Notwithstanding any provision of the Building Code, compliance with
this Subchapter shall not require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or
fire safety systems to be altered to comply with the current Building Code
unless they constitute a hazard to life or property as determined by the
Building Official.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.510 DEFINITIONS.
   Notwithstanding the applicable definitions, symbols and notations in the
Building Code, the following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this
Subchapter:
   BUILDING CODE. The Building Code of the City of Culver City in effect at the
time of submittal retrofit plan for plan review.
   CRIPPLE WALL. A wood-framed stud wall extending from the top of the
foundation wall to the underside of the lowest floor framing.
   DESIGN CRITERIA. A document that outlines the design professional's
alternative analysis or retrofit approach and methodology to satisfy the design
intent and performance objective of this Subchapter. This document is intended
to be used when the code and seismic ordinance language does not address the
proposed analysis or retrofit approach or methodology.
   GROUND FLOOR. Any floor within the wood-frame portion of a building whose
elevation is immediately accessible from an adjacent grade by vehicles or
pedestrians. The ground floor portion of the structure does not include any
floor that is completely below adjacent grades.
   HISTORICAL BUILDING. Any building designated as a "qualified historical
building" as defined in Part 8, Title 24 of the Cal. Code of Regulations.
   OPEN-FRONT WALL LINE. An exterior wall line, without vertical elements of
the lateral force-resisting system, which requires tributary seismic forces to
be resisted by diaphragm rotation or contains an excessive cantilever beyond
parallel lines of shear walls. Diaphragms that cantilever more than twenty-five
(25%) of the distance between tines of lateral force resisting elements from
which the diaphragm cantilevers shall be considered excessive. Diaphragm
cantilevers or exterior balconies of six (6) feet or less in width shall not be
considered excessive cantilevers.
   OWNER or BUILDING OWNER. The individual(s), agent, firm, corporation, or
entity having legal possession, equitable interest in the property, or rights
to sanction evaluation or retrofit of a building.
   RETROFIT. An improvement of the lateral force resisting system by alteration
of existing structural elements or addition of new structural elements.
   SEISMIC DESIGN GUIDELINES. Framework guidelines developed by the Building
Official which are intended to calibrate, delineate and detail technical
requirements to be used for the retrofitting of buildings subject to this
Subchapter.
   SOFT WALL LINE. A deficiency in a wall line in which the lateral stiffness
is less than what is required by story drift limitations and deformation
compatibility requirements of this Subchapter. In lieu of the engineering
analysis required by this Subchapter to determine whether a wall line's lateral
stiffness is less than the aforementioned story drift limitations and
deformation compatibility requirements, a SOFT WALL LINE deficiency may be
defined as a wall line in a story where the wall stiffness is less than seventy
percent (70%) of the stiffness of the exterior wall above for the direction
under consideration.
   STORY. As defined in the Building Code, but includes any basement or under-
floor space of a building with cripple walls exceeding four (4) feet in height.
   STORY STRENGTH. The total strength of all seismic-resisting elements sharing
the same story shear in the direction under consideration.
   WALL LINE. Any length of a wall along a principal axis of the building used
to provide resistance to lateral loads.
   WEAK WALL LINE. A deficiency of a wall line at the ground floor in which the
wall strength is less than eighty percent (80%) of the strength of the wall
above in the direction under consideration or is an exterior wall where the
majority of the ground floor or basement portion of the structure contains an
open floor space and the ground floor story strength is less than eighty
percent (80%) of the story strength above.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.515 COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   The owner of each building within the scope of this Subchapter shall
cause an investigation of the existing construction and a structural analysis
to be performed on the building by a registered civil or structural engineer
licensed in the State of California, and if the building does not meet the
minimum standards specified in this Subchapter, the Owner shall cause it to be
structurally altered to conform to such standards.
   B.   Each building within the scope of this Subchapter which has been
analyzed to demonstrate compliance or has been structurally altered to comply
with the minimum standards in this Subchapter shall be maintained in conformity
with the requirements of this Subchapter in effect at the time of such analysis
or structural alteration.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Subchapter to the
contrary, a building that is found to be within the scope of this Subchapter
and is not brought into compliance in the time frame indicated in Table A of
this Subchapter may be deemed unsafe and subject to the requirements of Section
102 of the Building Code.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.520 TIME PERIOD FOR COMPLIANCE/PRIORITY DESIGNATION.
   A.   Screening report. Within the time limits allowed in Table A, the owner
of any building subject to the provisions of this Subchapter shall submit a
screening report to the Building and Safety Division. The report shall
demonstrate whether the structure conforms to the earthquake design provisions
contained in this Subchapter; minimum form requirements shall be as specified
by the Building Official.
   B.   Plan, permits and construction. If the screening report concludes the
structure does not comply with the provisions of this Subchapter, the structure
shall be strengthened to comply with the standards of this Subchapter within
the time periods shown in Table A. Minimum plan requirements shall be as
specified by the Building Official.
Table A
Time Period for Compliance
 
Required  Submit       Submit                     Commence       Complete
Action by Screening    Retrofit     Obtain Permit Construction   Construction
Owner     Report       Plans
          1 year       2 years      3 years       4 years        5 years
Milestone From notice  From notice  From notice   From notice to From notice to
          to the owner to the owner to the owner  the owner      the owner
 
   C.   Priority designations. The Building Official shall prioritize
enforcement of this Subchapter as defined in Table B.
Table B
Priority Designation
 
Priority     Description
Priority I   Buildings containing more than 12 units, or 3 stories with more
             than 6 units.
Priority II  Buildings containing between 5 and 12 units not falling within the
             definition of Priority I.
Priority III Buildings not falling within the definition of Priority I or II,
             including but not limited to duplexes, triplexes, and townhouses.
 
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.525 ADMINISTRATION.
   A.   Issuance of order. The Building Official shall, in accordance with the
priorities set forth in Table B of this Subchapter, issue an order as provided
in this Section to the owner of each building that is expected to be within the
scope of this Subchapter.
   B.   Contents of order. The order shall be in writing and shall be served
either personally or by certified mail to the owner as shown on the last
equalized Los Angeles County assessment roll of the building. The order shall
specify that the building has been determined by the Building Official to be
within the scope of this Subchapter and, therefore, is required to meet the
standards of this Subchapter.
   C.   Service of order. Proper service of a notice shall be by certified
mail, It shall be deemed a reasonable effort has been made to serve such notice
when registered or certified letters have been mailed to the address of the
interested party as shown on the official record. The designated period within
which the owner or person in charge is required to comply with such notice
shall begin as of the date the owner or person in charge receives such notice
by personal service or certified mail.
   D.   Failure to receive order. Failure of any owner, party concerned or
other person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any
proceedings taken thereunder.
   E.   Appeal from order. Once the building owner has submitted a screening
report in accordance with §
15.02.520.A. and the Building Official has determined that the building is
within the scope of this Subchapter, the owner may appeal the decision per
Section 1.8.8.3 of the Building Code.
   F.   Extensions. The building owner may request an extension to the time
period for compliance set forth in Table A of §
15.02.520. An application for extension may only be filed after the owner has
submitted a screening report to the City and the retrofit plans have been
approved by the City. The building owner has the burden of proof to establish
with substantial evidence that good cause for the extension exists. The
building owner must also provide a new proposed schedule for compliance, and
plan to comply with the provisions of this Subchapter during that timeframe.
Upon good cause shown, the Building Official may approve, approve with
modifications or deny the extension request for an extension that is
commensurate with the justification for the extension. The owner of the
building may appeal the Building Official's decision on the extension per
Section 1.8.8.3 of the Building Code.
   G.   Recordation. Once a building that was determined to be within the scope
of this Subchapter has failed to comply with the requirements of this
Subchapter within the time limits provided in Table A, the Building Official
may record in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder a certificate
stating that the subject building is within the scope of this Subchapter and
requires seismic retrofit. The certificate shall also state that the owner
thereof has been notified of the need to retrofit the building. Once the
building has been retrofitted to comply with this Subchapter, the Building
Official shall record a certificate indicating that the subject building no
longer is in violation of this Subchapter.
   H.   Regulations and policies. The Building Official may promulgate
implementing regulations and policies consistent with this Subchapter.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.530 OCCUPANCY AND TENANT ADVISORY.
   A.   Notification to tenants and occupants. The owner shall notify in
writing all current and prospective residential and non-residential tenants,
subtenants, lessees, sublessees, or any other person(s) entitled to the use
and/or occupancy of the building (collectively, "tenants") of a proposed
project submitted pursuant to this Subchapter. The notice shall include the
information for the project, as determined by the City, including the scope of
work, expected duration, and contact information for a representative of the
contractor. The form of notice shall be supplied by the Community Development
Department and Building and Safety Division.
   B.   Tenant Impact Mitigation Plan. If required, the property owner shall
submit to the Building Official a Tenant Impact Mitigation Plan.
   C.   Tenant protections. The property owner must mitigate untenantable
conditions resulting from the project either through actions to ensure that
tenants can safely remain in the building during the project or through the
temporary relocation of tenants, in compliance with all applicable provisions
of §
15.09.330.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.535 HISTORICAL BUILDINGS.
   Historical buildings shall comply with the California Historical Building
Code and the provisions of this Subchapter. Modifications to the standards set
forth in this Subchapter may be permitted when such modifications are
consistent with the provision of the California Historical Building Code. Such
modifications shall be clearly specified in the screening report.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.540 ANALYSIS AND DESIGN.
   A.   Scope of analysis. This Subchapter requires the alteration, repair,
replacement or addition of structural elements and their connections to meet
the strength and stiffness in conformance with the Building Code except as
modified herein. The lateral-load-path analysis shall include the resisting
elements and connections from the wood diaphragm immediately above any soft,
weak or open-front wall lines to and including the foundation. Stories above
the weak wall line shall be considered in the analysis but need not be
modified. The engineer shall investigate existing conditions as applicable for
the required analysis, including performing initial material testing and
verification of existing conditions.
   B.   Design base shear and design parameters. The design force in a given
direction shall not be less than seventy-five percent (75%) of that derived
from the base shear as determined from the seismic provisions of ASCE 7 and
design provisions as specified by the current Seismic Design Guidelines. The
structure shall be analyzed and/or strengthened in order to mitigate the soft
wall line and/or weak wall line deficiencies as defined in §
15.02.510.
   C.   Exception. Alternatively, the structure may be retrofitted per Appendix
A4 of the California Existing Building Code, provided the entire story is
analyzed and/or strengthened in order to mitigate the soft wall line and/or
weak wall line deficiencies defined in §
15.02.510.
   D.   Lateral vertical systems. Strengthening systems with concrete walls or
masonry walls, or steel braced frames shall not be permitted unless a full
building analysis considering diaphragm stiffness and torsional behavior is
performed.
   E.   Horizontal structural irregularities in buildings with three (3) or
more stories. Structures with three (3) or more stories having horizontal
structural irregularities of either type 2, 3, 4, or 5 listed in ASCE 7,
"Horizontal Structural Irregularities", shall be altered to meet the additional
requirements of those sections referenced in the table for the weak, soft or
open-front wall lines being considered.
   F.   Alternate analysis, base shear and design parameters. The Building
Official may approve alternate analysis and/or design methodologies that meet
the same performance intent as those prescribed by this Subchapter and that
achieve the objectives established by this Subchapter. A design criteria shall
be submitted to the City for review and approval prior to submission of plans.
Peer review shall be required when advanced systems, such as damped systems are
utilized.
   G.   Additional anchorage requirements for buildings on hillsides. Where any
portion of a building within the scope of this Subchapter is constructed on or
into a slope steeper than one (1) unit vertical in three (3) units horizontal
(33% slope), the lateral-force-resisting system, at and below the base level
diaphragm, shall also be analyzed for the effects of concentrated lateral loads
caused at the building base from the hillside conditions and comply with the
provisions of the Building Code.
   H.   Story drift limitations. The calculated story drift for each
retrofitted story shall not exceed the allowable deformation compatible with
all vertical load-resisting elements and meet the requirements of the current
Seismic Design Guidelines. The calculated story drift shall not be reduced by
the effects of horizontal diaphragm stiffness, but shall be increased when
these effects produce rotation. Drift calculations shall be in accordance with
ASCE 7 requirements.
   I.   Cantilever column systems. The effects of rotation and soil stiffness
shall be included in the calculated story drift where lateral loads are
resisted by vertical elements whose required depth of embedment is determined
by pole formulas. The coefficient of subgrade reaction used in deflection
calculations shall be based on an approved geotechnical investigation conducted
in accordance with approved geotechnical engineering reports.
   J.   P-delta effect. The requirements of the Building Code shall apply,
except as modified herein. All structural framing elements and their
connections not required by the design to be part of the lateral force
resisting system shall be designed and detailed to be adequate to maintain
support of design dead plus live loads when subject to the expected
deformations caused by seismic forces. The stress analysis of cantilever
columns shall use an effective length factor of 2.1 for the direction normal to
the axis of the beam.
   K.   Ties, continuity and collectors. All parts of the structure included in
the scope of analysis shall be interconnected and the connection shall be
capable of resisting the seismic force created by the parts being connected as
required per the Building Code.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.545 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLANS.
   A.   General. The plans and specifications required by the Building Official
shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature, design methodology, and
extent of the proposed work and to show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of this Subchapter and the Building Code.
   B.   Engineer's statement. The responsible engineer shall provide the
following statements on the approved plans:
      "I am responsible for designing this building's seismic strengthening in
compliance with the minimum standards of the Mandatory Seismic Strengthening
Provisions for Existing Wood Frame Buildings with Soft, Weak or Open-Front
Walls (Subchapter
15.02.500)."
   C.   Owner's or owners' representative statement. Unless the entire building
has been retrofitted to meet the full intent of the current Building Code, the
owner shall provide and sign the following statement on the cover of the
drawings:
      "_____ understand the seismic evaluation and strengthening performed
under this project is limited to that specified in the Mandatory Seismic
Strengthening Provisions For Existing Wood Frame Buildings With Soft, Weak or
Open-Front Walls (Subchapter
15.02.500) which is intended to reduce the risk under a seismic event. I
understand the full building has not been evaluated nor strengthen for other
potential structural deficiencies that may cause a life safety concern, injury,
or property damage risk under a seismic event."
   D.   Quality control and assurance requirements. General notes shall show
the requirements for material testing, special inspection, structural
observation and the proper installation of newly added materials.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.550 QUALITY ASSURANCE.
   A.   Structural observation. All structures regulated by this Subchapter
require structural observation during construction. The owner shall employ the
engineer of record responsible for the structural design, or another registered
engineer designated by the engineer of record to perform structural observation
as defined in the Building Code.
   B.   Special inspection. Special inspections shall be provided as required
by the Building Code. Additional inspections shall be noted on drawings as
required by Building Official.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.555 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   A.   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure or portion thereof, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this
Subchapter, pursuant to §
15.02.005 of this Municipal Code, and California Building Code Section 114.
   B.   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this Subchapter shall be guilty of the misdemeanor, and each such
person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Subchapter
is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation
such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000), or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. The provisions of this Section are in addition to and
independent of any other sanctions, penalties or costs which are or may be
imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this Subchapter.
   C.   Recordation of violation.
      1.   General. The Building Official may record a notice with the County
Recorder's Office that a property, building or structure, or any part thereof,
is in violation of any provision of this Subchapter provided that the
provisions of this section are complied with. The remedy provided by this
section is cumulative to any other enforcement actions permitted by this
Subchapter, Culver City Municipal Code, or any other applicable State or
federal laws.
      2.   Recordation. If (i) the Building Official determines that any
property, building, or structure, or any part thereof is in violation of any
provision of this Subchapter; and (ii) the Building Official gives written
notice as specified below of said violation; then the Building Official may
have sole discretion to, at any time thereafter, record with the County
Recorder's Office a notice that the property and/or any building or structure
located thereon is in violation of this Subchapter.
      3.   Notice. The written notice given pursuant to this Section shall
indicate:
         a.   The nature of the violation(s); and
         b.   That if the violation is not remedied to the satisfaction of the
Building Official, the Building Official may, at any time thereafter, record
with the County Recorder's Office a notice that the property and/or any
building or structure located thereon is in violation of this Subchapter. The
notice shall be posted on the property and shall be mailed to the owner of the
property as indicated on the last equalized County Assessment roll. The mailed
notice may be by certified or first-class mail.
      4.   Rescission. Any person who desires to have recorded a notice
rescinding the notice of violation must first obtain the necessary approvals
and permit(s) to correct the violation. Once the Building Official determines
that the work covered by such permit(s) has been satisfactorily completed, the
Building Official may record a notice rescinding the prior notice of violation.
Following the recordation of the notice of violation the Building Official is
not required to make any inspection of review of the premises to determine the
continued existence of the cited violation. It is the responsibility of the
property owner, occupant or other similarly interested private party to comply
with the above provisions.
   D.   Costs. Any person that has violated any provision of this Subchapter
shall be responsible for the costs of any and all enforcement actions taken by
the Building Official in response to such violations. These costs shall be
based on the amounts specified by the fee schedule adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
§ 15.02.560 APPLICABILITY.
   A.   Internal conflict. Where there is a conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable. Where, in any specific case, different Sections of this Subchapter
specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements,
the most restrictive shall govern.
   B.   Other laws. The provisions of this Subchapter shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, State or federal law.
   C.   Codes and references. The provisions of the codes and standards
referenced in this Subchapter shall be considered part of the requirements of
this Subchapter to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where there
are conflicts between provisions of this Subchapter and the provisions of any
referenced code or standard, the provisions of this Subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. 2021-013, § 1(part))
ANTENNAS
§ 15.02.600 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA.  Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, which
system is external to or attached to the exterior of any building. The term
ANTENNA shall include “dish” antennas and devices having active elements
extending in any direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements
carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom which may be mounted
upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and
antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna.
   ANTENNA ARRAY. A group of antenna elements on the same geometric plane.
   ANTENNA, COMMERCIAL. An antenna in any zoning district used in conjunction
with a business, commercial enterprise, trade, calling, vocation, profession,
occupation or means of livelihood, whether or not carried on for gain or
profit, including, but not limited to, public utilities, cellular telephone
communications or privately owned or publicly supported AM or FM radio stations
not otherwise exempt from the provisions of the Zoning Code, cable television
operations or television broadcast stations, but excluding FCC-licensed amateur
radio stations and standard television receive only (TVRO) nonparabolic
antennas.
   ANTENNA ELEMENT.  Individual components of an individual antenna.
   ANTENNA HEIGHT. The distance from the grade of the property at the base of
the antenna or, in the case of a roof-mounted antenna, from the grade at the
exterior base of the building, to the highest point of the antenna and its
associated support structure when fully extended.
   ANTENNA, NONCOMMERCIAL. An antenna in any zoning district not used in
conjunction with a business, commercial enterprise, trade, calling, vocation,
profession, occupation, or means of livelihood, including, but not limited to,
FCC-licensed amateur radio stations and standard television receive only (TVRO)
parabolic antennas.
   ANTENNA, NONPARABOLIC.  An individual array or group of arrays used to
transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals, including, but not limited to,
radio waves related to amateur radio stations licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
   ANTENNA STRUCTURE. An antenna array and its associated support structure,
such as a mast, tower, or bracing wire, but not to include a suspended simple
wire antenna, that is used for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving
electromagnetic signals, including, but not limited to, radio waves and
microwaves.
   ANTENNA STRUCTURE, FREESTANDING.  An antenna structure that is not attached
to a building, fence or other such structure.
   ANTENNA, TVRO NONPARABOLIC. A standard roof-mounted antenna array, and its
associated support structure, that is used solely to receive broadcast
television signals.
   ANTENNA, VERTICAL WHIP. A pole or single element vertical antenna no more
than three (3) inches in diameter, and its associated support structure.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.605 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   A.   Radio and television antennas, including satellite receiving or
transmission antenna systems and microwave antenna systems, may be installed,
erected and maintained within all land use zones of the City, but only in
accordance with the provisions of this Subchapter and the “Dish Antenna
Regulations” of the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code.
   B.   No antenna shall be permitted within the City, except as follows:
      1.   Roof-mounted antennas are permitted when the boom or any active
element of the antenna array is fifteen (15) feet or less in length, provided
that they are in conformity with the development standards of this Section.
      2.   The following antennas shall require a building permit, and may be
permitted upon review and approval of the plans for such antennas by the City
Planner. The plan should be in conformity with the development standards of §
15.02.615 and the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code:
         a.   Roof-mounted antennas when the boom or any active element of the
antenna array is longer than fifteen (15) feet.
         b.   All ground-mounted antennas.
         c.   All satellite receiving or transmission antennas.
      3.   Every antenna, whether temporary or permanent, shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Building Official where required by the Building
Code, and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the Zoning Code, as
set forth it Title 17 of this Code, and to
Chapter 15.07, except that noncommercial nonparabolic antennas are subject only
to the provisions of §
15.02.610 C.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
§ 15.02.610 NONCOMMERCIAL NONPARABOLIC ANTENNAS.
   A.   Applicability to noncommercial nonparabolic antennas.
      1.   Notwithstanding §
15.02.605, a nonparabolic antenna that is it existence as of May 11, 1995, may
continue in existence at the current height and location, and need not comply
with the design standards stated herein, unless the following occurs:
         a.   If, in the case of a roof-mounted antenna weighing more than
fifty (50) pounds, the antenna is replaced with one that is larger in any of
its dimensions, the antenna structure shall then comply with the applicable
regulations and design standards.
         b.   If, in the case of a noncommercial freestanding antenna
structure, an existing antenna is replaced with one that is larger in any of
its dimensions, the antenna structure shall then comply with the regulations
and design standards contained in §
15.02.610 C.
      2.   Notwithstanding §
15.02.605, no additional or structural alterations may be made to a
nonconforming antenna structure that would increase its nonconformity with the
applicable regulations and design standards.
   B.   Purpose.
      1.   The City desires to allow noncommercial nonparabolic antennas in all
areas of the City, subject only to limited and reasonable regulations which are
permitted by Federal Law in order to prevent such antennas from adversely
affecting the public health, safety, welfare or aesthetic interests.
      2.   a.   The City Council finds that amateur radio operators provide an
important public service by participating in local, regional and Statewide
emergency and disaster preparedness programs, in facilitating international
disaster relief programs, and in fostering international goodwill and
understanding.
         b.   The City Council finds, however, the antennas and antenna
structures related to FCC-licensed amateur radio communications may be
aesthetically unsightly and visually obtrusive.
      3.   a.   The City Council recognizes that because of the important
public service provided by amateur radio operators, the FCC has partially
preempted local regulation of amateur radio antennas.
         b.   Federal regulations specify that local regulations concerning the
placement, screening or height of antennas for amateur radio communications
must reasonably accommodate amateur communications, and constitute the minimum
practicable regulation necessary to accomplish the local agency's legitimate
purpose.
      4.   The City Council finds that the regulations and design standards set
forth in this Subchapter reasonably accommodate FCC-licensed amateur radio
communications, and constitute the minimum practicable regulation necessary to
protect the public health, safety and aesthetic interests.
      5.   The provisions allowing the erection of nonparabolic antennas shall
only permit those individuals who are Federally-licensed amateur radio
operators to erect such antennas as allowed by the Municipal Code.
   C.   Regulation and design standards.
      1.   A noncommercial nonparabolic antenna shall be installed, modified,
and maintained in accordance with the following standards:
         a.   One (1) roof-mounted TVRO nonparabolic antenna per residential
unit, and up to four (4) roof-mounted nonparabolic antennas related to a FCC-
licensed amateur radio station, shall be permitted for each parcel.
            (1)   One of the roof-mounted nonparabolic antennas per parcel may
extend up to twenty-five (25) feet above the roofline, but all other additional
nonparabolic antennas shall extend no more than fifteen (15) feet above the
roofline.
            (2)   One (1) roof-mounted antenna related to a FCC-licensed
amateur radio station may extend up to twenty-five (25) feet above the
roofline; however, all other roof-mounted antennas related to a FCC-licensed
amateur radio station shall extend no more than fifteen (15) feet beyond these
height limits.
         b.   One (1) freestanding antenna structure related to a FCC-licensed
amateur radio station measuring up to sixty-six (66) feet in height or fifteen
(15) feet above the height limit of the district in which it is located,
whichever height is greater, shall be permitted per parcel.
            (1)   For purposes of this section, antenna structures shall be
measured to the highest horizontal antenna element.
            (2)   A freestanding antenna structure exceeding fifty (50) feet in
height shall be retractable to thirty-five (35) feet.
            (3)   A single vertical element may extend fifteen (15) feet beyond
these height limits.
         c.   No portion of an antenna, including the array in any position, or
of an antenna structure, shall be located between the face of the main building
and any public street, or in any required front or side yard setback.
         d.   (1)   The support structure shall be located a minimum of ten
(10) feet from the rear property line.
            (2)   Neither an antenna nor an antenna structure shall extend
beyond the property line of the parcel on which it is located.
         e.   Roof-mounted antennas or antenna structures shall be located at
or to the rear of the centerline of a building.
         f.   An antenna structure shall be finished in a color to blend in
with its immediate surroundings, to reduce glare, and to minimize its visual
intrusiveness and negative aesthetic impact.
         g.   The display of any sign on an antenna or antenna structure is
prohibited, except for public safety warnings, which must be placed no higher
than eight (8) feet above the base of the antenna structure.
         h.   A building permit shall be obtained prior to the installation of
a ground-mounted antenna structure, or a roof-mounted antenna structure for
roof-mounted antennas weighing fifty (50) pounds or more, pursuant to the
requirements of the Building Code.
      2.   Unless a finding is made that a proposed antenna poses an actual
threat to the public health or safety, the Building Official, shall have the
authority to grant a use permit to modify the regulations and design standards
of Subsection C. l. paragraphs a., b., c., ore. of this Section, if
topographical conditions, nearby tall structures or other factors unreasonably
obstruct or otherwise unreasonably interfere with effective transmission or
reception of the type desired, and the cause of such obstruction or
interference was not created by the applicant.
         a.   An application for a use permit and for a building permit shall
be reviewed upon payment of fees for each application as established by
resolution of City Council.
         b.   As a condition of approval of a use permit to modify the design
standard of Subsection C.1. paragraph b. of this Section, an antenna structure
shall be required to be retractable to thirty-five (35) feet.
         c.   In cases where topographical conditions surrounding the antenna
structure or the presence of nearby tall structures physically impede
retracting an antenna to thirty-five (35) feet, the Building Official, may
allow an antenna structure to be retracted to a height greater than thirty-five
(35) feet.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2007-002 § 18; Ord. No. 2025-001 § 2
(part)) Penalty, see §
15.02.005
§ 15.02.615 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Every antenna shall be located, designed, constructed, treated, and
maintained in accordance with the following standards:
   A.   The antenna shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the
requirements of the Building Code.
   B.   The maximum number of antennas that may be installed on any lot shall
not exceed:
      1.   One ground-mounted antenna;
      2.   Two (2) roof-mounted antennas;
      3.   In the manufacturing and studio zones, more dish antennas may be
permitted, according to Title 17 of this Code.
   C.   1.   In residential zones, roof-mounted antennas shall not extend
higher than fifteen (15) feet above the maximum building height permitted in
the zone, except a single vertical pole antenna may extend to twenty (20) feet
above the peak of the roof; provided that a roof-mounted disc antenna shall not
exceed twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.
      2.   In nonresidential zones, roof-mounted antennas shall not extend
higher than fifteen (15) feet above the maximum building height permitted in
the zone or fifteen (15) feet above the building upon which it is mounted,
whichever is less.
   D.   1.   Ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed forty (40) feet in
height, except remote communication installation facility antennas, as provided
in the Zoning Code.
      2.   All satellite receiving and transmitting “dish” type antennas shall
be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code, as set forth
in Title 17 of this Code.
   E.   Not more than one antenna shall be permitted on any lot when the boom
or any active element of the antenna array is longer than fifteen (15) feet.
   F.   1.   Stacking of antennas may be permitted when stacked in a ground-
mounted antenna configuration, provided that not more than three (3) such
antennas are attached to the tower.
      2.   For the purpose of this Section, such antennas shall be considered
one antenna and shall be subject to all the requirements of this Section.
   G.   Antennas shall be erected or maintained to the rear of the main
building; provided that, when the subject property is a cul-de-sac or any lot
with a side yard larger than the rear yard, the antenna may be located in the
side yard.
      1.   Antenna towers or the supports therefor shall not be located in any
street-facing setback area.
      2.   No portion of any antenna array shall extend beyond the property
lines or into any front yard area.
      3.   Guy wires shall not be anchored within any front yard area, but may
be attached to the building.
   H.   Antennas may be roof- or ground-mounted, freestanding or supported by
guy wires, buildings or other structures in compliance with the manufacturer's
structural specifications.
      1.   A ground-mounted antenna shall be an antenna with its base mounted
directly in the ground, even if such antenna is supported or attached to the
wall of a building.
      2.   A fixed-guy antenna tower shall be fascia-mounted or guyed according
to approved standards.
      3.   A wire antenna that is not self-supporting shall be supported by
objects entirely within the lot lines of the property upon which the antenna is
erected, but not within a front setback.
   I.   Antennas, including guy wires, supporting structures and accessory
equipment, shall be located and designed so as to minimize the visual impact on
surrounding properties and from public streets.
      1.   Antennas should be screened through the addition of architectural
features and/or landscaping that harmonize with the elements and
characteristics of the property.
      2.   The materials used in constructing the antennas shall not be
unnecessarily bright, shiny, garish or reflective.
   J.   The antenna shall meet all manufacturer's specifications.
      1.   The mast or tower shall be of noncombustible and corrosive-resistant
material.
      2.   The miscellaneous hardware, such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips and
similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion, shall be protected with a
zinc or cadmium coating, by either a galvanizing or a sherardizing process
after forming, to guard against corrosion and to protect the elements against
electrolytic action due to the use of adjoining dissimilar metals.
   K.   1.   Whenever it is necessary to install an antenna near power lines,
or where damage would be caused by its falling, a separate safety wire must be
attached to the antenna mast or tower, and secured in a direction away from the
hazard.
      2.   Antenna transmission lines must be kept at least twenty-four (24)
inches clear of utility lines.
   L.   Every antenna shall be adequately grounded for protection against a
direct strike of lightning, with an adequate ground wire.
      1.   The ground wire shall be of the type approved by the latest edition
of the Electrical Code for grounding masts and lightning arrestors, and shall
be installed in a mechanical manner with as few bends as possible, maintaining
a clearance of at least two (2) inches from combustible materials.
      2.   Lightning arrestors shall be used, which are approved as safe by the
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and both sides of the line must be adequately
protected with proper arrestors to remove static charges accumulated on the
line.
      3.   When lead-in conductors of polyethylene ribbon-type are used,
lightning arrestors must be installed in each conductor.
      4.   When coaxial cable or shielded twin lead is used for lead-in,
suitable protection may be provided without lightning arrestors by grounding
the exterior metal sheath.
   M.   Reasonable conditions of approval may be imposed to mitigate any
negative impacts caused by installation of the antenna.
      1.   The cost of any such condition to the applicant shall be considered
in light of the public benefit derived from the condition.
      2.   Other than the manufacturer's trade name and/or logo, no antenna or
the support structure therefore shall be used for any commercial advertising
purpose.
   N.   All antenna components shall be Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.,
approved as acceptable to the Building Official.
   O.   Ground-mounted antennas shall have their related cables installed in
conduit underground from base of antenna to wall of building.
      1.   Conduit may be rigid steel or PVC.
      2.    Roof-mounted antennas may have related cables installed in conduit
(threaded rigid) or run exposed, provided related cables are of hard usage type
and grouped together.
      3.   All antennas are subject to Articles 810 and 820 of the 1984
National Electric Code, in addition to Culver City ordinances.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-013 § 1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
§ 15.02.620 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL.
   A.   Prior to installing any antenna for which approval is required pursuant
to §
15.02.605 or the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, a building
permit application shall be submitted to and approved by the authorized agency.
   B.   The application shall be accompanied by construction drawings showing
the proposed method of installation, the manufacturer's specifications, if any,
and a plot plan showing the location of the antenna, property and setback
lines, and all structures.
   C.   In addition, the application shall be accompanied by engineering data
establishing the fact that the antenna conforms to the structural requirements
of the Building Code.
      1.   Such engineering data may include custom engineering calculations
for each installation, the calculations and data to be submitted by a
structural or civil engineer registered by the State of California.
      2.   Such registered engineer may be employed by the manufacturer of the
antenna.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.625 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Every antenna shall be maintained in good condition and in accordance
with all requirements of this Section.
   B.   1.   Every antenna shall be subject to periodic reinspection.
      2.   No additions, changes or modifications shall be made to an antenna,
unless the addition, change or modification is in conformity with the Building
Code, this Subchapter, and the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this
Code, if it is a dish antenna.
   C.   1.   Failure to abide by and faithfully comply with this Section, or
with any and all conditions that may be imposed, shall constitute grounds for
the revocation of the approval by the City Planner.
      2.   The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative with other
remedies provided in this Code, and not exclusive.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
POST-DISASTER RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION
§ 15.02.700 PURPOSE.
   A.   This Subchapter establishes regulations to apply in the event a
disaster causes damage to buildings and structures in the City, and includes
the adoption of uniform placards to post the condition of the building based on
an early assessment of danger, procedures for demolition and standards for
repair and reconstruction of building and structures, including those deemed
historic, damaged by disasters.
   B.   Adoption of this Subchapter is not intended to preempt the City
Council's authority to adopt different or supplemental regulations, including
interim regulations, for post-disaster recovery and repair.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.705 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this Subchapter are applicable following any disaster or
societal upheaval, including earthquake, fire, flood, hurricane, tornado,
tsunami or similar event which results in damage to buildings and structures of
all occupancies within the City of Culver City.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.710 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARCHITECT. An individual licensed by the State of California to practice
architecture as defined in the California Business and Professions Code.
   BUILDING. Any building as defined in California Health and Safety Code §
18908.
   CBC.  The California Building Code published by the California Building
Standards Commission, as adopted by §
15.02.100 hereinabove, in accordance with the operation of law pursuant to
California Health and Safety Code § 18941.5. The edition to be applied shall be
that edition in effect at the time of the declaration of a local emergence by
the City Council.
   CIVIL ENGINEER. An individual registered by the State of California to
practice civil engineering as defined in the California Business and
Professions Code.
   DISASTER. Any natural occurrence, including earthquake, fire, flood,
hurricane, tornado, tsunami or similar event, or any societal upheaval,
including civil disturbance or similar event, which results in a declaration
that the City or a portion thereof is a disaster area, or a declaration of
local emergency by the President of the United States, Governor of the State of
California, City Council of Culver City, City Manager or designee, or other
governmental official.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES FACILITY. Any building or structure which houses
facilities or services necessary for emergency operations subsequent to a
disaster, as determined by the City Manager or his or her designee.
   HISTORIC BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure included on the
National Register of Historic Places, the State Register of Historic Places or
Points of Interest, or structures or buildings within a historic district
designated pursuant to
Chapter 15.05 of this Code.
   REINFORCED. The installation or the existence of reinforcing steel with the
capacity to allow the load-resisting cross section to resist flexure and shear
stress, as determined by the Building Official.
   REPLACEMENT VALUE. The dollar value, as determined by the Building Official,
of replacing the damaged structure with a new structure of the same size,
construction material and occupancy on the same site.
   SAFETY ASSESSMENT. A visual, nondestructive examination of a building or
structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy
following a natural or manmade disaster.
   STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER. The individual appointed by the
Governor, pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act, 16 U.S.C. § 470a
(b), to administer the State Historic Preservation Program.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. An individual registered by the State of California to
practice civil engineering, and to use the title STRUCTURAL ENGINEER as defined
in the California Business and Professions Code.
   STRUCTURE. Any STRUCTURE as defined in California Health and Safety Code §
18908.
   VALUE OF REPAIR. The dollar value, as determined by the Building Official,
of making the necessary repairs to the damaged structure.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part))
§ 15.02.715 PLACARDS.
   A.   The placards described in this Section are hereby adopted as the
official placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy
of building or structures.
   B.   At the top of each placard, the words “DISASTER PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM,
CITY OF CULVER CITY BUILDING DIVISION,” the official City Seal, address and
telephone number of the Building Division, and at the bottom of each placard
the words “DO NOT REMOVE, ALTER OR COVER THIS PLACARD UNTIL AUTHORIZED BY THE
BUILDING OFFICIAL OF THE CITY OF CULVER CITY” shall appear.
   C.   In addition to the information set forth in Subsection B., the placards
shall additionally provide one of the three (3) following descriptions:
      1.   “INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted” is to be posted on any
building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found.
Posting of this placard does not intend to mean that there is no damage to the
building or structure.
      2.   “RESTRICTED USE” is to be posted on each building or structure that
has been damaged, wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction
to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will:
         a.   Note in general terms the type of damage encountered; and
         b.   Clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued
occupancy.
      3.   “UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy” is to be posted on each building or
structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to
life safety.
         a.   Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be
entered under any circumstance, except as authorized in writing by the Building
Division.
         b.   This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition
order or permit.
         c.   The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms
the type of damage encountered.
   D.   Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not
to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative
of the department or upon written notification from the Building Division.
   E.   1.   No person shall post or attach any facsimile placards on any
building.
      2.   No person shall use any facsimile placards for advertisement.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
§ 15.02.720 CRITERIA FOR DEMOLITION OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
   A.   1.   Except as provided in §
15.02.725 for historic buildings or structures, within seven (7) days after the
event, any building or structure determined by the Building Official to
represent an imminent hazard to public health and safety, or to pose an
imminent threat to the public right-of-way, shall be condemned and immediately
demolished.
      2.   The condemnation and demolition shall be performed in the interest
of public health and safety, without the hearings otherwise required by
Chapter 9.04 of this Code.
   B.   After the seven (7)-day period established in Subsection A., if the
Building Official determines that any building or structure represents a hazard
to the health and safety of the public, or poses a threat to the public right-
of-way, the Building Official shall duly notify the owner, or other person or
legal entity in lawful possession or control of such building, stating that the
building or structure is a dangerous building and represents a hazard to the
public health and safety, or poses a threat to the public right-of-way, and
shall commence condemnation or other legal proceedings.
   C.   In the event the owner of a building or structure damaged by the
disaster elects to demolish rather than repair, the owner shall obtain a
demolition permit for the building or structure in accordance with City
procedures.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
§ 15.02.725 DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   A.   Notwithstanding the Historic Preservation Program set forth in
Chapter 15.05, within seven (7) days after the event, any historic building or
structure determined by the Building Official to represent an imminent hazard
to public health and safety, or to pose an imminent threat to the public right-
of-way, the Building Official shall notify the State Historic Preservation
Officer that one of the following actions will be taken:
      1.   Whenever possible, within reasonable limits as determined by the
Building Official, the historic building or structure shall be braced or shored
in such a manner as to mitigate the hazard to public health and safety or the
hazard to the public right-of-way.
      2.   Whenever bracing or shoring is determined not to be reasonable, the
Building Official shall cause the historic building or structure to be
condemned and immediately demolished.
         a.   The condemnation and demolition shall be performed in the
interest of public health and safety, without the hearings otherwise required
by
Chapter 9.04 of this Code.
         b.   Prior to commencing demolition, the Building Official shall
videotape and photographically record the entire building or structure.
   B.   If, after the seven (7)-day period specified in subsection A. and less
than thirty (30) days after the event, a historic building or structure is
determined to represent a hazard to the health and safety of the public, or
pose a threat to the public right-of-way, the Building Official shall duly
notify the owner, or other person or legal entity in lawful possession or
control of such building, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in
accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended,
stating that the building or structure is a dangerous building and represents a
hazard to the public health and safety, or poses a threat to the public right-
of-way, and that the City intends to commence condemnation or other legal
proceedings.
   C.   In the event the owner of any historic building or structure and the
Building Official have agreed to demolition of the affected building or
structure within thirty (30) days of the event, the Building Official shall
submit a request to demolish, including al substantiating data, to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, in accordance with the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended.
   D.   If, after thirty (30) days have elapsed, the Building Official and
owner of a historic building or structure agree to demolition of the affected
structure, the proposed demolition shall be subject to the review process,
including appeal, established by the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966, as amended.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
§ 15.02.730 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR DAMAGED BUILDINGS.
   Except as otherwise provided, buildings and structures of all occupancies
which have been damaged as a result of a disaster shall be repaired in
accordance with the following criteria:
   A.   When the estimated value of repair does not exceed ten percent (10%) of
the replacement value of the structure, the damaged portion shall be restored
to its pre-disaster condition, unless the damaged elements include suspended
ceiling systems.
   B.   Notwithstanding Subsection A.1. above, a suspended ceiling system which
is damaged shall be repaired and all bracing required by the current CBC shall
be installed.
   C.   When the estimated value of repair is greater than ten percent (10%)
but less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the structure,
the damaged elements, including all critical ties, supported elements and
supporting elements associated with therewith, shall be repaired and brought
into conformance with the structural requirements of the current CBC.
   D.   When the estimated value of repair is fifty percent (50%) or more of
the replacement value of the structure, the entire structure shall be brought
into conformance with the structural requirements of the current CBC.
   E. In Group R, Division 3 occupancies (single-family dwelling and duplex),
the repair value of damaged chimneys shall be excluded from the computation of
percentage of replacement value.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
§ 15.02.735 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR CHIMNEYS.
   A.   All damaged reinforced chimneys must be repaired or reconstructed to
comply with the requirements of Chapter 31 of the CBC (pertaining to chimneys,
fireplaces and barbecues). Damaged portions shall be removed in accordance with
the following criteria:
      1.   a.   When the damaged portion is located between the roofline and
the top of the chimney, the damaged portion shall be removed to the roofline,
provided the roof and ceiling anchorage are in sound condition.
         b.   The reconstructed portion of the chimney shall be braced to the
roof structure.
      2.   For a single-story structure in which the damaged portion of the
chimney is below the roofline or extends from above the roofline to below the
roofline, the chimney shall be removed to the top of the fireplace.
      3.   For a multiple-story structure, the damaged portion of the chimney
shall be removed from the top to a floorline where sound anchorage is found.
      4.   In any structure where the firebox has been damaged, the entire
chimney and firebox shall be removed to the foundation.
         a.   If the foundation is in sound condition, the firebox and chimney
may be reconstructed using the existing foundation.
         b.   If the foundation has been damaged, the foundation shall be
removed and replaced.
   B.   1.   Where existing conditions preclude the installation of all
anchorage required by Chapter 31 of the CBC, alternate systems may be used in
accordance with the alternate methods and materials provisions of the CBC, as
approved by the Building Official.
      2.   Such alternate systems shall be designed and detailed by a
structural engineer, civil engineer or architect, as approved by the Building
Official.
   C.   When the portion of the chimney extending above the roofline exceeds
two (2) times the least dimension of the chimney, that portion above the
roofline shall be braced to the roof structure.
   D.   All damaged unreinforced chimneys shall be demolished to the footing or
other founding support system.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
§ 15.02.740 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR ESSENTIAL SERVICES FACILITIES.
   A.   An engineering evaluation shall be performed for buildings or
structures housing essential service facilities which have been damaged as a
result of a disaster.
   B.   The minimum criteria for repair shall be as follows:
      1.   When the estimated value of repair is less than thirty percent (30%)
of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged elements, including all
critical ties, supported elements and supporting elements associated with
therewith, shall be repaired and brought into conformance with the structural
requirements of the current CBC.
      2.   When the estimated value of repair is thirty percent (30%) or more
of the replacement value of the structure, the entire structure shall be
brought into conformance with the structural requirements of the current CBC.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 §1 (part))
Penalty, see § 15.02.005
§ 15.02.745 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   A.   An engineering evaluation shall be performed for historic buildings or
structures which have been damaged as a result of a disaster.
   B.   The criteria for repair shall be those established in the State of
California Historic Building Code, as set forth in California Code of
Administrative Regulations, Title 24, Part 8; provided that the minimum
standards established in §
15.02.730 (for general repair criteria) shall be followed, with consideration
given to the historical rating and nature of the structures.
   C.   Where conflicts exist between the standards established in this
Subchapter and the State Historic Building Code, the State Historic Building
Code shall govern.
(Ord. No. 2003-015 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.800 RESERVED.
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSESSMENT COST RECOVERY
§ 15.02.900 ADMINISTRATIVE ASSESSMENT COST RECOVERY PROGRAM.
   The City Council hereby finds and determines it is appropriate and necessary
to require the recovery of costs incurred by the City in the administrative
enforcement of §
9.07.035 of this Code; Chapter
15.02 of this Code, including but not limited to, the adopted California
Building, Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing Codes; Chapters
15.03 and
15.05 of Title 15 of this Code; Title 17 of this Code, any and all final
conditions of approval imposed on a construction project pursuant to this Code,
and any other provisions of this Code authorized by resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. No. 2004-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2005-005 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.905 IMPOSITION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with
any Order to Comply issued by the Culver City Building Safety Division.
   B.   Violation corrected. When an Order to Comply has been satisfied within
the time period prescribed, as confirmed by inspection or other proof
acceptable to the Building Official, no administrative assessment shall be
imposed.
   C.   Violation not corrected.  When an Order to Comply has not been
satisfied within the time period prescribed, as confirmed by inspection or
other proof acceptable to the Building Official, an administrative assessment,
established by resolution of the City Council, shall be imposed on the person
named in the Order to Comply for each additional compliance inspection required
until such time as the Order to Comply has been satisfied.
(Ord. No. 2004-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2005-005 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.910 APPEALS.
   The initial Order to Comply identified as an “initial warning” cannot be
appealed. Subsequent orders to comply can be appealed to the Municipal Code
Appeals Committee. To contest subsequent Orders to Comply and their respective
administrative assessments, a written objection must be filed with the Building
Safety Division office within ten (10) days after receipt of the appealable
Order to Comply. The Building Safety Division will notify each appellant of the
date and time of the scheduled hearing.
(Ord. No. 2004-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2005-005 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.915 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The imposition of an administrative assessment, as set forth in this
Subchapter, is not mutually exclusive of the provisions set forth in §
15.02.005 of this Chapter, or any other applicable provisions of this Code or
federal, state or local laws, and does not prevent the use of concurrent or
consecutive remedies to achieve compliance with this Code.
(Ord. No. 2004-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2005-005 § 1 (part))
§ 15.02.1000 RESERVED.
LOCAL AMENDMENTS TO THE GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE,
BUILDING CODE AND RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE, TO ESTABLISH REACH CODES STANDARDS
§ 15.02.1100 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF REACH CODE STANDARDS.
   The city has established Reach Code standards, which shall be administered
by the Building Safety Division pursuant to the provisions of this Subchapter.
The purpose of the Reach Code is to reduce the use of natural resources, create
healthier living environments, and minimize the negative impacts of development
on local, regional, and global ecosystems. The city's Reach Code standards
shall be in addition to all current State of California Title 24 Energy Code
requirements.
(Ord. No. 2009-004 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007
§ 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1105 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms defined herein shall have the following meanings when used in this
Subchapter:
   APPLICANT. Any individual, firm, limited liability company, association,
partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry
or public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever that applies
to the City for the applicable permits to undertake a qualifying project.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official of the City of Culver City or his
or her designee.
   BUILDING SAFETY DIVISION. The city's Building Safety Division and its staff.
   CALGREEN. The California Green Building Standards Code (Title-24, Part 11,
California Code of Regulations)
   CATEGORY 1 QUALIFYING PROJECT.  The construction of a new low-rise
residential building.
   CATEGORY 2 QUALIFYING PROJECT.  The addition to, or alteration of, an
existing low-rise residential building wherein the construction valuation of
the proposed work exceeds 50% of the replacement value of the existing
building, as determined by the Building Official.
   CATEGORY 3 QUALIFYING PROJECT. The construction of a new non-residential
building or a new high-rise building.
   CATEGORY 4 QUALIFYING PROJECT. The addition to, or alteration of, an
existing non-residential building or an existing high-rise building wherein
either of the following conditions applies:
      (1)   The construction valuation of the proposed work exceeds 50% of the
replacement value of the existing building, as determined by the Building
Official; or
      (2)   The combined area of all alterations to the existing building and
all additions to the existing building exceeds 50,000 square feet.
   CCMC. The Culver City Municipal Code.
   CITY. The City of Culver City.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the City of Culver City or
his or her designee.
   PROJECT. The qualifying project that is the subject of the permit
application.
   Construction projects that meet the definition of a Category 1 Qualifying
Project, Category 2 Qualifying Project, Category 3 Qualifying Project or
Category 4 Qualifying Project, shall comply with the provisions of §§
15.02.1120 through
15.02.1180, as applicable, and the provisions of the California Energy Code and
2 CALGreen.
(Ord. No. 2009-004 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007
§ 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1110 RESERVED.
§ 15.02.1115 RESERVED.
§ 15.02.1120 WATER PERMEABLE SURFACES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, Section 4.106.3.1 and
Section 5.106.3 of the California Green Building Standards Code are hereby
added to read as follows:
   4.106.3.1 Water permeable surfaces for low-rise residential building. Not
less than 20% of new parking, walking or patio surfaces shall be permeable.
   Exceptions:
      1.   The primary driveway, primary entry walkway and entry porch or
landing shall not be included when calculating the area required to be a
permeable surface.
      2.   Required accessible routes for persons with disabilities as required
by California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 11A and/or Chapter
11B as applicable.
   5.106.3 Water permeable surfaces for other than low-rise residential
building. Not less than 20% of new parking, walking or patio surfaces shall be
permeable.
   Exceptions:
      1.   The primary driveway, primary entry walkway and entry porch or
landing shall not be included when calculating the area required to be a
permeable surface.
      2.   Required accessible routes for persons with disabilities as required
by California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 11A and/or Chapter
11B as applicable.
(Ord. No. 2009-004 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007
§ 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1125 GRAY WATER.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, § 4.305.2 of the California
Green Building Standards Code is hereby added as follows:
   4.305.2 Gray water for low-rise residential building. When a low-rise
residential building includes one or more dwelling units that contain a laundry
connection within the dwelling unit, all of the dwelling units containing a
laundry connection shall have a minimum of one (1) plumbing fixture constructed
to divert gray water onto the subject property in full compliance with Chapter
15 of the California Plumbing Code. The plumbing fixture(s) connected to the
gray water discharge system may be any fixture(s) allowed to discharge gray
water under the California Plumbing Code. The gray water may be utilized for
landscape irrigation or for percolation into the soil.
   Exception: accessory dwelling unit and junior accessory dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 2009-004 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007
§ 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1130 LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION CONTROLS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, § 4.304.2 and § 145.304.2 of
the California Green Building Standards Code are hereby added to read as
follows:
   4.304.2 Landscape irrigation controls for low-rise residential building. All
new landscape irrigation shall utilize automatic irrigation controllers
utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data for irrigation
scheduling.
   5.304.2 Landscape irrigation controls for other than low-rise residential
building. All new landscape irrigation shall utilize automatic irrigation
controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data
for irrigation scheduling.
(Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-
015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1135 LIGHT POLLUTION REDUCTION.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, § A402.3.1 .4of the
California Green Building Standards Code is hereby adopted.
(Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-
015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1140 ENHANCED CONSTRUCTION WASTE REDUCTION.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, § 4.408.1 and § 5.408.1 of
the California Green Building Standards Code are hereby modified to read as
follows:
   4.408.1 Construction waste management. Recycle and/or salvage for reuse a
minimum of 75% of the nonhazardous construction and demolition waste in
accordance with either Section 4.408.2, 4.408.3 or 4.408.4, or meet a more
stringent local construction and demolition waste management ordinance. The
reuse of any construction materials for the project may be considered in
determining compliance with the 75% waste reduction target. Third-party
verification shall be required.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Excavated soil and land-clearing debris.
      2.   Alternate waste reduction methods developed by working with local
agencies if diversion or recycle facilities capable of compliance with this
item do not exist or are not located reasonably close to the jobsite.
      3.   The enforcing agency may make exceptions to the requirements of this
section when isolated jobsites are located in areas beyond the haul boundaries
of the diversion facility.
   5.408.1 Construction waste management. Recycle and/or salvage for reuse a
minimum of 75 percent of the nonhazardous construction and demolition waste in
accordance with Section 5.408.1.1, 5.408.1.2 or 5.408.1.3; or meet a local
construction and demolition waste management ordinance, whichever is more
stringent. The reuse of any construction materials for the project may be
considered in determining compliance with the 75% waste reduction target.
Third-party verification shall be required.
(Ord. No. 2019-15 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-015
§ 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1145 DEFENSIBLE SPACE IN WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE (WUI) AREAS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter 6, § 603.1.1 of the
California Wild land Urban Interface Code of the California Residential Code
are hereby added to read as follows:
   701A.5.1 Vegetation management plan. For all projects located in an area
designated as a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone, a plan shall be submitted
to the Building Official or designee that identifies all areas of the property
for which vegetation management compliance is required by Chapter 6 of the
California Wild land Urban Interface Code. Compliance with Chapter 6 must be
completed prior to requesting a final inspection.
(Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-
015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1150 FIRE-RESISTANT ROOF ASSEMBLIES IN WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE (WUI)
AREAS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, § 504.2.3 of the California
Wildland Urban Interface Code are hereby added to read as follows:
   705A.1.1 Class-A fire resistant roof assemblies. Roof coverings for new
buildings and replacements located in an area designated as a Very High Fire
Hazard Severity Zone shall be listed as Class-A by a recognized listing agency.
Wood shake and wood shingle roof coverings shall be prohibited in areas
designated as a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone.
(Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-
015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1155 RESERVED.
§ 15.02.1160 SHOWER FACILITIES FOR BICYCLE PARKING.
   When bicycle parking is required by other provisions in the Culver City
Municipal Code, shower facilities shall be required to be installed in a
quantity and location as established by guidelines promulgated by the Building
Official and/or the Director. When installed, shower facilities shall comply
with the provisions of Chapter 11A or 11B of the California Building Code.
(Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-
015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1165 RESERVED.
§ 15.02.1170 RESERVED.
§ 15.02.1175 RESERVED.
§ 15.02.1180 INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   No final inspection shall be approved for a project subject to the
requirements of this Subchapter, nor shall a temporary or final certificate of
occupancy be issued for such project, until such time as the requirements of
this Subchapter have been satisfied, as determined by final inspection of the
Building Safety Division.
   B.   The Building Safety Division may issue field correction notices and/or
stop work orders on a project for non-compliance with the requirements of this
Subchapter.
   C.   The provisions of this Subchapter may be enforced through any or all
available remedies provided in the CCMC.
(Ord. No. 2019-015 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2022-007 § 15 (part); Ord. No. 2025-
015 § 15 (part))
§ 15.02.1200 RESERVED.
APPENDIX: HILLSIDE DRAINAGE; DIAGRAMS
DIAGRAM “A”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4879_6840x6855.jpg]
 
DIAGRAM “B”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4882_6525x6075.jpg]
 
CHAPTER 15.03: CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD PRONE AREAS
Section
   
15.03.005   General provisions
   
15.03.010   Purpose
   
15.03.015   Definitions
   
15.03.020   Establishment of areas of special flood hazard
   
15.03.025   Compliance required
   
15.03.030   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
15.03.035   Interpretation
   
15.03.040   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
15.03.045   Establishment of development permit
   
15.03.050   Designation of Building Official as Administrator
   
15.03.055   Standards of construction
   
15.03.060   Standards for utilities
   
15.03.065   Standards for subdivisions
   
15.03.070   Standards for manufactured homes
   
15.03.075   Standards for recreational vehicles
   
15.03.080   Floodways
   
15.03.085   Appeals and variances
   
15.03.090   Conditions for variances
   
15.03.095   Penalty
Editor's note:
   This Chapter, Construction in Flood Prone Areas, has been amended in
entirety by Ord. No. 88-008.
Cross-reference:
   Administrative Assessment Cost Recovery Program, see §§
15.02.900 through
15.02.915
   Post-disaster recovery and reconstruction, see §§
15.02.800 through
15.02.855
§ 15.03.005 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The Legislature of the State of California has, in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65302,
65560, and 65800, conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
of its community. Therefore, the City of Culver City of Los Angeles County does
hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   F.   Help to maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   G.   Ensure potential buyers of property within an area of special flood
hazard are notified;
   H.   Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   I.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   J.   Require uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   K.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   L.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   M.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters, or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
('65 Code, § 9-150) (Ord. 2021- 004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.015 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is either:
      1.   Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or
      2.   A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred
fifty (150) square feet and $1,500 in value.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Building Official's interpretation of
any provision of this Chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on
all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALLS. Any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether
constructed of any concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other
suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the
building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or
wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the
building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried
by flood waters.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 17, 1979.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of waters; (2) the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or
(3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body
of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of
water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually
high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or
by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal
surge, or by some similar unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
FLOODING as defined in this definition.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP. The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by flooding from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning codes, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose requirements such as,
floodplain, grading and erosion control and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities,
but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      3.   Individually listed on the State of California inventory of historic
places.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfurnished or flood resistance enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME shall also include park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days but does not include a
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by this community on December 17,
1979.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. A flood which has a one percent
(1%) annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the
base flood, which will be the term used throughout this Chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or
corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its
agencies or political subdivisions.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      1.   Built on a single chassis;
      2.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this Chapter, or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river, including, but not
limited to tributary, stream, or brook.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area having special flood or flood-
related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE,
A99, or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and shall mean the
date the building permit was issued; provided that, the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start shall
mean either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      1.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either:
         a.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         b.   If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      2.   For the purposes of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         a.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         b.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be in full
compliance with all floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other
evidence of compliance required in this Chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION
until such time as that documentation is provided.
('65 Code, § 9-150.5) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the
City of Culver City Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated August, 1979, and
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated February 1, 1980, and all
subsequent amendments or revisions are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this Chapter. This FIS, with its attendant mapping, is the
minimum area of applicability of this Chapter and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas that allow implementation of this Chapter and are
recommended to the City Council by the Building Official or City Engineer. The
FIS and FIRM are on file at the Office of the Building Official, City Hall,
9770 Culver Boulevard, Culver City, California 90232.
('65 Code, § 9-151) (Ord. No. 95-007 § 1; Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.025 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this Chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
('65 Code, § 9-151.5) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.030 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter,
another provision of this Code or an easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
('65 Code, § 9-152) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.035 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the City for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted to the
City.
('65 Code, § 9-152.5) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.040 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision made
thereunder.
('65 Code, § 9-153) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.045 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A building permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazards, established in §
15.03.050. Application for a building permit hereunder in addition to normal
City requirements, shall include:
   A.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all structures; in Zone AO, elevation of highest
adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures;
   B.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
structures will be floodproofed;
   C.   All appropriate certifications listed in Subsection
15.03.050 D.; and
   D.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
('65 Code, § 9-153.5) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.050 DESIGNATION OF BUILDING OFFICIAL AS ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
Chapter by granting or denying building permits in accordance with its
provisions. The duties and responsibilities of the Building Official shall
include, but not be limited to:
   A.   Review all building permits to determine:
      1.   The permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied;
      2.   All other required local, state and federal permits have been
obtained;
      3.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
      4.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but
floodways have not been designated. For purposes of this Section, ADVERSELY
AFFECT shall mean the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any
point;
   B.   Use other base flood data, when base flood elevation data has not been
provided in accordance with §
15.03.020. The Building Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or
other source, in order to administer this Chapter. Any such information shall
be submitted to the City Council for adoption.
   C.   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
      1.   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water
Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;
      2.   Require the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse be maintained.
   D.   In the case of changes in base flood elevations due to physical
alterations within six (6) months of information becoming available or project
completion, whichever comes first, submit, or assure that the permit applicant
submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR). All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance
of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional
Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the
proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start
of construction" definition.
   E.   Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed:
      1.   The certification required in Subsection
15.03.055 C.1. (floor elevations);
      2.   The certification required in Subsection
15.03.055 C.2. (elevations in areas of shallow flooding);
      3.   The certification required in Subsection
15.03.055 C.3. (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
      4.   The certification required in Subsections
15.03.055 C.4.a. or C.4.b (wet floodproofing standard);
      5.   The certified elevation required in Subsection
15.03.065 B., (subdivision standards); and
      6.   The certification required in Subsection
15.03.080 A., (floodway encroachments).
   F.   Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
15.03.085.
('65 Code, § 9-154) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.055 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   A.   Anchoring.
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of §
15.03.070
   B.   Construction materials and methods.
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation plus one-
foot freeboard.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
      3.   All new construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed
and/or located a minimum of the base flood elevations plus one-foot freeboard,
or so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
      4.   Require within Zones AH, or AO, adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   C.   Elevation and floodproofing.
      1.   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation plus one-foot freeboard. Nonresidential structures may meet the
standards in Subsection
15.03.055 C.3. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest
floor plus one-foot freeboard, including the basement shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community
building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification
shall be provided to the Building Official.
      2.   New construction and Substantial Improvement of any Structure in
Zone AH or AO, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet on the FIRM plus one-foot freeboard, or at least two (2) feet plus one-
foot freeboard if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures may
meet the standards in Subsection
15.03.055 C.3. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the
Building Official.
      3.   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance
with Subsections
15.03.055 C.1. or C.2. or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:
         a.   Be floodproofed so below the base flood level plus one-foot
freeboard, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water;
         b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         c.   Be certified, by a registered professional engineer or architect,
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be
provided to the Building Official.
      4.   Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements,
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
         a.   Either a minimum of two (2) openings have a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices; provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Buildings with more than one enclosed area must
have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly
enter; or
         b.   Be certified by a California registered civil engineer or
architect to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal
Insurance Administration.
      5.   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in §
15.03.070.
      6.   Breakaway walls shall have a safe design loading resistance of not
less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of
breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and
shall meet the following conditions:
         a.   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than
would occur during the base flood; and
         b.   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously in the event of the base flood.
   D.   Attached garages.
      1.   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the
garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic
entry of flood waters in compliance with Subsection
15.03.055 C.4. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood
resistant materials in compliance with Subsection
15.03.055 B.
      2.   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above
requirements or be dry floodproofed.
   E.   Detached garages and accessory structures.
      1.   Accessory structures used solely for parking (two-car detached
garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in §
15.03.015, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood
elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
         a.   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or
limited storage;
         b.   The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE
must be built using flood-resistant materials;
         c.   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
         d.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure
must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
         e.   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment
provisions in Subsection
15.03.080 A.; and
         f.   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Subsection
15.03.055 C.4.a.
      2.   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above
standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in
Subsections
15.03.055 A. through C.
('65 Code, § 9-154.5) (Ord. 2021- 004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.060 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
   A.   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharge from systems into flood waters.
   B.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
('65 Code, § 9-155) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.065 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   A.   All preliminary subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation
of the base flood.
   B.   All final subdivision plans, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If
the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the
Building Official.
   C.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
   D.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   E.   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
('65 Code, § 9-155.5) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.070 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   All new, substantially improved, and replacement manufactured homes and
additions to manufactured homes shall:
   A.   Be elevated so the lowest floor is at or above the base flood
elevation; and
   B.   Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
   C.   Be supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above the
grade.
('65 Code, § 9-156) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.075 STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either:
   A.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days; or
   B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions; or
   C.   Meet the permit requirements of §
15.03.045 of this Chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in §
15.03.070.
(Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.080 FLOODWAYS.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
15.03.020 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
   A.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating encroachments
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
   B.   If Subsection
15.03.080 A. is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
15.03.055 through
15.03.080.
('65 Code, § 9-156.5) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.085 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   A.   The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Building Official in the administration of this Chapter or in a determination
regarding a request for a variance.
   B.   In making such determinations and decisions the Building Official and
Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter, and:
      1.   The danger of materials being swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
      2.   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after Flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
   C.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structure constructed below
the base flood level, providing the items set forth in Subsections
15.03.085 B.1. through B.11., above, have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
   D.   Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection
15.03.085 B., above, and the purposes of this Chapter, the Building Official or
Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter.
   E.   The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
('65 Code, § 9-157) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.090 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   A.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of Structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this Section.
   B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   C.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   D.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      2.   A determination that the failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or articles.
   E.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use; provided that the provisions of Subsections
15.03.090 A. through D. above are satisfied and the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
   F.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Building
Official in the office of the Los Angeles County Recorder and shall be recorded
in a manner so it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
('65 Code, § 9-157.5) (Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.03.095 PENALTY.
   A.   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, install, replace, equip, use, occupy,
maintain or relocate any building or structure or fixture or equipment or
property, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of any
provisions of this Chapter, and no person shall fail to comply with any lawful
order made thereunder. Any such violation or failure to comply shall be a
misdemeanor which shall be punishable in accordance with §
1.01.040 of this Code.
   B.   Any violation of, or failure to comply with this Chapter shall
constitute a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of
which any such violation or failure is committed, continued, or permitted and
shall be punishable accordingly.
   C.   At the discretion of the City Attorney, any violation of this Chapter
may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or as an infraction.
('65 Code, § 9-10) (Ord. No. CS-944 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 87-026 § 1; Ord. No.
90-023 § 3; Ord. 2021-004 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 15.04: [RESERVED]
 
CHAPTER 15.05: HISTORIC PRESERVATION PROGRAM
Section
   
15.05.005   Purpose
   
15.05.010   Definitions
   
15.05.015   Nomination for cultural resource designation
   
15.05.020   Cultural resource criteria
   
15.05.025   Classification of structures and districts
   
15.05.030   Process for designating, changing or removing designation
   
15.05.035   Certificate of Appropriateness
   
15.05.040   Certificate of Exemption
   
15.05.045   Appeals
   
15.05.050   Nonconformity
   
15.05.055   Encroachment into public right-of-way
   
15.05.060   Fees
Cross-reference:
   Administrative Assessment Cost Recovery Program, see §§
15.02.900 through
15.02.915
§ 15.05.005 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the City's unique historical,
architectural and cultural heritage as reflected in the City's architectural
history and patterns of cultural development. It is also intended to encourage
and facilitate public knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the City's
historic past and unique cultural resources.
('65 Code, § 38-1) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
2002-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1
(part))
§ 15.05.010 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this Chapter:
   ALTERATION. Any work involving the exterior of a designated structure for
which a City permit must be obtained, including the demolition, addition,
removal, restoration, relocation or other modification, in whole or in part, of
a structure.
   ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE. A criterion used in designating a structure that
is an outstanding or surviving example of period, style, detail, unique
craftsmanship or method of construction; or represents the work of a locally,
statewide or nationally significant architect, designer, or builder.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. The document verifying that alterations
proposed to a designated structure comply with the requirements of this
Chapter.
   CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION. The document authorizing work described in a
disapproved Certificate of Appropriateness, after all alternatives were
considered, because it was subsequently determined that such disapproval
results in a substantial hardship on the owner.
   CULTURAL RESOURCE. A structure that has aesthetic, cultural, architectural
or historical significance to the City, State or nation, and that may have been
designed as a landmark, significant, recognized or historic district under this
Chapter.
   HISTORICAL OR CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE. A criterion used to designate a
structure or district in which events occurred that made a significant
contribution to City, State or national history or culture; or that involved a
close association with the lives of people who made a significant contribution
to the history and development of the City, State or nation.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A designated area consisting of one (1) or more
contiguous parcels improved with structures at which events occurred that made
a significant contribution to the City, State or national history or culture,
or an area that contains structures that are collectively significant examples
of period, style, or method of construction that provide distinguishing
characteristics of the architectural type or period represented. An historic
district may be either a landmark district or a significant district.
   INCIDENTAL EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE. The repair or replacement of building
features in like kind, or paint up/clean up work, that does not change either
the exterior appearance of the building envelope of a designated structure.
   LANDMARK STRUCTURE. A structure designated as an exceptional example of the
highest architectural, historical, or cultural significance to the community.
   MAJOR EXTERIOR ALTERATION. An alteration resulting in an addition,
demolition, or other significant modification to the existing envelope, or a
substantial change in the exterior appearance of any structure designated
landmark, significant or historic district.
   MINOR EXTERIOR ALTERATION. An alteration resulting in a noticeable but less
than substantial change in the exterior appearance, but no change in the
existing envelope of a structure designated landmark, significant or historic
district.
   OWNER. The fee title owner of real property on which there is a designated
structure, or which is part of an historic district, or any person who applies
for any certificate under this Chapter.
   RECOGNIZED STRUCTURE. A structure designated as being of architectural,
historical, or cultural interest.
   SIGNIFICANT STRUCTURE. A structure designated as being of substantial
architectural, historical, or cultural significance to the community.
   STRUCTURE. A building, sign or other constructed feature, improvement or
appurtenance.
('65 Code, § 38-2) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
94-017 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord.
No. 2004-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.05.015 NOMINATION FOR CULTURAL RESOURCE DESIGNATION.
   A.   A structure or a district may be nominated to be considered by the
Cultural Affairs Commission and City Council for designation as a cultural
resource as follows:
      1.   A resident of the City may nominate a structure or district to be
considered for designation as a cultural resource.
      2.   An owner may nominate his or her structure, or his or her property
within a district.
      3.   The Cultural Affairs Commission may nominate a structure or
district.
      4.   The Cultural Affairs Commission or the City Council may nominate a
structure or district on its own motion.
      5.   Applications for nomination shall be properly completed and filed
with the City on a form provided by the Community Development Department.
   B.   If the City Council disapproves designation of a structure or district,
that same structure or substantially the same district shall not be renominated
by any person within one (1) year after the date of disapproval. Furthermore,
only the owner, the City Council, or the Cultural Affairs Commission may
renominate the same structure or substantially the same district more than one
(1) year after the City Council has disapproved its designation.
   C.   The Community Development Director shall prepare an evaluation of the
proposed designation and shall make a recommendation to the Cultural Affairs
Commission, within forty-five (45) working days after the proper filing of the
application, as to the appropriateness and qualifications of the application
for consideration by the Commission. The Cultural Affairs Commission shall
follow the procedures in §
15.05.030 in considering a designation application.
('65 Code, § 38-3) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
94-017 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-005 §§ 1 (part) and 2 (part); Ord. No. 2002-007 § 1
(part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.05.020 CULTURAL RESOURCE CRITERIA.
   After the City receives an application for designation of a structure or
district, the following criteria will be applied in evaluating the
appropriateness of such a designation:
   A.   Threshold criteria.  To be considered for designation, the structure(s)
must meet one of the following criteria:
      1.   The structure(s) is at least fifty (50) years old and the exterior
of the structure is accessible or visible to the public; or
      2.   The structure or district has special importance to the City.
   B.   Assessment criteria.  After satisfying the threshold criteria, a
structure or district shall be reviewed for compliance with one or more of the
following criteria, as defined under §
15.05.010 of this Chapter:
      1.   Is the structure(s) of “architectural significance”?
      2.   Is the structure(s) of “historical or cultural significance”?
      3.   Do the structures in the district collectively meet 1. or 2. above?
('65 Code, § 38-4) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
2002-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1
(part))
§ 15.05.025 CLASSIFICATION OF STRUCTURES AND DISTRICTS.
   Structures and districts which meet the requirements of §
15.05.020, above, shall be classified as “recognized,” “significant,” or
“landmark.” Each structure or district shall be so classified by applying a
ranking system which shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 38-5) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
2002-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1
(part))
§ 15.05.030 PROCESS FOR DESIGNATING, CHANGING OR REMOVING DESIGNATION.
   The following process shall be used to designate, or to change or remove the
designation (hereinafter “designate”) of a structure or district as a cultural
resource:
   A.   Classifications.
      1.   “Landmark” structures or districts. These structures or districts:
         a.   May be designated without owner consent.
         b.   Shall be required to display a plaque, provided by the City and
placed at a location approved by the City, which indicates that the structure
or district is designated “landmark.” Prior to the installation of the plaque,
the City Council shall take a formal action to authorize the expenditure of
funds required to fabricate and install the plaque.
      2.   “Significant” structures or districts. These structures or
districts:
         a.   If residential, shall be designated “significant” only with a
written consent of the owner, provided that the consent of only a majority of
the owners shall be required for a “significant district” designation. Once the
designation has been made and the designation document has been filed for
recondition, owner consent is irrevocable. If the required owner consent is not
obtained, a residential structure or district may be designated “recognized.”
         b.   If nonresidential, may be designated “significant” without owner
consent.
         c.   Shall be required to display a plaque, provided by the City and
placed at a location approved by the City, which indicates that the structure
or district is designated “significant.”
      3.   “Recognized” structures. These structures:
         a.   May be designated “recognized” without the consent of the owner.
         b.   No other requirements of this Chapter apply to “recognized”
structures. Owners are encouraged to preserve these structures.
   B.   Cultural Affairs Commission and City Council designation process.
      1.   a.   Structures recommended for designation by the Cultural Affairs
Commission shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council. All
owners of such structures shall be notified in writing of the proposed
designation at least ten (10) working days prior to the date of the meeting at
which the City Council will make its decision. Each owner shall be given the
opportunity to be heard on the proposed designation of his or her structure.
The City Council shall either accept, modify or disapprove the Cultural Affairs
Commission recommendations for designation of specific structures. Structures
shall be designated by resolution of the City Council.
         b.   Any modification or disapproval by the City Council shall be
supported by a finding that the basis for the Cultural Affairs Commission's
recommendation, or that designation of the property, would impose a substantial
hardship on the property owner that outweighs the benefit to the community.
   C.   Cultural Affairs Commission designation process. Nominations for
designation filed after the initial designation process, and not filed within a
time period during which the Cultural Affairs Commission has been reconvened,
shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director for compliance with
designation criteria established in §
15.05.020. The Community Development Director's review and recommendation shall
be submitted to the Cultural Affairs Commission. The Cultural Affairs
Commission shall either designate the structure as a cultural resource or
disapprove the nomination application. The owner of record of any nominated
structure, as well as the applicant and other persons who, in writing, have
requested notice, shall be notified, in writing, at least ten (10) calendar
days, as observed by the Administrative Offices of the City and excluding
national holidays, prior to the Cultural Affairs Commission's review.
('65 Code, § 38-6) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
94-017 § 3; Ord. No.97-018, § 1; Ord. No. 2002-005 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2002-
007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.05.035 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   A.   No person shall demolish, remove or make alterations affecting the
exterior appearance of any designated landmark or significant structure or
historic district, in whole or in part, without first obtaining a Certificate
of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Exemption. The requirement and process
for obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness shall depend on the category of
exterior alteration proposed.
      1.   Major exterior alterations. Prior to the issuance of any City permit
required for a proposed major exterior alteration, as defined in §
15.05.010, a Certificate of Appropriateness application, signed by the owner,
shall be filed with the Planning Manager, with a complete copy provided to the
Community Development Director. The Planning Manager shall submit the
application to the Planning Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
which is not more than sixty (60) working days after receipt of the completed
application. The application and analytic materials prepared by the Planning
Manager shall include any input provided by the Cultural Affairs Division
staff. The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the application within thirty (30) working days. If the Planning
Commission does not disapprove or conditionally approve the application within
thirty (30) working days, or for good cause does not extend the time for
action, the application shall be deemed approved.
      2.   Minor exterior alterations. Prior to the issuance of any City permit
required for a proposed minor exterior alteration, as defined in §
15.05.010, a Certificate of Appropriateness application, signed by the owner,
shall be filed with the Planning Manager. The Planning Manager shall submit the
application to the Community Development Director. The Community Development
Director shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application
within thirty (30) working days. If the Community Development Director does not
disapprove or conditionally approve, the application within thirty (30) working
days, or for good cause does not extend the time for action, the application
shall be deemed approved.
      3.   Incidental exterior maintenance.  While no Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be required for incidental exterior maintenance work, as
defined in §
15.05.010, the owner is required to notify the Planning Manager of the work
proposed to be performed prior to commencement. The Planning Manager shall
verify that such work qualifies as incidental exterior maintenance work, and
that no further requirements of this Chapter apply, as follows:
         a.   When the proposed incidental exterior maintenance work requires a
building permit, the building permit plan check review and approval process
shall be deemed to constitute the Planning Manager's verification.
         b.   When the proposed incidental exterior maintenance work does not
require a building permit, a written statement describing the proposed work
shall be submitted by the owner, and the Planning Manager shall indicate the
required verification thereon.
   B.   The approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be conditioned
upon all exterior alterations complying with the U.S. Secretary of Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings, as the City Council, Planning Commission or Community Development
Director determines appropriate, and with the California State Historic
Building Code and Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 18950 et seq., as amended, as
applied to the project by the Building Official. In addition, before approving
a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Community Development Director, the
Planning Commission or the City Council shall make one or more of the following
findings:
      1.   The proposed alteration would not detrimentally change, destroy, or
adversely affect any exterior feature or appurtenance of the landmark or
significant structure upon which the work would be done.
      2.   In the case of the proposed alteration to a structure within a
historic district, the proposed work would not be incompatible with the
exterior features or other improvements within the historic district, and would
not adversely affect the character of the historic district.
      3.   In the case of any proposed alteration that includes construction of
new improvements on the site of a designated structure or district, the
exterior features of such new improvements would not adversely affect or be
incompatible with the exterior features of the designated cultural resource.
      4.   In the case of an application to demolish a structure, that there
has been compliance with the waiting period and good faith efforts prescribed
by the provisions of this Code.
   C.   In the event the Planning Commission or Community Development Director
determines that the proposed alterations would have an adverse impact, one of
the following two courses of action shall be taken:
      1.   Either the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be disapproved; or
      2.   Up to a six (6) month waiting period shall be imposed during which
the owner shall try to identify, and the Planning Commission or Community
Development Director shall evaluate, ways to accomplish the owner's goals and
to preserve the designated structure. If at the end of the waiting period, the
Planning Commission or Community Development Director determines that the owner
has acted in good faith but no acceptable way to meet the owner's goals and
preserve the structure has been found, one of the following shall occur:
         a.   If the structure is designated significant, the Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be approved; but
         b.   If the structure is designated landmark, the Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be disapproved.
   D.   No permits for alterations to a nominated landmark or significant
structure shall be issued, nor shall any alteration be done, until a final
designation decision has been made and a Certificate of Appropriateness, where
required, has been approved.
('65 Code, § 38-7) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
94-017 § 4; Ord. No. 2002-005 §§ 1 (part) and 2 (part); Ord. No. 2002-007 § 1
(part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.05.040 CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION.
   A.   A Certificate of Exemption application may be filed by an owner where,
in the owner's opinion, there has been or will be a deprivation of all
reasonable use or economic return on the property because of any one of the
following:
      1.   Designation of a structure as landmark or significant;
      2.   Imposition of the maximum waiting period set forth in §
15.05.035 C.2. relating to the waiting period for a certificate of
appropriateness; or
      3.   Disapproval of a certificate of appropriateness.
   B.   A Certificate of Exemption application shall be signed by the owner and
filed with the Planning Manager. The Planning Manager shall submit the
application to the Planning Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
which is not more than sixty (60) working days after receipt of the completed
application. The owner shall have the burden of proof to present evidence
supporting the exemption request. The Planning Commission shall review all the
evidence presented and, within thirty (30) working days after the date of its
hearing, make its determination on the application.
   C.   A Certificate of Exemption shall not be approved unless the Planning
Commission finds that the designation, maximum waiting period, or Certificate
of Appropriateness disapproval has deprived or will deprive the owner of a
reasonable economic return on the property or of any reasonable use of the
property. In the case of a proposed demolition of a designated structure, the
Planning Commission shall also make one or more of the following findings:
      1.   Conversion of the use of the structure to a different allowable use
is not feasible.
      2.   Rehabilitation of the structure or some other alternative method of
preserving the structure, including relocation within the City, is not
feasible.
      3.   All means involving City-sponsored incentives, such as transfer of
development rights, tax abatements, and financial assistance, have been
explored and found infeasible.
      4.   Disapproval of the Certificate of Exemption would damage the owner
unreasonably in comparison to the benefit conferred on the community.
   D.   Where a Certificate of Exemption is approved, the owner of a landmark
structure shall file with the Community Development Director a photographic or
videotape documentary of the structure prior to making any exterior changes to,
or demolition of, the structure. A complete copy of these materials shall be
submitted to the Community Development Director for his or her files.
('65 Code, § 38-8) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
94-017 § 5; Ord. No. 2002-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord.
No. 2004-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.05.045 APPEALS.
   A.   Appeals of Designation of Historic Structure or Cultural Resource,
Decision regarding Certificate of Appropriateness, or Decision regarding
Certificate of Exemption. The applicant, the owner, or any Culver City resident
may appeal an action of the Cultural Affairs Commission, the Community
Development Director, the Planning Manager, or the Planning Commission, by
filing a notice of appeal not later than ten (10) working days after the date
of a notice of decision. The ten (10) working days shall be based on the work
schedule maintained by the Administrative Offices of the City and shall exclude
national holidays. The City Council, Planning Commission, or Cultural Affairs
Commission, as appropriate, shall review the appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, which is no more than sixty (60) working days after City
receipt of the notice of appeal, and shall render a decision on the appeal on
or before its next regularly scheduled meeting after the date the appeal has
been heard.
   B.   Timing for decisions subject to appeal becoming final. No decision that
is subject to appeal shall become final until the time for filing an appeal has
run out and no timely appeal has been filed, or until the date upon which the
decision on a timely appeal is made, whichever is later.
('65 Code, § 38-9) (Ord. No. 91-005 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No.
94-017 § 6; Ord. No, 2002-07 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No.
2004-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.05.050 NONCONFORMITY.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, improvements made to a
structure prior to its original designation, and improvements made under the
requirements of this Chapter shall not require correction of other
nonconforming conditions that do not, in the Building Official's determination,
cause unsafe conditions; provided that, the extent of any such nonconforming
conditions shall not be worsened by the improvements.
('65 Code, § 38-10) (Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No. 94-017 § 7; Ord. No. 2002-07
§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.05.055 ENCROACHMENT INTO PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The City Engineer may grant permission for an encroachment into the public
right-of-way for an improvement made pursuant to a Certificate of
Appropriateness under §
15.05.035, if the improvement cannot be made in any other feasible manner and
subject to all conditions deemed appropriate by the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 38-11) (Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-07 § 1 (part); Ord. No.
2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1 (part))
§ 15.05.060 FEES.
   The City Council, by resolution, may adopt fees for the costs of processing
applications and appeals pursuant to this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 38-12) (Ord. No. 91-018 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-07 § 1 (part); Ord. No.
2003-019 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2004-004 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 15.06: NEW DEVELOPMENT FEES
Section
New Development Impact Fees
   
15.06.005   Purpose
   
15.06.010   New Development Impact Fund
   
15.06.015   Definitions
   
15.06.020   Calculation and payment of fees
   
15.06.025   Exceptions
   
15.06.030   Accounting for fees
   
15.06.035   Use and disbursement of funds
   
15.06.040   Determination of impact zones
   
15.06.045   Special project map
   
15.06.050   Return of fees
   
15.06.055   Projects subject to discretionary approval
Art in Public Places
   
15.06.100   Purpose
   
15.06.105   Implementation by Cultural Affairs Commission
   
15.06.110   Definitions
   
15.06.115   Cultural Trust Fund created
   
15.06.120   Developments subject to provisions of Subchapter
   
15.06.125   Art in public places program allocations
   
15.06.130   Administrative and design fees
   
15.06.135   Application and approval procedures for placing artwork on private
property
   
15.06.140   Approval procedures for fulfillment of the art in public places
program requirement for city development projects
   
15.06.145   Procedure for acceptance of artwork donated to the city to fulfill
the art in public places program requirement
   
15.06.150   Ownership and maintenance of artwork
   
15.06.155   Final city approval
   
15.06.160   Artwork on public property, performing arts and purchase of real
property for public art
   
15.06.165   Criteria for approving architecture as art
   
15.06.170   Procedure for approving architecture as art
   
15.06.175   De-accessioning of artwork
   
15.06.180   Appeal
Residential Development Park Dedication and In Lieu Parkland Fees
   
15.06.300   Purpose
   
15.06.305   Deposit and use of fees
   
15.06.310   Park dedication or payment of fees
   
15.06.315   Reduction of fees for second unit
   
15.06.320   Recreational facilities credit
   
15.06.325   Exemptions
   
15.06.330   Return of fees
Mobility Improvement Fees
   
15.06.500   Purpose
   
15.06.505   Mobility Improvement Fund
   
15.06.510   Definitions
   
15.06.515   Calculation and payment of fees
   
15.06.520   Exceptions
   
15.06.525   Accounting for fees
   
15.06.530   Use and disbursement of funds
   
15.06.535   Project list
   
15.06.540   Adjustments or waivers
   
15.06.545   Return of fees
Affordable Housing Commercial Development Impact Fee
   
15.06.600   Purpose and intent
   
15.06.605   Definitions
   
15.06.610   Affordable Housing Commercial Development Impact Fee
   
15.06.615   Adjustments or waivers
   
15.06.620   Conversion
   
15.06.625   Use of funds
NEW DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
§ 15.06.005 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subchapter is to provide a method for the financing of
public works capital improvements made necessary by permitting new development
for nonresidential use.
('65 Code, § 33H-1) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 90-003 § 2)
§ 15.06.010 NEW DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FUND.
   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the “New Development Impact
Fund” to account for fees paid pursuant to this Subchapter. Said fund shall be
maintained by the City Treasurer.
('65 Code, § 33H-2) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 90-003 § 2)
§ 15.06.015 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Subchapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Used in establishing the New Development Impact Fund and
Fees shall mean any of the following:
      1.   Construction or relocation of a structure for non-residential use.
      2.   The addition, extension or enlargement of an existing structure used
or intended for nonresidential use.
      3.   The conversion of a residential use structure to a nonresidential
use structure.
      4.   The conversion of parking structures or facilities to another
nonresidential use.
   SQUARE FOOTAGE. Used in establishing this fund, means the aggregate of all
floor space enclosed within the exterior walls of a building, including
basements.
('65 Code, § 33H-3) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 90-003 § 2)
§ 15.06.020 CALCULATION AND PAYMENT OF FEES.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter, all new developments
shall pay into the New Development Impact Fund a fee for the privilege of such
development in an amount to be established by the Council by resolution. Such
fee shall apply per square foot of new development in excess of five thousand
(5,000) square feet for all new nonresidential development; provided, however,
that if the total square footage of new development constructed within any
seven (7) year period exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet on one parcel,
the first five thousand (5,000) square feet thereof shall not be subject to the
New Development Impact Fee, but the fee shall be applied to all development in
excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet. The fee shall be paid prior to the
issuance of any building permit for new development, or the commencement of
construction on facilities not requiring a building permit or at the time of
application for a Business Tax Certificate for any change of residential or
parking structure use to nonresidential use whichever is sooner.
   B.   The New Development Impact Fee shall not be construed as a substitution
for any city-required dedication and/or public improvement adjoining a new
development or subdivision, but shall be construed as a fee towards mitigating
the impact of providing traffic controls, traffic management projects and
street improvements made necessary by permitting the development.
   C.   The Building and Fire Safety Division shall not issue any building
permit for new development and the City Treasurer shall not release any
Business Tax Certificate for any change of residential or parking use to
nonresidential use until the fee required by this Subchapter has been paid.
   D.   The Community Development Department shall calculate and the City
Treasurer shall collect all fees required pursuant to this Subchapter.
('65 Code, § 33H-4) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 90-003 § 2)
§ 15.06.025 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following new developments are exempted from payment of the fees
required by this Subchapter:
   A.   The reconstruction of any building destroyed or damaged by fire,
explosion, natural catastrophe or Act of God to the extent that the
reconstruction does not add to the floor area of the structure which existed
prior to its being damaged or destroyed, or where such additional floor area is
less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   B.   Any development for which a building permit issued prior to the
effective date of the ordinance establishing this Subchapter which is still
valid.
   C.   Parking structures, parking facilities and parking areas, but not
including vehicle display, repair or inventory storage space within a building.
   D.   Mechanical equipment penthouses and structures.
   E.   Any development which is the subject of an Owner Participation
Agreement or Disposition and Development Agreement with the Culver City
Redevelopment Agency wherein there is established an alternative method for
mitigating the contemplated or calculated traffic impacts of the new
development.
('65 Code, § 33H-5) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 90-003 § 2)
§ 15.06.030 ACCOUNTING FOR FEES.
   For the purposes of accounting, the City shall be divided into areas as
determined by the City Council by resolution. Revenues from the New Development
Impact Fund shall be accounted for by each area in which the new development is
located. The City Treasurer shall maintain records identifying by area the
origin of the funds used in whole or in part, for any project or improvement,
by the New Development Impact Fund. Such records shall enable the City
Treasurer to account for and trace the fees from new developments to specific
projects funded by such fees from new development within each area. The fees
collected shall be disbursed on the basis of a first-in-first-out accounting
method for qualified projects within each area, impact zone or special project.
Interest earned on the fund shall be part of the fund and shall be accountable
by area; provided, however, that monies in the fund may be commingled for
investment purposes with other City assets with a pro rata share of resulting
interest earnings credited to the fund.
('65 Code, § 33H-6) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.035 USE AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   Fees from each new development shall be appropriated and disbursed only for
street improvements, traffic controls and traffic management projects which are
made necessary by the development and are:
   A.   Located within the area from which the fees were collected; or
   B.   Located within the impact zone of the new development as determined
pursuant to §
15.06.040; or
   C.   Found pursuant to §
15.06.045 to benefit the new development and mitigate its traffic impact.
('65 Code, § 33H-7) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1)
§ 15.06.040 DETERMINATION OF IMPACT ZONES.
   A.   The Director of the Community Development Department, upon
recommendation of the City Engineer, may recommend to the City Council the
approval of a map or maps delineating impact zones within which any new
development will cause or contribute to a traffic or street problem, and within
which any new development will benefit from street improvements, traffic
controls and traffic management projects. The proposed map shall be accompanied
by a report setting forth the reasons for the zone boundaries recommended by
the Director of Community Development. Said map(s) and report shall be
available for public inspection upon notice of the public hearing as required
by this Section.
   B.   Prior to the approval of any impact zones, the City Council shall hold
a public hearing on the proposed map or maps. The hearing shall be noticed as
follows:
      1.   A notice of the time and place of such hearing and the purpose
thereof shall be given by publication of a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing.
      2.   The notice shall contain:
         a.   The time, place and purpose of the public hearing;
         b.   The times and places where copies of the proposed map or maps and
the report of the Community Development Director are available for inspection
by the public; and
         c.   A statement that any interested person may appear in person or by
agent and be heard, or submit comments in writing in advance of said hearing.
   C.   After the public hearing by the City Council, the City Council may
approve the recommendation of the Director of Community Development or may
modify or reject, in whole or in part, the recommendation of the Director of
Community Development. If the determination of the City Council varies from the
recommendation of the Director of Community Development, the City Council shall
make written findings setting forth the reasons for such changes. The action of
the City Council approving such map or maps shall be by resolution.
   D.   The approved map or maps delineating the impact zones may be revised by
the City Council after a public hearing as required by this Section. The
Director of Community Development shall file a report of recommended changes,
if any, with the City Council prior to setting the date for hearing on
revisions to an approved map or maps.
   E.   Certified copies of the approved map or maps shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk and in the office of the Building and Fire Safety
Division and the Community Development Department by the City Treasurer after
adoption by resolution.
('65 Code, § 33H-8) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.045 SPECIAL PROJECT MAP.
   A.   Whenever a street improvement, traffic control and/or traffic
management project may have benefits which extend beyond the impact zone
established by the resolution establishing the zone in which the improvement or
project is located, or if impact zones have not been established, the Director
of Community Development may recommend to the City Council the adoption of a
special project map to show the boundaries of the areas benefitted by the
project and which are made necessary, in whole or in part, by traffic generated
by the new development within the proposed boundary.
   B.   A special project map shall be adopted, approved and revised by the
same procedures used for adopting, approving and revising maps for impact
zones.
('65 Code, § 33H-9) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1)
§ 15.06.050 RETURN OF FEES.
   A.   Fees paid into the New Development Impact Fund which are not
appropriated or disbursed within seven (7) years from the date of payment shall
be returned to the payer, with all interest actually earned thereon, if a
written request for return is filed with the City Treasurer during the seventh
year after payment. The request for return shall be verified, and shall state
the date of payment, the amount paid, the location of the new development for
which the fee was paid, and that the party requesting return of the fee is the
payer of the fee or the payer's assignee or successor.
   B.   The right to a return of fees may be assigned in writing. No assignment
shall be valid unless the assignment is acknowledged before a notary public in
the same manner as is required for the recording of documents affecting title
to real property with the County Recorder. Any assignment shall be filed with
the City Treasurer and may be recorded at the option of the signatories.
   C.   If a request for return of fees is not made within one year from the
date a request for return may first be filed, then the right to have the fee
returned shall terminate, and the fees and all interest earned thereon shall
revert to the New Development Impact Fund.
('65 Code, § 33H-10) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.055 PROJECTS SUBJECT TO DISCRETIONARY APPROVAL.
   A.   Projects which are subject to discretionary approvals prior to the
effective date of the ordinance establishing this Subchapter and which had such
approvals conditioned upon the payment of fees to mitigate traffic or street
use impacts of the project, shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirements
of this Subchapter upon payment of the fee required by such conditions.
   B.   Except as expressly provided in Subsection A. of this Section, nothing
in this Section shall excuse or exempt a new development from complying with
all conditions set forth in a site plan review, an exception, variance,
conditional use permit, subdivision, or architectural design approval.
('65 Code, § 33H-11) (Ord. No. 83-021 § 1; Ord. No. 90-003 § 2)
ART IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 15.06.100 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds and declares:
   A.   Cultural and artistic resources, that include visual artwork, the
performing arts, and architectural resources, enhance the quality of life for
individuals living in, working in and visiting the City.
   B.   Balanced development of cultural and artistic resources preserves and
improves the quality of the urban environment, increases real property values,
and has a positive economic impact.
   C.   As development and revitalization of real property within the City
continues, the opportunity for creation of cultural and artistic resources is
diminished. As these opportunities are diminished and urbanization occurs, the
need to develop alternative sources for cultural and artistic outlets to
improve the environment, image and character of the community is increased.
   D.   The Culver City Art in Public Places Program (“APPP”) was created in
1988 so that development of cultural and artistic assets are financed by those
whose development and revitalization diminishes the availability of the
community's resources for those opportunities and contributes to community
urbanization.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.105 IMPLEMENTATION BY CULTURAL AFFAIRS COMMISSION.
   The Cultural Affairs Commission (“CAC”), as established by §
3.03.400 of the Culver City Municipal Code, was created in 2001 and shall
implement the duties established in this Subchapter. The City Council may
prescribe, by resolution, other duties and the appointment process for the
members of the CAC.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.110 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ADMINISTRATIVE FEES. Include art consultant, conservator, legal fees, travel
and out-of-pocket expenses.
   ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM ALLOCATION (also referred to as APPP
ALLOCATION). The percentage of the construction costs which are set aside for
the City's Art in Public Places Program.
   ARTWORK. Includes but is not limited to paintings, drawings, murals in any
media, stained glass, statues, bas relief or other sculptures, and any creation
under “new genres” as defined herein; environmental artworks or public spaces;
monuments, fountains, arches or other structures of a permanent or temporary
character intended for ornament or commemoration; integrated and functional
architectural, video and other media-based elements designed by a qualified
artist. For projects which involve no structures, artwork may include a
combination of landscape design, natural and manufactured materials including
but not limited to rocks, fountains, reflecting pools, sculptures, screens,
benches, and other types of street furniture, provided they have been designed
by a qualified artist.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the
City or his or her designee.
   CONSERVATION. Encompasses actions taken toward the long-term preservation of
cultural property and includes examination, documentation, treatment and
preventative care, supported by research and education. Restoration is a type
of conservation treatment and specifically refers to an attempt to bring
cultural property closer to its original appearance. Stabilization, also a type
of conservation, refers to an attempt to maintain the integrity of cultural
property and to only minimize deterioration.
   CULTURAL AFFAIRS COMMISSION. The Commission established in 2001 pursuant to
§
3.03.400 of this Code. Unless otherwise specified, any reference to
“Commission” in this Subchapter shall mean the Cultural Affairs Commission.
   DE-ACCESSION. Refers to the process of permanently removing artwork acquired
through the Art in Public Places Program as outlined in this Subchapter.
   DESIGN FEES. Include, but are not limited to, those fees which are paid to
an artist, architect, structural engineer or an appropriate party for the
development of a design concept and the preparation of construction drawings.
Design fees are separate and apart from the cost of the fabrication and
installation of an artwork.
   FREELY ACCESSIBLE. The artwork is accessible to the public for viewing, in
its entirety and in a direct line of sight without hindrances or obstacles, for
a period often (10) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
   NEW GENRES. Include, but are not limited to, sculpture, sound installation,
video, film, audio, digital, hybrid and emerging art forms. These works may be
temporary or permanent in nature.
   NON-PROFIT. Those entities deemed to be exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Service Code.
   PERFORMING ARTS. Performances presented by professional or amateur
performers, including theater performance (any form of dramatic presentation,
spoken or silent); musical theater/opera (any dramatic performance of which
music is an integral part); dance (any form of rhythmical movement); music or
concert (any musical performance with live musicians and/or singers).
   PERMANENT INSTALLATION. Artwork designed and fabricated to remain installed
for twenty (20) or more years.
   PROJECT (also referred herein as DEVELOPMENT PROJECT). Defined as consisting
of all physical changes and improvements necessary to complete a development.
Such physical changes shall include the construction of new structures or the
remodeling of existing structures.
   REAL PROPERTY. That which consists of land, and of all rights and profits
arising from and annexed to land, of a permanent, immovable nature.
   QUALIFIED ARTIST (also referred herein as ARTIST). A practicing artist who
has demonstrated a high level of accomplishment through a body of work,
exhibitions, presentations, or performances. The qualified artist shall have a
history of strong conceptual development, as well as possess the ability for
skillful execution of tools, materials, and craft. This includes programs
rooted in innovative uses of technology, collaborative work, or
interdisciplinary projects. The qualified artist shall have a BFA, MFA or other
comprehensive advanced training in the visual arts and work primarily in the
production of art in unique or limited editions and not for purposes of
marketing, mass production or advertising.
   TEMPORARY INSTALLATION. Artwork intended to remain installed for three (3)
years or less.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.115 CULTURAL TRUST FUND CREATED.
   A.   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the “Culver City Cultural
Trust Fund” (hereinafter “Cultural Trust Fund”) to account for fees paid
pursuant to this Subchapter. This fund, maintained by the Chief Financial
Officer, and subject to §§
15.06.040 and
15.06.050, shall be used solely:
      1.   For the design, acquisition, commission, installation, improvement,
relocation, conservation, utility charges and insurance of artwork acquired by
the City through the APPP;
      2.   For preventative care, maintenance and utility charges related to
the artwork and real property purchased pursuant to Subsection
15.06.115.A.1; provided, that the total amount of the appropriation made in any
year from the Cultural Trust Fund for the purpose set forth in this Subsection
15.06.115.A.2 shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total fees
deposited into the Cultural Trust Fund, pursuant to this Subchapter, during the
fiscal year immediately preceding that appropriation. The City Council, with a
recommendation by the Cultural Affairs Commission, may appropriate additional
funds from the Cultural Trust Fund for the purpose of completing larger
conservation efforts, including restoration projects, for one or more artworks;
      3.   To sponsor or support the performing arts;
      4.   For the acquisition and improvement of real property for the purpose
of displaying artwork, which has been or may be subsequently approved by the
City;
      5.   For costs associated with administering The Art in Public Places
Program and associated cultural programs, in an amount not to exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the total fees deposited into the Cultural Trust Fund,
pursuant to this Subchapter, during the fiscal year immediately preceding that
appropriation; however, in the event the City Council determines that a special
circumstance exists, the City Council may set a higher amount by a majority
vote; and
      6.   Other City-produced cultural programs pursuant to the requirements
of this Subchapter.
   B.   If real property purchased with monies from the Cultural Trust Fund is
subsequently sold, the proceeds from the sale shall be returned to the Cultural
Trust Fund.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.120 DEVELOPMENTS SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS OF SUBCHAPTER.
   A.   All new residential development projects of five or more units, and all
commercial, industrial, and public building development projects, with a
building valuation of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) or more shall
be subject to the provisions of this Subchapter.
   B.   Including but not limited to exterior and interior modifications and
additions, all remodeling of existing residential buildings of five (5) or more
units, and all remodeling of existing commercial, industrial and public
buildings, shall be subject to the provisions of this Subchapter when such
remodeling has a valuation of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00)
or more, excluding earthquake rehabilitation required by this Code for seismic
safety.
   C.   Covenanted low- and moderate-income and senior citizen housing shall be
exempted from the requirements of this Subchapter for as long as it is used for
that purpose.
      1.   The APPP allocation for a development project that includes
residential units covenanted for low- or moderate-income households or for
senior citizens shall be reduced by the value of the square footage of the
covenanted units and associated spaces (such as parking).
      2.   Prior to the date any restrictions regarding residential units
covenanted for low- or moderate-income households or for senior citizens
terminate, the then current owner of the development shall pay fees to the
Cultural Trust Fund in an amount equal to the exemption calculated in
Subsection
15.06.120.C.1.
   D.   Buildings which are designed and dedicated primarily to nonprofit
performing arts spaces or museum uses shall not be required to meet the Art in
Public Places Program Allocation requirement for as long as the performing arts
or museum uses are maintained within these buildings.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.125 ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM ALLOCATIONS.
   A.   The APPP allocation, as used in this Subchapter, is the percentage of
the construction costs which is set aside for the City's APPP and shall be an
amount equal to one percent (1%) of the total building permit construction
valuation for an applicable project, excluding land acquisition costs. The
total building permit construction valuation used for determining the APPP
allocation shall be based on the latest building construction valuation data
used by the Building Safety division staff, based on R.S. Means Square Foot
Costs, unless, in the opinion of the Building Official, a different valuation
methodology is more appropriate for a particular project.
   B.   Multiple building permits issued within a three year period for a
single project shall be considered in the aggregate in determining the APPP
allocation.
   C.   If the total APPP allocation for a project is less than seventy-five
thousand dollars ($75,000), the applicant shall pay their APPP allocation into
the Cultural Trust Fund as the only option for complying with the APPP
requirement.
   D.   Payment of any required APPP allocation shall be received prior to
issuance of a City building permit.
   E.   If the APPP allocation is seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) or
greater, the applicant shall either:
      1.   Pay the APPP allocation into the Cultural Trust Fund prior to
issuance of a City Building Permit ("in-lieu fee"); or
      2.   Commission original, site-specific artwork for the applicant's
development project, with
a valuation equal to or greater than the APPP allocation, in compliance with
the guidelines of this Subchapter; or
      3.   Donate artwork to the City with an appraised value equal to or
greater than the APPP allocation, in compliance with the guidelines of this
Subchapter; or
      4.   Incorporate a Cultural Facility into the applicant's development
project, in compliance with the guidelines of this Subchapter; or
      5.   Have the building or a portion thereof designated “Architecture as
Art,” in compliance with the guidelines of this Subchapter.
   F.   Any applicant whose APPP allocation is less than seventy-five thousand
dollars ($75,000) may voluntarily increase their APPP allocation to an amount
of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) or greater, and thereby qualify the
applicant to fulfill the APPP requirement pursuant to Subsection
15.06.125. E.
   G.   If the APPP allocation is seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) or
greater, the applicant may place an approved artwork, create a Cultural
Facility, donate artwork, or designate their building “Architecture as Art”
with acquisition and installation costs totaling less than the applicant's APPP
allocation; provided that, such costs are at least seventy-five thousand
dollars ($75,000) and that the applicant also pay the difference between its
APPP allocation and such costs into the Cultural Trust Fund.
   H.   For the commission of new on-site artwork, applicants are required to
use a Request for Proposal (“RFP”) process for selecting an artist when the
APPP allocation exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). The applicant
shall also hire a qualified art consultant to assist with the RFP process,
proposal development, and project oversight. The art consultant shall be
selected from a pre-quaiified list provided by the City. The CAC Public Art
subcommittee and staff shall review the art consultant and RFP information with
the applicant prior to releasing the RFP. The RFP will include the following
components:
      1.   Deadline for submission of requested information;
      2.   Information on development project components, including but not
limited to goals for the development project and the artwork, scope of work,
physical description of project site and other physical or legal restrictions
which may apply;
      3.   Proposal review/selection schedule;
      4.   Scope of services;
      5.   Artwork budget;
      6.   Development project and artwork timelines; and,
      7.   Evaluation criteria.
   I.   If the APPP allocation is seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) or
greater, the applicant may opt to fulfill the APPP requirement by incorporating
a Cultural Facility within the development project. In order to ensure
integrated projects, applicants shall submit plans to the Community Development
Director during Preliminary Project Review (PPR) or prior to receiving any
discretionary review approvals. The only acceptable Cultural Facilities are:
indoor and outdoor performing arts spaces that can accommodate a minimum
audience of fifty (50), with a performance area of at least five hundred (500)
square feet, or exhibition spaces designed for the visual arts. Cultural
Facilities must include all amenities for supporting a performance or art
exhibition space, including a sound and lighting system, audience seating,
separately designated restrooms, and technical space. Cultural Facilities shall
be permanent and must be ADA-compliant. Further, the facility must be made
available to the recipients of the Culver City Performing Arts Grant Program
and Culver City-based visual and performing arts organizations at rental rates
no higher than other local arts venues. Cultural Facilities must be
specifically designated as such and cannot be used for any other purpose on an
on-going basis. Applicants may receive credit for up to three (3) years of
operations, maintenance and programming costs for Cultural Facilities, together
with construction costs, toward fulfillment of the minimum APPP allocation for
their project. The applicant's proposal for a Cultural Facility shall include a
plan that identifies key staff, programming goals and an associated budget for
a minimum of three (3) years. The proposal shall be approved by the Cultural
Affairs Commission, monitored by designated City staff, and subject to all
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. Review and approval
of Cultural Facilities shall include review by a CAC subcommittee with a
recommendation to the full CAC. Cultural Facilities are required to display a
permanent plaque as outlined in Subsection
15.06.155.F.3. and are subject to the covenant and maintenance requirements of
Section
15.06.150.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.130 ADMINISTRATIVE AND DESIGN FEES.
   In those instances covered by Subsections
15.06.125.E,
15.06.125.H or
15.06.125.1, the following shall apply:
   A.   Total Administrative Fees shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the
APPP allocation or one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), whichever is less.
   B.   Design fees must be proportionate to the overall scope of the budget.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.135 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES FOR PLACING ARTWORK ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
   A.   In order to ensure integrated projects, applicants choosing to
commission new artwork for their project shall submit plans to the Community
Development Director during Preliminary Project Review (PPR) or prior to
receiving any discretionary review approvals. At a minimum, the following
information shall be included:
      1.   Preliminary sketches, photographs or other documentation of
sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork;
      2.   Preliminary plans containing such detailed information as may be
required by theCommunity Development Director to adequately evaluate the
location of the artwork in relation to the proposed development, including
compatibility with the character of adjacent conforming developed parcels and
the existing neighborhood. Applicants should be involved in the development of
the preliminary plans in order to assist in the proper placement of the artwork
in relation to their proposed development environment, and to ensure that the
artist that is chosen creates an artwork that fits the needs and requirements
of both the applicant's project and the APPP.
   B.   Upon receipt of discretionary review approvals, applicants shall
prepare the following in preparation for Cultural Affairs Commission review:
      1.   A narrative proposal, with the artwork's budget and timeline.
Elevations, site plans, line of sight studies, renderings and other descriptive
materials, as deemed necessary by the Community Development Director, shall be
included to demonstrate that the artwork will be displayed in an area open and
freely accessible to the general public.
      2.   Information provided by a conservator affiliated with the American
Institute for Conservation (“AIC”) about the durability of the proposed
materials, recommendations for future maintenance and estimated maintenance
costs. In addition, the application shall include information on how the future
maintenance costs will be allocated and identify the party responsible for
ensuring that maintenance is performed; and,
      3.   If applicable, an appraisal or other evidence of the value of the
proposed artwork, including acquisition and installation costs.
   C.   The Cultural Affairs Commission shall review the completed application
together with the recommendation of the Community Development Director and CAC
Public Art subcommittee, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
proposed artwork, and its proposed location, considering the aesthetic quality
and harmony with the proposed project, and the public accessibility of the
artwork.
   D.   Submitted artwork applications shall be assessed on:
      1.   Compliance with the general APPP requirements as outlined in this
Subchapter;
      2.   Artistic quality;
      3.   Conceptual compatibility of the design with the immediate
environment for the site;
      4.   Appropriateness of the design to the function of the site;
      5.   Creation of a desirable environment for the general community by the
design and location of the artwork;
      6.   Preservation and integration of natural features with the project;
      7.   Appropriateness of the materials, textures, colors, and design to
the expression of the design concept;
      8.   Ability to convey the artist's intention and underlying themes;
      9.   Whether the artwork is representative of a broad variety of tastes
within the community and makes a contribution to the provision of a balanced
inventory of artworks commissioned through the APPP;
      10.   Permanence of structural and surface components including, but not
limited to, the structural and surface soundness and inherent resistance to
theft, vandalism, weathering, and excessive maintenance or repair costs.
   E.   Disqualifying characteristics for artwork:
      1.   Directional elements such as super graphics, signage, or color
coding except where these elements are integral parts of the original artwork
or executed by the artist in unique or limited editions;
      2.   Artwork that incorporates logos, images, text or other elements that
relate directly to a specific business's or organization's branding or
marketing themes;
      3.   Art objects which are mass-produced and of standard design such as
playground equipment or fountain pieces;
      4.   Reproduction of original artworks, except in cases where
incorporated into an original artwork;
      5.   Decorative or functional elements which are designed by the building
architect as opposed to a qualified artist;
      6.   Landscape design except where it is designed by a qualified artist
and is an integral part of the artwork;
      7.   Architectural rehabilitation, historic preservation and structural
building modifications;
      8.   Temporary art exhibitions, unless included with a Cultural Facility
as outlined in Subsection
15.06.125.1;
      9.   Educational activities;
      10.   Artwork designed by City elected or appointed officials, City staff
or members of their immediate family, members of the project architect's firm
or immediate family members, individuals directly associated with the
development team or immediate family members of the property owner/applicant,
or any individuals with whom the property owner and/or applicant may have an
interest in common; and,
      11.   Artwork designed by an artist who has received a prior permanent
public art commission through the City's Art in Public Places Program, if the
contract for said commission was executed within the last ten (10) years.
   F.   If the applicant proposes significant revisions to the artwork, a
revised application shall be submitted to the Community Development Director
for review and recommendation to the Cultural Affairs Commission. The
Commission shall make a determination whether to approve, approve with
conditions or deny the requested revision(s).
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.140 APPROVAL PROCEDURES FOR FULFILLMENT OF THE ART IN PUBLIC PLACES
PROGRAM REQUIREMENT FOR CITY DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   A.   All City-initiated projects subject to the requirements of this
Subchapter shall follow the same requirements as development projects on
private property, with the exception of the requirement to pay an in-lieu fee
into the Cultural Trust Fund if the APPP allocation is less than seventy-five
thousand dollars ($75,000). The APPP allocation shall be included in the
development project budget and appropriated from the development project
funding sources. The APPP allocation may be supplemented with money from the
Cultural Trust Fund with a recommendation from the Cultural Affairs Commission
and City Council approval.
   B.   Depending on the scope of the development project and/or overall
budget, the City may employ a Community Advisory Committee and/or Artist
Selection Panel, an RFQ and/or RFP process and/or the services of a qualified
art or theater consultant. Both the Community Advisory Committee and Artist
Selection Panel shall include a combination of professional artists, arts and
design professionals, community representatives or stakeholders and City
department representatives.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.145 PROCEDURE FOR ACCEPTANCE OF ARTWORK DONATED TO THE CITY TO FULFILL
THE ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM REQUIREMENT.
   A.   An application for acceptance of artwork to be donated to the City for
placement on public property shall be submitted to the Community Development
Director and shall include the following information, at minimum:
      1.   Artist biography and object provenance;
      2.   Sketches, photographs, models, or other documentation of sufficient
descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork and
installation and siting requirements;
      3.   Acquisition and installation costs;
      4.   An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the proposed artwork.
The value of the proposed artwork will be determined by an Accredited Member or
Accredited Senior Appraiser of the American Society of Appraisers, or a member
of another established national or international organization for appraisers;
      5.   Information provided by an American Institute for Conservation
("AIC") affiliated conservator about the durability of the proposed materials,
recommendations for future maintenance and estimated maintenance costs; and,
      6.   If applicable, a written agreement, in a form approved by the City
Attorney, executed by or on behalf of the artist who created the artwork which
provides the City necessary protections as permitted under applicable law.
   B.   Review of application:
      1.   Completed applications shall be submitted to the Community
Development Director who, together with the CAC Public Art subcommittee, makes
a recommendation to the Cultural Affairs Commission.
      2.   The Cultural Affairs Commission shall in turn make a recommendation
to the City Council, which shall have the sole authority to accept or reject or
conditionally accept the donation.
   C.   All artwork donated to the City in fulfillment of the requirements of
this Subchapter shall become the property of the City upon acceptance by the
City Council.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.150 OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF ARTWORK.
   A.   All artwork placed on the site of an applicant's project shall become
the property of the property owner and his or her successor(s) in interest.
Artwork cannot be sold or transferred other than to a subsequent successor in
interest. The obligation to provide maintenance and security, as necessary to
preserve the artwork in good condition, shall remain with the owner of the
site.
   B.   Maintenance of artwork, as used in this section, shall include without
limitation: preservation of the artwork and, where applicable, of the lighting
and surrounding landscaping, in good condition to the satisfaction of the City;
protection of the artwork against physical defacement, mutilation or
alteration; and, securing and maintaining fire and extended insurance and
vandalism coverage in an amount to be determined on a case-by-case basis by the
City.
   C.   Prior to placement of an approved artwork, the applicant and the owner
of the site shall execute and record a covenant reflecting all the owners'
obligations under this Subchapter, in a form approved by the City.
   D.   The covenant shall include a financial plan for the maintenance of the
artwork, a schedule of future condition checks, preventative maintenance and
restoration of the artwork necessary to conserve the artwork at an appropriate
level, and should be created with input from the artist, the applicant, the
Cultural Affairs Commission, and an Art Consultant, if one was hired for the
project.
   E.   Applicants are required to set-aside funds for future conservation and,
where possible, in interest bearing accounts. Preventative maintenance costs
may represent from five percent (5%) to fifteen percent (15%) annually of the
total APPP allocation but shall be based on conservation reports prepared by a
professional art conservator working with the artist and the artist's
fabricator. Funds for maintenance are not part of the APPP allocation.
   F.   The City reserves the right to inspect the artwork at any time to
ensure it is being maintained as required by any covenant entered into pursuant
to the provisions of Subsection
15.06.150.C.
   G.   Failure to maintain the artwork as provided herein is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance. The City may pursue remedies to obtain compliance with
the provisions of the APPP for maintenance of artwork, including subjecting the
property owner to administrative citation and/or misdemeanor prosecution;
placing conditions for maintenance of an artwork on the owner's future
development project approvals; performing all necessary repairs, maintenance or
securing insurance and placing a lien against the involved property for the
costs associated with such.
   H.   The artwork is to remain freely accessible, as previously defined, and
may not otherwise be draped or obscured.
   I.   The siting of the artwork, including the surrounding landscaping or
adjacent area, shall not be altered without approval from the City. The City
reserves the right to implement measures necessary to preserve the design and
placement of an artwork as approved by the Cultural Affairs Commission.
   J.   Unless an artwork poses imminent danger to life or property, no person
or entity shall remove any artwork from the location for which it was selected,
and anyone needing to do so shall obtain City approval prior to doing so.
   K.   The applicant, its successors, and its assigns, may not destroy,
permanently remove, relocate, change, alter, modify, or allow to be defaced,
any artwork or portion thereof without the express consent of the City. This
requirement will be included in the covenant to be recorded against the
property.
   L.   If any approved artwork placed on private property pursuant to this
Subchapter is removed without City approval, the artwork must be replaced with
artwork of the same value as that of the removed artwork and be approved by the
CAC or the property owner must pay the value of the removed artwork into the
Cultural Trust Fund. If these requirements are not met within one-hundred
eighty (180) days, then the Certificate of Occupancy is revoked or a lien is
placed against the involved property.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.155 FINAL CITY APPROVAL.
   No final City approval or Certificate of Occupancy for any project subject
to this Subchapter shall be granted or issued unless and until full compliance
with the APPP is achieved as follows:
   A.   In lieu art fees have been paid, if applicable;
   B.   The approved artwork has been fabricated and placed on the project site
in a manner consistent with the proposal approved by the Cultural Affairs
Commission and inspected by the CAC and/or Cultural Affairs staff, if
applicable;
   C.   Donation of an approved artwork has been accepted by the City Council,
if applicable;
   D.   A Cultural Facility has been incorporated into the applicant's
development project, if applicable;
   E.   The building or a portion thereof has been designated “Architecture as
Art,” if applicable.
   F.   In cases where approved artwork is placed on private property, a
Cultural Facility has been incorporated into the applicant's development
project or a building has been designated “Architecture as Art” pursuant to
this Subchapter, all of the following must occur prior to final City approval
or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any project subject to this
Subchapter:
      1.   A copy of the maintenance guidelines that include information on
materials, parts and fabricator contact information has been submitted to the
City;
      2.   A covenant, complying with Subsection
15.06.150.C. and setting forth the applicant's obligations under the APPP, has
been executed and recorded with the Los Angeles County Recorder;
      3.   A plaque has been installed adjacent to the artwork measuring no
less than 8" x 8" or a proportionate size. The plaque shall be made of cast
metal, stainless steel or other durable material and will be placed in an
appropriate location near the artwork and shall include the date, title of
artwork (if applicable), artist(s) or architect(s) (as applicable), and should
indicate that the artwork, building's architecture or Cultural Facility was
commissioned in conjunction with the Culver City Art in Public Places Program.
Staff shall review and approve plaque text and layout prior to its fabrication
and installation at the site; and,
      4.   Proof of final payment to the artist and/or all members of the
design and fabrication/installation team has been furnished to the City.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.160 ARTWORK ON PUBLIC PROPERTY, PERFORMING ARTS AND PURCHASE OF REAL
PROPERTY FOR PUBLIC ART.
   A.   The Cultural Affairs Commission shall prepare a plan for the Art in
Public Places Program and update it annually through the budget process.
   B.   The Cultural Affairs Commission may recommend to the City Council the
purchase of artwork to be displayed on public property, recommend support for
the performing arts, and the purchase and improvement of real property to be
used for the display of artwork. A recommendation shall include the following
information:
      1.   The type of artwork considered, an analysis of the constraints
applicable to placement of the artwork on a site, the need for and practicality
of the maintenance of the artwork, and the costs of acquisition and
installation of the artwork; or
      2.   The type of performance and amount recommended; or
      3.   The estimated costs of acquisition and improvements of the real
property proposed to be purchased.
   C.   The Cultural Affairs Commission is authorized to review the performing
arts grant applications and make a recommendation to the City Council up to the
amount authorized in the City budget for the fiscal year for which the projects
are being considered.
   D.   An expenditure from the Cultural Trust Fund may be made for the
performing arts provided the City Council approves the performing arts event
and that the performance occurs at a location in the City, or location owned or
controlled by the City, or at an alternative site which is located within close
proximity to the corporate boundaries of the City and which has facilities for
performing arts that complement or supplement those available within the City.
   E.   No more than twenty- five percent (25%) of deposits made in any one
year into the Cultural Trust Fund may be allocated from the Cultural Trust Fund
for performing arts in the subsequent year unless this amount is less than
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), in which case a minimum of twenty- five
thousand dollars ($25,000) may be allocated. Eligible activities include city-
produced performing arts events and grants to performing arts organizations as
subject to the release of a Notice of Funding Availability (“NOFA”) and review
of applications by the Cultural Affairs Commission and approval by the City
Council.
   F.   In order to attract more cultural users to City-owned and City-operated
facilities, up to Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000) per year may be allocated from
the Cultural Trust Fund for capital improvements to enhance the performance
area of such facilities.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.165 CRITERIA FOR APPROVING ARCHITECTURE AS ART.
   The following criteria shall be used to determine, on a case-by-case basis,
whether architecture can be considered art for purposes of fulfilling the
City's APPP requirement:
   A.   The architect shall be internationally recognized and have earned a
respectable reputation in both the design and visual art communities and have
exhibited their work in major regional, national or international museums.
   B.   When reviewing architecture as art, the underlying concept of the
architecture shall be expressive as more than mere utilitarian architecture.
The architecture as a whole, or certain architectural features, shall express
ideas or meaning and have cultural significance or conceptual complexity in
relation to the totality of the object.
   C.   The applicant must be able to demonstrate how the APPP allocation
enhances the design of their project.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.170 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVING ARCHITECTURE AS ART.
   The following procedure must be followed by the applicant to fulfill the
APPP requirement with the building's architecture:
   A.   An applicant shall make an initial presentation to the CAC Public Art
sub-committee and staff prior to the development application being deemed
complete. The applicant must submit a maquette and/or other materials which
satisfactorily illustrate the proposed conceptual development. The applicant
and architect must submit a conceptual statement expressing why the
architecture should be considered art, including an explanation of the ideas,
meaning, cultural significance or conceptual complexity expressed in the
architecture.
   B.   A second presentation shall be made at the completion of the City's
review and approval process for the project to a panel comprising two (2)
commercial architects, one (1) visual artist, one (1) visual arts
administrator, and one (1) general design professional such as a landscape
architect or commercial interior designer. At least one (1) of the panel
members shall be a Culver City business owner or resident. The panel shall make
a recommendation to the CAC Public Art subcommittee whether to accept the
project under Architecture as Art and the subcommittee will then make a
recommendation to the Cultural Affairs Commission for consideration.
   C.   The applicant and architect shall demonstrate that high quality
materials and craftsmanship will be used in the execution of the construction.
   D.   If all of the foregoing criteria are met, the Cultural Affairs
Commission shall approve the Architecture as Art, only if, in its judgment, the
architectural work is of extremely high artistic merit and would make a
substantial cultural contribution to Culver City.
   E.   The applicant and/or architect shall have the responsibility to
demonstrate that all of the foregoing criteria are met.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.175 DE-ACCESSIONING OF ARTWORK.
   A.   The City will allow the de-accessioning of artwork acquired or
commissioned through the Art in Public Places Program only when it is in the
public interest and serves as a means of improving the quality of the overall
APPP collection;
   B.   De-accessioning should be considered only after five (5) years
following the acceptance of artwork donated to the City or the installation of
permanent art commissioned through the APPP. The need for temporary removal
from public display does not necessitate de-accession. In instances where the
artwork considered for de-accession is on private property, the Cultural
Affairs Commission shall make the final decision. When the artwork is installed
on public property or is City-owned, the Cultural Affairs Commission shall make
a recommendation to the City Council which will make the final decision.
   C.   After de-accession has been approved by the Cultural Affairs Commission
or the City Council, if the artwork is sold, all proceeds from sale of artwork,
minus payment to the artist under California Resale Royalties Act, will be used
for the exclusive purpose of acquiring replacement artwork for the site or be
paid into the Cultural Trust Fund. If the artwork was on private property, the
then property owner shall replace the de-accessioned artwork with an artwork of
equal or greater value or pay an in-lieu fee equivalent to the cost of the
artwork to the Cultural Trust Fund.
   D.   Circumstances that may cause review of artwork for de-accessioning:
      1.   The artwork is a threat to public safety, or the condition/security
of the work cannot be guaranteed;
      2.   The owner cannot properly care for the artwork, or the artwork
requires an excessive or unreasonable amount of maintenance;
      3.   The artwork has serious or dangerous faults in design or
workmanship, the condition of the artwork requires restoration costs in gross
excess of its monetary value or is in such a deteriorated state that
restoration is either unfeasible, impractical, or would render the artwork to
be false;
      4.   A similar but superior example exists in the collection;
      5.   The artwork is a forgery;
      6.   No suitable site for the artwork is available;
      7.   A significant adverse reaction to the artwork is documented over
five (5) years or more;
      8.   The artwork is judged to have no aesthetic, historical or cultural
value;
      9.   The owner wishes to replace an artwork with a more appropriate work
by the same artist;
      10.   The artwork can be sold to finance, or can be traded for, an
artwork of greater importance;
      11.   A written request from the artist to remove the artwork from public
display has been received and approved by the City;
      12.   The artwork is not or is rarely displayed; or
      13.   The artwork is incompatible with the rest of the collection.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
§ 15.06.180 APPEAL.
   Any person may seek review of a decision of the Cultural Affairs Commission
by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk's Office within ten (10) working
days of the decision by the Commission. The City Clerk's Office shall
coordinate with the Community Development Director to schedule the appeal
hearing before the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2013-003 § 1 (part))
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PARK DEDICATION AND IN LIEU PARKLAND FEES
§ 15.06.300 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds and declares:
   A.   The public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require
neighborhood and community park and recreational facilities must be provided
for the enhancement of the quality of life of City's residents.
   B.   The public interest requires three (3) acres of community park or
recreational facilities for each one thousand (1,000) persons within the City
shall be provided and maintained for community parks and recreational purposes.
   C.   There currently is a deficiency in the City's community park and
recreational facilities and land because the requisite three (3) acres per
thousand (1,000) persons is not provided.
   D.   This deficiency is caused, in significant part, by residential
construction without adequate community park and recreational facilities and
land for the residents.
   E.   The developer of residential units who does not subdivide the land upon
which the units are constructed increases the population of the City and adds
to the need for public recreational facilities to the same extent as the
subdivider of land for residential construction.
   F.   Development of new and rehabilitation of existing community park and
recreational facilities should be financed by applicants for developments which
are served by public recreational facilities.
   G.   Establishment of residential development park dedication and in lieu
fees, as provided in this Subchapter, will promote the general welfare by
requiring all developers of residential units to pay a share of the cost of
developing new, and rehabilitating existing, community park and recreational
facilities which will serve the residents of the development.
('65 Code, § 33h-40) (Ord. No. 90-003 § 1)
Cross-reference:
   Parks, public buildings and property, see
Ch. 9.10
§ 15.06.305 DEPOSIT AND USE OF FEES.
   Fees paid pursuant to this Subchapter shall be deposited into the Park
Facilities Fund maintained by the City Treasurer, and shall be used solely for
the acquisition of new and rehabilitation of existing community park and
recreational facilities.
('65 Code, § 33h-41) (Ord. No. 90-003 § 1)
§ 15.06.310 PARK DEDICATION OR PAYMENT OF FEES.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter, all new residential
developments of more than one (1) unit, and addition of one (1) or more units
to an existing residential development, shall be subject to the park dedication
requirement, or payment of fees in lieu thereof, or both, established by this
Subchapter.
   B.   The amount of land to be dedicated for neighborhood and community park
or recreational facilities or fees to be paid in lieu thereof shall be based on
the residential density of the proposed development, which shall be determined
on the basis of the number of residential dwelling units to be constructed and
the density factor, as set forth in Subsection C., so as to provide three (3)
acres of park area for one thousand (1,000) residents.
   C.   As used herein, the term “density factor” means the average number of
persons per household for the type of dwelling unit proposed to be constructed,
based on the most recent available federal census, or census taken pursuant to
Cal. Gov't Code §§ 40200 et seq., according to the following:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling unit: Two and seventy-five
hundredths (2.75) persons per dwelling unit:
      2.   Single-family attached dwelling unit: Two and forty-four hundredths
(2.44) persons per dwelling unit:
      3.   Multi-family residential developed with four (4) or fewer units: Two
and thirty-one hundredths (2.31) persons per dwelling unit; and
      4.   Multi-family residential developed with more than four (4) units:
Two (2.00) persons per dwelling unit.
      5.   Mobile homes: One and seventy-eight hundredths, (1.78) persons per
dwelling unit.
   D.   When a fee is to be paid in lieu of or in addition to parkland
dedication, the amount of such fee shall be the fair market value, as
determined in §
15.10.765 C., per acre of the land within the proposed residential development
multiplied by the number of acres required to be dedicated pursuant to this
Section, except that the amount of the fee shall be calculated as provided in §
15.06.315 when the construction consists solely of adding a second residential
unit to a property containing one (1) single family dwelling.
   E.   The park dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof, or both, shall
be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or a temporary
Certificate of Occupancy for such development.
('65 Code, § 33h-42) (Ord. No. 90-003; Ord. No. 94-013 § 1)
§ 15.06.315 REDUCTION OF FEES FOR SECOND UNIT.
   A.   When a building permit is sought for addition of a second unit to a
property containing a single family dwelling, regardless of the zoning district
in which the property is located, the amount of the in lieu fee to be paid at
the time the Certificate of Occupancy is issued shall be for that second unit,
fifty percent (50%) of the amount required under the formula established in §
15.06.310 D. for so long as the property remains developed with two (2) units.
   B.   In the event a second residential unit is constructed and the reduced
in lieu fee established in Subsection A. is paid, and thereafter a building
permit is sought for construction of one or more additional residential units,
so that the property is developed with three (3) or more units, the amount of
the in lieu fees to be paid at the time the Certificate of Occupancy is issued
for the new additional units shall be calculated pursuant to the formula
established in §
15.06.310 D., and an additional amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the in
lieu fee for the second unit shall be collected.
('65 Code, § 33H-42.5) (Ord. No. 94-013 § 2)
§ 15.06.320 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES CREDIT.
   A.   Where private open space area is developed for park or recreational
facilities in a proposed development, the park or recreational facilities may
be partially credited against the parkland dedication requirement established
in §
15.06.310, as provided in this Section.
   B.   The Planning Commission or City Planner, whichever is the decision
making authority on the residential development, shall determine at the time
the residential development is approved or conditionally approved, whether it
is in the public interest to determine a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the
parkland dedication requirement is satisfied by the proposed development of
private open space area with recreational facilities, or such area is
reasonably adaptable for use for recreational or park purposes, taking into
consideration factors such as the size, shape, topography, geology, access, and
location of such area within the development.
   C.   Yards, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by
zoning and building regulations shall not be considered as credit against the
parkland dedication requirement.
   D.   The private ownership and maintenance of the private open space area as
park or recreational facilities is adequately provided for by written
agreement, and the use of such area is restricted by recorded covenants which
run with the land and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the
consent of the City.
('65 Code, § 33H-43) (Ord. No. 90-003 § 1)
§ 15.06.325 EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   Residential developments which are subject to the park dedication and
in lieu fee requirements of Chapter 15.10 shall be exempted from the
requirements of this Subchapter.
   B.   Residential developments containing units which are covenanted for low-
and moderate-income households or senior citizens shall be exempted from the
requirements of this Subchapter during the period the unit or units remain
covenanted for such use. Prior to the date these restrictions terminate, the
then current owner of the residential development shall dedicate additional
parkland or pay additional fees in lieu thereof, based on the then current fair
market value of the land and in accordance with the density factor in effect at
the time the restrictions terminate.
('65 Code, § 33h-44) (Ord. No. 90-003 § 1)
§ 15.06.330 RETURN OF FEES.
   A.   Fees paid into the Park Facilities Fund which are not committed within
five (5) years from the date of payment may be returned to the then current
owner of the residential development project, with all interest actually earned
thereon, if a written request for return is filed with the City Treasurer
during the fifth year after payment, and refund of the fees is approved by the
City Council. The request for return shall be verified, and include the date of
payment, the amount paid and method of payment, the location of the new
development for which the fee was paid, and a statement that the applicant is
the payer of the fees or the current owner of the development project.
   B.   The City Council shall determine, if return of the then uncommitted
portion of the fees and interest is appropriate and, if so, the method of
refund. No refund shall be appropriate if the City Council determines any one
of the following applies:
      1.   The City Council finds the fee is needed for the City's Park
Facilities Fund.
      2.   Moneys were not posted as fees, but were satisfied by letter of
credit, bond or other instrument taken to secure payment at a future date.
      3.   The administrative costs of refunding uncommitted fees pursuant to
this Subchapter exceeds the amount to be refunded; provided notice of a public
hearing on this issue has been published and posted on the site of the
development project in not less than three (3) places.
('65 Code, § 33h-45) (Ord. No. 90-003 § 1; Ord. No. 96-007 § 1 (part))
MOBILITY IMPROVEMENT FEES
§ 15.06.500 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subchapter is to provide a method for new development
projects to pay their fair share towards the funding of the City's identified
mobility infrastructure and programs project list, intended to reduce vehicle
miles traveled and needed to support projected jobs and housing growth.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.505 MOBILITY IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   A.   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66006, the Mobility Improvement Fund is
hereby established.
   B.   The fees paid to the City under this Subchapter's provisions shall be
deposited into the Mobility Improvement Fund and used solely for the purpose
described in this Subchapter.
   C.   All monies deposited into the Mobility Improvement Fund shall be held
separate and apart from other City funds.
   D.   All interest or other earnings on the unexpended balance in the
Mobility Improvement Fund shall be credited to the Mobility Improvement Fund.
There shall at all times be sufficient amounts of earned interest in the
account to enable the City to pay all potential obligations for the refund of
interest earned on fees which may be eligible for refunds per §
15.06.545. Any amounts of interest earned by the fund which exceeds the
necessary reserve amount may be appropriated and disbursed for project list
funding.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.510 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Subchapter, the following terms are defined as follows
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning. All other terms
herein shall follow the definitions found in §
17.700.010.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, or any entity or combination of entities, which seeks or applies
for City approvals, permits or entitlements for all or part of a commercial
development project.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the City of Culver City, or
his or her designee.
   PROJECT LIST. The list of mobility improvements and programs identified by
the Community Development, Public Works, and Transportation Departments needed
to support new development based on 2045 jobs and housing growth forecasts,
which will reduce vehicle miles traveled and be partially funded by mobility
improvement fees.
   MULTIMODAL. Alternative transportation modes to single-occupancy vehicles
including but not limited to active transportation like walking, running,
rolling, bicycling, scooting, skating, and accessing public transit and
ridesharing like car and vanpools.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Shall have the same meaning as that set forth in §
15.06.015.
   SQUARE FOOTAGE. Shall have the same meaning as that set forth in §
15.06.015.
   VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED. The sum of the number of miles traveled by each
vehicle.
   NET NEW VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED. Additional vehicle miles traveled resulting
from new development above existing development. For the purpose of
illustration only, an example of net new vehicle miles traveled is as follows:
If a new restaurant replaces an existing restaurant without adding new square
footage, the fee will not be charged. However, if a new restaurant replaces an
existing restaurant and adds 1,000 new square feet; then fees will be required
for the added 1,000 square feet and associated net new vehicle miles traveled.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.515 CALCULATION AND PAYMENT OF FEES.
   A.   Requirement. Mobility improvement fees are hereby imposed on all new
development projects resulting in net new vehicle miles traveled, except as
specifically exempted in §
15.06.520. No application for a building permit for a development project shall
be approved, nor shall any such development project be constructed without
compliance with this Subchapter. The fee imposed by this Subchapter shall be
collected at the time of the issuance of a building permit. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for a development project that has not paid the fee
required under this Subchapter.
   B.   Rates and calculation. Except as otherwise provided in this Subchapter,
all new developments shall pay into the Mobility Improvement Fund a fee for the
privilege of such development in an amount to be established by resolution of
the City Council.
   C.   Annual review and adjustment. To account for inflation in
infrastructure construction costs, the fee imposed by this Subchapter shall be
adjusted automatically on July 1 of each fiscal year, beginning on July 1,
2022, by a percentage equal to the appropriate Construction Cost Index for the
Los Angeles region, or equivalent index, as determined by the City, for the
preceding twelve (12) months. The City shall publish the revised fee and index
in a newspaper of citywide circulation or on the City website before July 31 of
each year.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.520 EXCEPTIONS.
   Certain new developments are exempted from payment of the fees required by
this Subchapter as established by resolution of the Council.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.525 ACCOUNTING FOR FEES.
   The City's Chief Financial Officer shall maintain records specifically
identifying the origin of the funds used for any project or improvement funded,
in whole or in part, by the Mobility Improvement Fund. Such records shall
enable the City's Chief Financial Officer to trace the fees from new
development to specific projects funded by each development.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.530 USE AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   A.   All monies and interest earnings in the Mobility Improvement Fund shall
be expended on constructing improvements and deploying programs in the project
list. Such expenditures may include, but are not limited to the following:
      1.   Reimbursement for all direct and indirect costs incurred by the City
to construct improvements under this Subchapter, including but not limited to
the cost of land and right-of-way acquisition, planning, legal advice,
engineering, design, construction, construction management, materials, and
equipment.
      2.   Costs of issuance or debt service associated with bonds, notes, or
other security instruments issued to fund improvements.
      3.   Reimbursement for administrative costs, not exceeding up to five
percent (5%) each year, of the total Mobility Improvement Fund balance,
incurred by the City in establishing or maintaining the Mobility Improvement
Fund required by this Subchapter, including but not limited to the cost of
studies to establish the requisite nexus between the fee amount, studies to
compare the fee amount to neighboring jurisdictions, the use of fee proceeds,
and annual accounting and reports.
   B.   The City shall not expend Mobility Improvement Fund monies on street
improvements, traffic controls, or traffic management projects required by §
15.06.035; projects that induce vehicle miles traveled; operation and
maintenance costs; off-street parking facilities except as part of a TDM
program; alley improvements; or private streets.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.535 PROJECT LIST.
   A.   The City Council shall adopt by resolution the project list, which
meets the General Plan Circulation Element goals, objectives, and measures.
   B.   The City Council may amend the resolution to update the project list
every three (3) to five (5) years to reflect current conditions, so long as any
project added reduces vehicle miles traveled and is consistent with the General
Plan.
   C.   City staff shall annually determine which project(s) will be scheduled
for implementation from the project list as part of their work plans based on
feasibility factors such as funding, staffing capacity, community support, and
City Council direction.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.540 ADJUSTMENTS OR WAIVERS.
   A.   The requirements of this Subchapter may be adjusted or waived if the
developer demonstrates that an insufficient nexus exists between the proposed
use and fee.
   B.   The developer must submit a written request to the Director, or their
designee, when the developer files a discretionary project application or if no
discretionary application is required, a building permit application.
   C.   The developer shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence
to support the request and detail the factual and legal basis for the claim,
including supporting technical documentation.
   D.   The Director, or their designee, shall render a written decision within
ninety (90) days after a complete application is filed.
   E.   The developer may seek review of the Director's decision by filing a
written appeal with the City Clerk's Office within ten (10) City Hall business
days of the decision by the Director. The City Clerk's Office shall coordinate
with the Director to schedule the appeal hearing before the City Council.
   F.   If an adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use from the
approved project shall invalidate the adjustment or waiver.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.545 RETURN OF FEES.
   A.   Fees paid into the Mobility Improvement Fund not appropriated within
five (5) years of payment shall be returned to the payer, with earned interest,
if a written return request is filed with the City's Chief Financial Officer
within the fifth fiscal year after payment. The return request shall be
verified and state the payment date, the amount paid, and that the party
requesting the fee return is the payer of the fee or the payor's assignee or
successor.
   B.   The right to a return of fees may be assigned in writing. No assignment
shall be valid unless the assignment is acknowledged before a notary public in
the same manner as is required for the recording of documents affecting title
to real property with the County Recorder. Any assignment shall be filed with
the City's Chief Financial Officer and may be recorded at the option of the
signatories.
   C.   If a return request is not made within one (1) calendar year from when
the return request is originally filed, then the right to have fees returned
shall terminate, and the fees and all interest earned shall revert to the
Mobility Improvement Fund.
(Ord. No. 2021-006 § 2 (part))
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMMERCIAL   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
§ 15.06.600 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The City Council of the City of Culver City finds:
   A.   The purpose of this Subchapter is to facilitate the development and
availability of housing affordable to a range of households with varying income
levels within the City through creation and imposition of a fee on new
commercial development, which will partially fund the need for affordable
housing created by the workforce of this new commercial development.
   B.   The requirements of this Subchapter are based on a number of factors
including, but not limited to, the City's commitment to increasing
opportunities for affordable housing, the immediate need for affordable
housing, as reflected in local, state, and federal housing regulations and
policies; the demand for affordable housing created by commercial development;
and the impact that the lack of affordable housing production has on the
health, safety, and welfare of the City's residents including its impacts on
traffic, transit and related air quality impacts, and the demands placed on the
regional transportation infrastructure. Imposing a fee that is reasonably
related to the burdens created by new commercial development on the City's need
for affordable housing will enable the City to fund development of affordable
housing units that will contribute to addressing these impacts and fulfilling
these goals.
   C.   The City has commissioned the preparation of a jobs-housing nexus
study. It shows, and the City Council finds, that there is a reasonable
relationship between the purpose for which the fees established by this
Subchapter are to be used and the type of development projects on which the
fees are imposed, and between the amount of the fees and the cost of the
affordable housing units or portion of the units attributable to the
development on which the fees are imposed.
   D.   It is the intent of the City Council that the fee required by this
Subchapter shall be supplementary to any conditions imposed upon a development
project pursuant to other provisions of this Code, the City Charter, the
Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, and other state
and local laws, which may authorize the imposition of project specific
conditions on development.
(Ord. No. 2021-009 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.605 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE or FEE. The fee paid by
a developer of Commercial Development Projects to mitigate the impacts that
such developments have on the demand for affordable housing in the City.
   BUILDING PERMIT. Full structural building permits as well as partial permits
such as foundation-only permits.
   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. The construction or the addition of new
nonresidential gross floor area (as defined in this Section), or the conversion
from a use exempt from the Affordable Housing Commercial Development Impact
Fee, per § 15.06.610.B., to a use subject to the Affordable Housing Commercial
Development Impact Fee (as set forth in §
15.06.620).
   COMMUNITY LAND USES WHICH SERVE THE PUBLIC. Uses that include, but are not
limited to, hospitals, churches or other places of worship, museums,
educational facilities (public and private K-12, community colleges, and
colleges and universities), youth and recreational facilities, emergency
shelters, and other such institutional uses which serve the public, as
determined by the Director.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, or any entity or combination of entities, which seeks or applies
for City approvals, permits or entitlements for all or part of a Commercial
Development Project.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the City of Culver City, or
his or her designee.
   GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA. The square footage in a commercial property
designed for a tenant's exclusive use, which typically includes mezzanines,
basements, or upper floors, but does not include shared areas, such as parking
garages, public bathrooms or maintenance areas. GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA is
measured from the center of the wall separating tenant spaces. Internal walls
are incorporated in the GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA.
   MIXED-USE PROJECT. Shall have the same meaning as that set forth in §
17.700.010 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2021-009 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.610 AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE.
   A.   Requirement. An Affordable Housing Commercial Development Impact Fee,
in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, is hereby imposed
on all Commercial Development Projects. No application for a building permit
for a Commercial Development Project shall be approved, nor shall any such
Commercial Development Project be constructed, without compliance with this
Subchapter. The fee imposed by this Subchapter shall be collected at the time
of the issuance of a building permit. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for a Commercial Development Project that has not paid the fee required
under this Subchapter.
   B.   Exemptions. Notwithstanding subsection A. above, this Subchapter shall
not apply to the following:
      1.   A Commercial Development Project with a gross leasable floor area of
10,000 square feet or less in aggregate;
      2.   A Commercial Development Project with an application that has been
deemed complete prior to January 1, 2022;
      3.   Community land uses which serve the public (such as religious
institutions, museums, educational facilities, hospitals, etc.);
      4.   Reconstruction of any building that was destroyed by fire, flood,
earthquake or other act of nature, so long as the square footage does not
exceed the square footage prior to the loss; and
      5.   The housing portion of a Mixed-Use Project.
   C.   Fee calculation. The Affordable Housing Commercial Development Impact
Fee shall be charged on new gross leasable floor area, subject to §
15.06.620 (Conversion).
(Ord. No. 2021-009 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.615 ADJUSTMENTS OR WAIVERS.
   A.   The requirements of this Subchapter may be adjusted or waived if the
developer demonstrates that an insufficient nexus exists between the proposed
use and the Affordable Housing Commercial Development Impact Fee.
   B.   The developer shall submit a written request to the Director no later
than the date it files its initial development application with the City.
   C.   The developer shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence
to support the request and detail the factual and legal basis for the claim,
including supporting technical documentation. The developer shall provide such
additional information as may be required by the Director to make a
determination on the request.
   D.   The Director shall render a written decision within ninety (90) days
after a complete application is filed.
   E.   The developer may seek review of the Director's decision by filing a
written appeal with the City Clerk's Office within ten (10) City Hall business
days of the Director's decision. The City Clerk's Office shall coordinate with
the Director to schedule the appeal hearing before the City Council.
   F.   If an adjustment or waiver is granted, any modification to the approved
Commercial Development Project shall invalidate the adjustment or waiver.
(Ord. No. 2021-009 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.620 CONVERSION.
   If the use of a property is exempt from the Affordable Housing Commercial
Development Impact Fee at initial construction, but later converts to a use
subject to the fee, the gross leasable floor area of the converted square
footage will be subject to the fee pursuant to §
15.06.610.A.
(Ord. No. 2021-009 § 2 (part))
§ 15.06.625 USE OF FUNDS.
   The Affordable Housing Commercial Development Impact Fee imposed by this
Subchapter shall be collected at the time of the issuance of a building permit.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a Commercial Development
Project that has not paid the fee required under this Subchapter. All funds
generated by the Affordable Housing Commercial Development Impact Fee shall be
used to develop and/or preserve housing affordable to moderate and lower income
households.
(Ord. No. 2021-009 § 2 (part))
CHAPTER 15.07: PLANNING
Section
Architectural Review Procedures
   
15.07.005   Findings and determinations; purpose
   
15.07.010   Establishment
   
15.07.015   Responsibility of Planning Commission; applicability of rules
   
15.07.020   Standard for architectural review
   
15.07.025   Projects requiring and not requiring architectural review;
modifications
   
15.07.030   Approval authority
   
15.07.035   Procedures for architectural review
   
15.07.040   When decision becomes final; appeals
Architectural Review Procedures
§ 15.07.005 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS; PURPOSE.
   The City Council of the City of Culver City hereby finds and determines that
structural design techniques and amenities applied in the community directly
and immediately affect the health, safety and general welfare of the
inhabitants thereof as follows:
   A.   Structural appearance and quality in areas of the City significantly
affected with the public interest directly relate to the City's economic
strength and stability by attracting consumers and tourists, by establishing a
sound relationship between the taxable value of real property in each area of
the City and the cost of municipal services provided therefor, and by
encouraging the attraction and retention of commercial and industrial
investments in a manner consistent with the City's General Plan. Poor
structural design quality and exterior appearance adversely affect the economic
desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas for multiple
residential, commercial or industrial use, and hence impair the stability in
value of both improved and unimproved real property in such area; prevent the
most appropriate development of such area in accordance with the General Plan;
and produce undesirable conditions affecting the health, safety, comfort and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
   B.   Structural appearance and quality in areas of the City significantly
affected with the public interest directly affect the physical health and
welfare of the inhabitants of the City and those using the public thoroughfares
therein. Poor structural design technique and exterior appearance adversely
affect human emotional, psychological, and ultimately, physical well-being.
Since there is a tendency of some owners and/or developers to fail to consider
the impact of the exterior appearance and design quality of an apartment,
commercial or industrial building upon the natural site and its immediate man-
made and scenic environment, in the absence of legislative action insuring
reasonable consideration of such factors by owners and developers, the public
will be forced to continue absorbing the external public costs created in the
often short-sighted quest for profit by such failure to consider ecological
impact.
   C.   Structural appearance and quality in business areas of the City which
were developed prior to modern design and development standards are
significantly affected with the public interest by virtue of their economic
viability and high visibility on major arterial streets. Development over a
period of several decades of commercial buildings along arterial streets with
outmoded building materials, a lack of architectural design unity, a myriad of
outdated storefront designs including graphics and poor or no landscaping has
resulted in business areas not compatible with, appropriate to or acceptable in
the contemporary retail market. This adversely affects the economic
desirability of the immediate area and neighborhoods and may impair the
stability and continued economic viability of these areas. Revitalization of
these business areas by improving the commercial buildings with storefront
designs and graphics, architectural amenities and common treatment of adjacent
storefronts and building groups will alleviate the undesirable conditions
affecting the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of
the City.
   D.   It is the purpose of this Section to prevent the above-enumerated and
other harmful effects of the exterior appearance of buildings, whether of
public or private ownership, erected in areas affected by the public interest,
and thus fulfill the responsibilities of the City Council to promote and
protect the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the community, to
promote the public convenience and prosperity, to conserve the value of
existing buildings and real property, and to encourage the development of land
within the City in accordance with the General Plan. It is also the purpose of
this Section to alleviate the undesirable conditions above-enumerated within
business areas designated as Commercial Revitalization areas by the City
Council.
('65 Code, § 2-86.1) (Ord. No. CS-855 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 89-013 § 2)
§ 15.07.010 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to § 3.03.230 D. of the Municipal Code, there are hereby
established architectural review procedures.
('65 Code, § 2-86.2) (Ord. No. CS-855 §1 (part))
§ 15.07.015 RESPONSIBILITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION; APPLICABILITY OF RULES.
   A.   Architectural review shall be the responsibility of the Planning
Commission except as modified herein.
('65 Code, § 2-86.3)
   B.   The Commission's rules for the transaction of other business shall be
applicable to this responsibility.
('65 Code, § 2-86.4) (Ord. No. CS-855 § 1 (part))
Cross-reference:
   Planning Commission, see §§ 3.03.200 through 3.03.235
§ 15.07.020 STANDARD FOR ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.
   A.   The standard for architectural review as provided in this Section shall
be Architectural Design District Standards established in the current Design
and Physical Development Plan adopted by the City Council. The Planning
Commission shall continually seek to update the plan when necessary to achieve
the purpose of this Section.
   B.   In the areas designated as Commercial Revitalization areas by
resolution of the City Council, the Storefront Improvement Design Guidelines
for Commercial Revitalization Areas are adopted by the City Council as a
supplement to be applied in addition to the Architectural Design District
Standards of the Design and Physical Development Plan.
('65 Code, § 2-86.5) (Ord. No. CS-855 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 87-016 § 1; Ord. No.
89-013 § 3)
§ 15.07.025 PROJECTS REQUIRING AND NOT REQUIRING ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW;
MODIFICATIONS.
   A.   Projects requiring architectural review. Except as set forth in
Subsection B., architectural review and approval is required prior to the
issuance of a building permit for:
      1.   Construction of a new building or an addition to an existing
building, whenever a cumulative total of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet
or more of gross building floor area is added within a one year period.
      2.   Any project involving a substantial exterior modification as
determined by the City Planner.
      3.   Any project involving a substantial change or intensification of
land use, as determined by the City Planner such as but not limited to, another
use which would require more parking, or the conversion of a residential
structure to an office or commercial use.
      4.   Moving a building or structure onto a site (“move-on”).
      5.   Erection of a new, or a modification to an existing sign, fence,
wall or any other appurtenant structure.
   B.   Projects not requiring architectural review. Architectural review is
not required for construction of, or additions or alterations to an individual
single family or two family dwelling or appurtenant structure, or two single
family dwellings on one lot.
   C.   Modifications to an approved architectural review. Modifications to an
approved architectural review, involving additions to existing structures or
new buildings, shall require approval of an architectural review modification
prior to the issuance of a building permit. Except for minor modifications,
modifications to an architectural review approval shall be approved by the
decision making authority which originally approved the architectural style.
Unless the architectural review approval provides otherwise, the City Planner
may approve minor modifications. As used in this subsection, minor
modifications to an approved architectural review include, without limitation,
changes other than ones involving structural additions or new buildings. Where
an architectural review approval remains valid, an application for a modified
architectural review shall be accompanied by written consent of the property
owner.
('65 Code, § 2-86.6) (Ord. No. CS-855 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 87-016 § 2)
§ 15.07.030 APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
   A.   The City Planner shall be the decision making authority on all
architectural review applications; provided that, the City Planner shall refer
any application to the Planning Commission for decision if any of the following
criteria apply:
      1.   The project is for a residential use and contains ten (10) or more
units.
      2.   The project is for a commercial, industrial or institutional use and
contains over ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross building floor area.
      3.   The project otherwise requires Planning Commission review, such as
but not limited to, site plan review, conditional use permit, subdivision or
zone change application.
   B.   The City Planner may refer any architectural review application or
modification to the Planning Commission for decision.
('65 Code, § 2-86.7) (Ord. No. CS-855 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 87-016 § 3)
§ 15.07.035 PROCEDURES FOR ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.
   A.   The applicant for a building permit for any improvement subject to
architectural review shall submit to the City Planner plans, elevations,
specifications, and other data necessary to effectively relate the improvement
to the Architectural Design District Standards.
   B.   Architectural review by the City Planner may be performed concurrently
with the plan checking of working drawings submitted for a building permit,
provided that the drawings contain sufficient information to determine
compliance with the Architectural Design District Standards. Where an
administrative discretionary review process by the City Planner may be
involved, such as but not limited to, an administrative site plan review or
variance, architectural review may be performed concurrently therewith. In such
cases, the notice of decision required for such site plan review or variance
shall include notice of the administrative architectural review decision.
   C.   Planning Commission architectural reviews shall be made at regular or
special meetings which shall be open to the public. Each case requiring review
shall be placed on the Commission's agenda. The Commission shall review each
application, the staff report and any statement of the applicant, and after
discussion, shall make its findings and decision by motion or resolution. If
the property also requires other Planning Commission action, architectural
review may be combined by the Commission with those other actions including the
resolution reflecting the Commission's decision. The applicant shall be
notified in writing of the Commission's decision within ten (10) working days
of the date of the decision.
('65 Code, § 2-86.8) (Ord. No. CS-855 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 87-016 § 4)
§ 15.07.040 WHEN DECISION BECOMES FINAL; APPEALS.
   The decision of the City Planner or the Planning Commission shall become
final and effective twenty (20) working days after the date of decision as
indicated in the notice of decision, unless appealed pursuant to the Zoning
Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code.
('65 Code, § 2-86.9) (Ord. No. CS-855 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 87-016 § 5)
CHAPTER 15.08: PROPERTY REPORTS
Section
   
15.08.005   Intent
   
15.08.010   Definitions
   
15.08.015   Report required prior to agreement of sale of property
   
15.08.020   Application for property report
   
15.08.025   Verification of sewer or septic connection
   
15.08.030   Delivery of report
   
15.08.035   Exceptions
   
15.08.040   Penalties
§ 15.08.005 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the City Council to assure that the grantee of improved
real property within the City is furnished a report of matters of City record
pertaining to the authorized use, occupancy, and zoning classification of the
property before transfer. The report is not intended to be a warranty or
representation of any factual or legal matter but rather shall merely reflect
the contents of the relevant City records on the date of issuance of each
report.
('65 Code, § 28B-1) (Ord. No. CS-748 § 1(1); Ord. No. CS-945 § 1 (part))
§ 15.08.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGREEMENT OF SALE. Any agreement or written instrument which provides that
title to any property shall thereafter be transferred from one owner to another
owner by sale, including exchange.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation or fiduciary having
legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property.
   PROPERTY. Any lot or parcel of real property in the City upon which there is
a building.
('65 Code, § 28B-2) (Ord. No. CS-748 § 1(2); Ord. No. CS-945 § 1 (part))
§ 15.08.015 REPORT REQUIRED PRIOR TO AGREEMENT OF SALE OF PROPERTY.
   Before entering into an agreement of sale of any property, the owner or
authorized representative shall obtain from the City a property report showing
the authorized use, occupancy and zoning classification of such property. Said
report shall be prepared on a form which has been approved by the City
Attorney.
('65 Code, § 28B-3) (Ord. No. CS-748 § 1(3); Ord. No. CS-945 § 1 (part))
§ 15.08.020 APPLICATION FOR PROPERTY REPORT.
   Upon application of the owner, or his/her authorized agent, of a residential
building or commercial building, and the payment to the City of a fee as set
forth by City Council resolution, a property report shall be prepared and
delivered to the applicant within five (5) working days of request. The report
shall contain the information listed hereinbelow insofar as it is reflected by
City records. The purpose of the above-mentioned fees is solely to reimburse
the City for the costs involved in the preparation of the report.
   A.   The street address of the subject property.
   B.   The zoning classification and the uses authorized in that zone;
   C.   The authorized occupancy as indicated and established by permits of
record;
   D.   Variances, conditional use permits, exceptions and other pertinent
legislative and/or administrative acts of record; and
   E.   Any special restrictions in use or development, which may apply to the
subject property.
(Ord. No. 2003-014 § 1)
§ 15.08.025 VERIFICATION OF SEWER OR SEPTIC CONNECTION.
   At the time of making application pursuant to §
15.08.020, if no City of Culver City record exists of a sewer connection, prior
to issuance of the property report the applicant shall show proof of either a
sewer connection or septic system. Proof of connection to a sewer or septic
system shall be submitted by a licensed plumber.
('65 Code, § 28B-4.1) (Ord. No. 84-025 § 1)
§ 15.08.030 DELIVERY OF REPORT.
   The property report shall be delivered by the owner, or the authorized
representative of the owner, to the buyer or transferee of the property at the
time the agreement of sale is entered into or upon receipt of the property
report from the City. No sale shall be consummated before the property report
is so delivered. The buyer or transferee shall execute a receipt therefor as
furnished by the City, and said receipt shall be delivered to the Building
Department as evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 28B-5) (Ord. No. CS-748 § 1(5); Ord. No. CS-945 § 1 (part))
§ 15.08.035 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the first sale of a
property located in a subdivision whose final map has been approved and
recorded in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act not more than two (2) years
before the first sale.
('65 Code, § 28B-6) (Ord. No. CS-748 § 1(6); Ord. No. CS-945 § 1 (part))
§ 15.08.040 PENALTIES.
   A.   Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to
punishment in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
   B.   No sale or exchange of property shall be invalid solely because of the
failure of any person to comply with any provisions of this Chapter unless such
failure is an act or omission which would be a ground for rescission of such
sale or exchange in the absence of this Chapter.
('65 Code, § 28B-7) (Ord. No. CS-748 § 1(7); Ord. No. CS-945 § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 15.09: RENTAL HOUSING
Section
   
15.09.005   Purpose and objectives
   
15.09.010   Powers and duties; bylaws
   
15.09.015   Matters subject to mandatory mediation; process
   
15.09.020   Mediation of rent increases
   
15.09.025   Obligation to continue to pay rent
   
15.09.030   Rent mediation a protected right
   
15.09.035   Landlord's rights
   
15.09.040   Voluntary mediation or binding arbitration
   
15.09.045   Consolidated hearing
   
15.09.050   Landlord’s notice obligations
Rent Control
   
15.09.200   Findings and purpose
   
15.09.205   Definitions
   
15.09.210   Exemptions
   
15.09.215   Permissible rent increases
   
15.09.220   Applications for rent adjustments
   
15.09.225   Capital improvement pass- through cost recovery
   
15.09.230   Rent registry
   
15.09.235   Tenant petitions for noncompliance
   
15.09.240   Appeal and hearing procedures
   
15.09.245   Penalties and enforcement
   
15.09.250   Civil remedies
   
15.09.255   Waiver prohibited
   
15.09.260   Severability
   
15.09.265   Implementation; rulemaking; and subpoena authority
   
15.09.270   Conflict of provisions
Tenant Protections
   
15.09.300   Findings and purpose
   
15.09.305   Definitions
   
15.09.310   Evictions
   
15.09.315   For cause termination
   
15.09.320   No fault termination
   
15.09.325   Relocation assistance
   
15.09.330   Tenant protections during untenantable conditions
   
15.09.335   Tenant buyout agreements
   
15.09.340   Retaliatory eviction and anti- harassment
   
15.09.345   Penalties and enforcement
   
15.09.350   Civil remedies
   
15.09.355   Waiver prohibited
   
15.09.360   Severability
   
15.09.365   Implementation; rulemaking; and subpoena authority
   
15.09.370   Conflict of provisions
§ 15.09.005 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   The City Council finds and declares:
   A.   There shall be a Landlord-Tenant Mediation Board, the formation of
which is to build and strengthen communication between landlords and tenants,
reduces tensions in the rental housing market, and promotes the best interests
of the city;
   B.   Mediation sessions provided by the Landlord-Tenant Mediation Board
provide a confidential and privileged forum for discussion and resolution of
disputes relating to rent increases, or any other matters authorized by the
bylaws of the Landlord-Tenant Mediation Bylaws (“Bylaws”), and to educate the
parties about the landlord-tenant relationship; and
   C.   There is a shortage of rental housing in the City of Culver City
resulting in a low vacancy factor and high rents.
('65 Code, § 32-1) (Ord. No. 87-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.010 POWERS AND DUTIES; BYLAWS.
   A.   The Landlord-Tenant Mediation Board shall have the power and
responsibility to provide mediation services regarding claims of excessive or
unjustified rent increases, or any other matters authorized by the Bylaws of
the Culver City Landlord-Tenant Mediation Board (“Bylaws”), as amended.
   B.   The Bylaws shall be approved and adopted by resolution of the City
Council, by resolution, and shall set forth the duties of the Board; the
qualifications and appointment of its members; Board composition and
organization; mediation policies and procedures; and such other matters as
directed by the City Council.
('65 Code, § 32-2) (Ord. No. 87-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.015 MATTERS SUBJECT TO MANDATORY MEDIATION; PROCESS.
   A.   The following matters are subject to mandatory mediation:
      1.   Any claim a rent increase is excessive or unjustified, except as
provided in Subsection A.2 of this Section.
      2.   Mandatory mediation as provided in Subsection A.1. of this Section
shall not be applicable to a rent increase for a single-family home,
condominium unit or mobile home unit used as a rental unit, a mobile home pad,
property containing less than two (2) rental units, or property governed by a
written lease which contains a provision authorizing a rent increase at a rate
previously established by the terms of the written lease.
   B.   Mediation services shall be provided in accordance with this Chapter
and the bylaws now in effect or hereinafter amended.
('65 Code, § 32-3) (Ord. No. 87-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.020 MEDIATION OF RENT INCREASES.
   A.   If, within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of a notice of an increase
in rent, a request for mediation is filed by a tenant of a dwelling unit
subject to the rent increase, a mediation session shall be set prior to the
effective date of such rent increase.
   B.   No rent increase shall be invalid or otherwise questioned for failure
to reach agreement regarding the increase at a mediation session.
   C.   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any rent increase
established by a written lease.
('65 Code, § 32-4)
   D.   No rent increase subject to mediation pursuant to Subsections A.
through C. of this Section shall be effective unless or until the landlord or
the landlord's duly authorized agent meets in good faith with the tenant
requesting mediation at such session. Failure to pay any increase in rent
imposed in violation of the provisions of this Section shall not be grounds for
any unlawful detainer action, and if such action is instituted, the tenant may
assert this Section in defense thereto. ('65 Code, § 32-5)
(Ord. No. 87-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.025 OBLIGATION TO CONTINUE TO PAY RENT.
   Nothing set forth in this Chapter shall relieve a tenant of the obligation
to pay the rent in effect prior to the receipt of the notice of any increase,
whether or not the landlord meets with the tenant at the mediation session.
('65 Code, § 32-6) (Ord. No. 87-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.030 RENT MEDIATION A PROTECTED RIGHT.
   Use of the mediation process set forth in this Chapter is hereby declared to
be a protected right pursuant to Cal. Civil Code § 1942.5(c), as amended. It is
unlawful for a landlord to retaliate against a tenant for exercising any rights
under the law. Any waiver by a tenant of his or her rights under this Chapter
shall be void as contrary to public policy.
('65 Code, § 32-7) (Ord. No. 87-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.035 LANDLORD'S RIGHTS.
   Except for the requirement for a landlord to participate in good faith
mediation, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting in any way
the exercise of landlord's rights under any lease or agreement or any law
pertaining to the hiring of property or landlord's right to do any of the acts
described in Cal. Civil Code § 1942.5 for any lawful cause.
('65 Code, § 32-8) (Ord. No. 87- 010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.040 VOLUNTARY MEDIATION OR BINDING ARBITRATION.
   A.   If a request for mediation is filed by a tenant of a dwelling unit
subject to a rent increase at any time after the fifteenth day after receipt of
notice of the increase, a mediation session shall be held if both parties to
the dispute, or their authorized representatives, voluntarily agree to be
present and participate in the mediation process.
   B.   If a request for mediation is filed pertaining to a matter described in
Section
15.09.015.A.2., a mediation session shall be held if both the tenant and the
landlord to the dispute, or their authorized representatives, voluntarily agree
to be present and participate in the mediation process.
   C.   If a request for mediation is filed pertaining to any other matter
subject to voluntary mediation, as set forth in the Bylaws adopted by the City
Council, a mediation session shall be held if both parties to the dispute, or
their authorized representatives, voluntarily agree to be present and
participate in the mediation process.
   D.   If all parties agree to arbitration in lieu of mediation, the landlord
shall be deemed to have met the obligations of good faith mediation established
by this Chapter, upon submission of written documentation evidencing the
arbitration occurred.
('65 Code, § 32-9) (Ord. No. 87- 010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.045 CONSOLIDATED HEARING.
   A.   Whenever more than one (1) request for mediation has been filed with
respect to rental units which are under common ownership or management, such
requests may be consolidated for mediation at the mediator's discretion.
   B.   Two (2) or more persons may join in a request for mediation whenever
the dispute relates to all of the parties named.
('65 Code, § 32-10) (Ord. No. 87-010 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
§ 15.09.050 LANDLORD’S NOTICE OBLIGATIONS.
   A.   Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a
rental complex subject to the mandatory mediation requirements of this Chapter,
including new units and existing units, entered into, renewed, or continued
month-to- month, after October 24, 2019, shall include, or through an amendment
or addendum include, the following statement in text of no less than twelve
(12) point font size: “Tenant may have rights to mediation services provided by
the City of Culver City Landlord Tenant-Mediation Board, pursuant to Culver
City Municipal Code Chapter 15.09.” The foregoing statement shall be clearly
and conspicuously placed in the lease, amendment or addendum in a manner
reasonably likely to inform tenants of the availability of the City’s mediation
services.
   B.   Every notice of rent increase on a rental unit in a rental complex
subject to the mandatory mediation requirements of this Chapter, including new
units and existing units, entered into, renewed, or continued month-to-month,
shall include the following statement in text of no less than twelve (12) point
font size: “Tenant may have rights to mediation services provided by the City
of Culver City Landlord Tenant-Mediation Board, pursuant to Culver City
Municipal Code Chapter 15.09.” The foregoing statement shall be clearly and
conspicuously placed in the notice of rent increase in a manner reasonably
likely to inform tenants of the availability of the City’s mediation services.
(Ord. No. 2019-010 § 1)
RENT CONTROL
§ 15.09.200 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council of the City of Culver City finds:
   A.   Rents throughout the Los Angeles County region continue to rise as
market pressures, such as increasing real estate costs, lead to a decrease of
the affordability and stability of the housing stock. As a result, it is
increasingly difficult for tenants to find adequate, safe, and habitable
housing at reasonable rents.
   B.   According to the Culver City Housing Element, approximately 43.7% of
Culver City renters are "rent burdened," which is defined by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) as a renter-household
spending more than 30% of its household income on rent. In addition, a study by
BAE Urban Economics indicates that during the 2012-2016 period, 43% of Culver
City renter households were moderately or severely cost-burdened and over 80%
of extremely low-income households were excessively cost-burdened.
   C.   The purposes of this subchapter are to promote long-term stability and
certainty for tenants in the rental market while providing landlords an ability
to receive a fair and reasonable return with respect to the operation of their
property. This subchapter regulates rents and requires landlords to register
rental property, establishes an administrative hearing process, and provides
for procedures and guidelines for the implementation of this subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.205 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. The addition or replacement of improvements to a rental
unit(s) or common areas of the building housing the rental unit(s) as specified
in §
15.09.225.
   CODE. The Culver City Municipal Code.
   COVERED RENTAL UNIT. Any rental unit that is not exempt, pursuant to §
15.09.210.
   CPI. The Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for All Items (CPI-U)
for the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim metropolitan area (1982-84=100 reference
base), or any successor designation of that index that may later be adopted by
the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.
   CULVER CITY. The City of Culver City.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the City of Culver City, or
his or her designee.
   HOUSING DIVISION. The Housing Division of the Culver City Community
Development Department.
   HOUSING DIVISION GUIDELINES. The guidelines, procedures, and rules
promulgated pursuant to the authority set forth in §
15.09.265.
   HOUSING SERVICES.  All services provided by the landlord related to the use
or occupancy of a rental unit, including, but not limited to, insurance,
repairs, replacement, maintenance, painting, utilities, heat, water, elevator
service, laundry facilities, recreational areas and/or pools, janitorial
service, refuse removal, furnishings, parking, storage, and security services.
   INTERIM RENT CONTROL ORDINANCE. The urgency ordinance adopted by the City
Council on August 12, 2019 establishing interim rent control and tenant
protection measures for a 12-month period (Ordinance No. 2019-011), based on
the findings set forth therein; and, on June 11, 2020, extended, without
amendment or modification of its terms, through October 31, 2020.
   LANDLORD. An owner, lessor, or sublessor who receives or is entitled to
receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental unit or portion thereof,
and the representative, agent, or successor of such owner, lessor, or
sublessor.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION. A written notice from a landlord to a tenant that is
in the form required by State law to terminate a residential tenancy and that
is served in accordance with State law.
   PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN CPI. The percentage change in the annual average CPI,
which is the average of the latest 12 monthly CPIs published before the
effective date of the rent increase minus the average of the prior 12 monthly
CPIs (the "base CPI"), divided by the base CPI and multiplied by 100. The
percentage change in CPI shall be rounded to the nearest one-quarter of one
percent.
   RENT or RENTS. The sum of all periodic payments and all nonmonetary
consideration demanded or received by a landlord from a tenant for the use or
occupancy of a rental unit, including tenant's access to and use of housing
services. Rent includes, without limitation, the fair market value of goods
accepted, labor performed, or services rendered.
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. A lease, sublease or other oral or written agreement
between the landlord and tenant establishing the terms and conditions of the
tenancy.
   RENTAL UNIT. Any dwelling unit as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 1940(c),
including joint living and work quarters, located within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the City of Culver City and used for human habitation in
consideration of payment of rent, whether or not such use is legally permitted,
including mobilehomes rented by the owner of the mobilehome and accessory
dwelling units.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person responsible for, or alleged to be responsible
for, a violation of this subchapter.
   STATE. The State of California.
   TENANCY. The legal right of a tenant to the use or occupancy of the rental
unit.
   TENANT. A person entitled, by a rental agreement, or by sufferance, or by
this code or State or federal law, to the use or occupancy of any rental unit.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.210 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to any dwelling units expressly exempt
pursuant to any provision of state or federal law, and such units shall be
exempt from the provisions of this subchapter, with the exception of the
requirements of §
15.09.230. The following dwelling units are also specifically exempt from this
subchapter, with the exception of the requirements of §
15.09.230:
   A.   Any dwelling unit that has a certificate of occupancy or equivalent
permit for residential occupancy issued after February 1, 1995. For this
purpose, certificate of occupancy is the certificate first issued before the
property is used for any residential purpose. To the extent State law permits,
this exemption shall be limited to dwelling units that have a certificate of
occupancy or equivalent permit for residential occupancy issued within the
previous 15 years.
   B.   Any dwelling unit that is alienable separate from the title to any
other dwelling unit, including single-family residences, condominiums and
townhomes, but excluding: (i) mobilehomes offered for rent by the owner of the
mobilehome; and (ii) a rental unit that is wholly contained within such
separately alienable dwelling unit. To the extent State law permits, this
exemption shall be limited to dwelling units owned by a landlord who has no
direct or indirect economic interest in more than two rental units located
within or outside of Culver City, and who also is not: (i) a real estate
investment trust, as defined in § 856 of the Internal Revenue Code; (ii) a
corporation; (iii) a limited liability company in which at least one member is,
or is controlled by, a corporation; or (iv) a partnership in which at least one
partner is, or is controlled by, a corporation.
   C.   Any dwelling unit that is a subdivided interest in a subdivision, as
specified in Cal. Business and Professions Code § 11004.5(b), (d) and (f).
   D.   Any dwelling unit for which the landlord receives federal, state, or
local housing subsidies, including, but not limited to, federal housing
assistance vouchers issued under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of
1937 line 9 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 1437f).
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.215 PERMISSIBLE RENT INCREASES.
   A.   Applicability. As of October 30, 2020, no landlord may request,
receive, or retain rent for a covered rental unit from an existing tenant whose
tenancy began on or before October 30, 2020, in an amount that exceeds the
monthly rent that was in effect on October 30, 2020, plus any rent increase
authorized by this §
15.09.215. No landlord may request, receive, or retain rent for a covered
rental unit from a tenant whose tenancy began after October 30, 2020, which
amount exceeds the initial monthly rent charged for the covered rental unit,
plus any increase authorized by this §
15.09.215. Rent increases that were instituted in compliance with the Interim
Rent Control Ordinance and that took effect before October 30, 2020 shall not
be invalidated by this §
15.09.215.
   B.   Annual permissible rent increases. On or after October 30, 2020, rent
for a covered rental unit may be increased annually, without application to the
city, in an amount not to exceed the percentage change in CPI, subject to the
following provisions:
      1.   In no event shall the rent for a covered rental unit be increased
more than 5% every 12 months.
      2.   If the percentage change in CPI is less than 2%, rent for a covered
rental unit may be increased by up to 2%.
      3.   Not more than one rent increase for a covered rental unit may be
imposed in any 12-month period, except as described in §
15.09.215.B.4.
      4.   A landlord may impose a rent increase under this §
15.09.215 that takes effect sooner than 12 months following the date of the
latest permitted rent increase under the Interim Rent Control Ordinance but
such transitional increase, in combination with the prior increase, may not
result in total rent increase that exceeds the maximum amount permitted under
this §
15.09.215.B. Subsequent rent increases may only take effect every 12 months
thereafter.
   C.   Overpayments. In the event that a tenant household has paid rent in
excess of the maximum permissible increase authorized by this §
15.09.215, the landlord shall credit the tenant for the balance of the
overpayment. The landlord may elect to either: (a) pay the tenant the balance
of the overpayment directly in one lump sum; or (b) give the tenant a credit
against the rent otherwise due from the tenant to the landlord over a period of
not more than six months.
   D.   Rent increases following vacancies.
      1.   A landlord may set an initial rent for a covered rental unit without
restriction at the commencement of a new tenancy where no member of tenant's
household is an occupant of the covered rental unit only in the following
circumstances:
         (a)   The covered rental unit was voluntarily vacated by the tenant's
household. For purposes of this §
15.09.215.D, a tenant will not be considered to have voluntarily vacated if:
            (1)   The landlord served a notice of termination; or
            (2)   The tenant has opted to voluntarily vacate pursuant to §
15.09.330.F of this code.
         (b)   The covered rental unit was vacated as a result of landlord's
termination of tenancy pursuant to §
15.09.315 of this code.
         (c)   The covered rental unit was vacated as a result of landlord's
termination of tenancy pursuant to §
15.09.320 of this code; provided, if the landlord recovered possession of the
covered rental unit for use by the landlord or landlord's relative in
accordance with §
15.09.320.B of this code, the landlord or landlord's relative must have
continuously resided in the covered rental unit for three years before vacating
for this §
15.09.215.D to apply.
      2.   This §
15.09.215.D shall not apply where:
         (a)   The vacancy was the result of conduct of the landlord or the
landlord's agent, which constituted harassment prohibited by §
15.09.340 of this code or other applicable law, constructive eviction, or a
breach of the covenant of quiet enjoyment of the property; or
         (b)   The vacancy was the result of an eviction of a tenant within the
first 12 months of tenant's occupancy of the rental unit, as set forth in §
15.09.310.A.2 of this code.
      3.   After the landlord sets an initial rent for such covered rental unit
in accordance with this §
15.09.215.D, the landlord may only increase the rent in the amount authorized
by §
15.09.215.B.
   E.   Housing service adjustments. A decrease in housing services is
considered an increase in rent. A tenant may petition for an adjustment in rent
based on a decrease in housing services under the process set forth in §
15.09.235.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.220 APPLICATIONS FOR RENT ADJUSTMENTS.
   A.   If a landlord desires to increase the rent for a covered rental unit in
an amount greater than allowed in §
15.09.215.B, and the landlord contends that the limitations on rent increases
in §
15.09.215.B will prevent the landlord from receiving a fair and reasonable
return with respect to the operation of the property containing the covered
rental unit, the landlord may file a rent adjustment application with the
housing division to request an increase in rent beyond the amount permitted
under §
15.09.215.B.
   B.   The landlord shall mail a copy of the rent adjustment application by
first class mail, postage prepaid, to all tenants whose rents are the subject
of the application within five calendar days after the date the application is
filed with the housing division. Within ten calendar days after the date the
petition is filed, the landlord shall file a proof of service signed under
penalty of perjury stating that a copy of the petition was mailed to all such
tenants.
   C.   It shall be a rebuttable presumption that the annual net operating
income earned by a landlord on June 11, 2019 and rent increases allowed under
the Interim Rent Control Ordinance and §
15.09.215, provide the landlord with a fair and reasonable return with respect
to the operation of their property. A landlord shall have the burden to prove
that the additional rent increase is necessary to earn a fair and reasonable
return with respect to the operation of their property.
   D.   All rent adjustments approved by the housing division pursuant to this
§
15.09.220 may be imposed by landlord only after the following:
      1.   Landlord has provided written notice to the tenant of the rent
increase for the covered rental unit in accordance with Cal. Civil Code § 827;
and
      2.   Landlord has registered the covered rental unit pursuant to §
15.09.230 of this subchapter.
   E.   Rent adjustment applications will be considered and determined by the
Director in accordance with housing division guidelines; and the Director's
decision may be appealed to a hearing officer, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in §
15.09.240.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.225 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PASS-THROUGH COST RECOVERY.
   A.   Pass-through amount. Fifty percent of the approved cost of an eligible
capital improvement may be passed-through to the tenant in accordance with the
provisions of this §
15.09.225.
   B.   Eligible capital improvements. Capital improvements include, but are
not limited to:
      1.   The addition, but not the replacement, of the following improvements
to a covered rental unit or common areas of the building in which the covered
rental unit is located, provided such improvement has a useful life of five
years or more: air conditioning, security gates and other security items,
swimming pool, sauna or hot tub, fencing, garbage disposal, washing machine or
clothes dryer, dishwasher, major appliances, meter conversions, children's play
equipment permanently installed on the premises, and other similar improvements
as determined by the housing division.
      2.   Substantial improvements to, but not the renovation or replacement
of, any structural, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system that requires a
permit pursuant to State or local law, such as a required seismic retrofit.
      3.   Abatement of hazardous materials, such as lead-based paint or
asbestos, in accordance with applicable federal, State, and local laws.
      4.   Capital improvements cannot include regular maintenance or repairs
from wear and tear, or be the result of a landlord's failure to perform regular
maintenance and repairs.
   C.   Application process. A landlord may not pass-through approved costs of
capital improvements to tenants in covered rental units until the housing
division approves the landlord's pass-through cost recovery application and the
landlord registers each covered rental unit pursuant to §
15.09.230.
      1.   A landlord must submit a pass-through cost recovery application
pursuant to this §
15.09.225 within 120 days of completion of an eligible capital improvement.
      2.   The landlord shall mail a copy of the pass-through cost recovery
application by first class mail, postage prepaid, to all tenants whose rents
would be subject to an increase within five calendar days after the date the
application is filed with the housing division. Within ten calendar days after
the date the application is filed, the landlord shall file a proof of service
signed under penalty of perjury stating that a copy of the application was
mailed to all such tenants.
      3.   The following shall be established by housing division guidelines:
         (a)   The cost recovery calculations, amortization period and
depreciation schedules for the capital improvement pass-through cost for each
covered rental unit;
         (b)   Criteria upon which the housing division will evaluate a
landlord's pass-through cost recovery application, including, but not limited
to, whether the work was necessary to bring the property into compliance or
maintain compliance with code requirements affecting health and safety; and
         (c)   Procedures for a low-income tenant to file a request for a
hardship waiver of the pass-through cost (low-income tenant means a household
whose income does not exceed the qualifying limits for lower income families as
established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United
States Housing Act of 1937, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 50079.5).
      4.   If the capital improvement benefitted the entire building in which
the covered rental units are located, the pass-through costs shall be prorated
among all the tenants' rents on a square footage basis of each covered rental
unit, but annualized in accordance with depreciation schedules set forth in the
housing division's guidelines.
      5.   If the capital improvement inures solely to the benefit of one or
more of the covered rental units, but to less than all of the rental units
located in the building, the pass-through cost shall be annualized in
accordance with depreciation schedules set forth in the housing division's
guidelines, but shall be applied and/or prorated only with respect to the
covered rental unit or units directly benefitted.
      6.   No capital improvement pass-through cost shall be allowed which
exceeds 3% of rent in place at the time the pass-through cost recovery
application is filed with the housing division. For the purposes of such
computation, the base rent level for any time period shall not include any
previously imposed pass-through cost for capital improvement. If the total
amount of calculated pass-through costs exceeds 3%, the pass-through cost
amortization period may be extended beyond the established amortization period
to allow the landlord to recover capital improvement costs while not exceeding
the 3% maximum increase in rent.
      7.   Pass-through cost recovery applications will be considered and
determined by the Director in accordance with housing division guidelines; and
the Director's determination may be appealed to a hearing officer in accordance
with the procedures set forth in §
15.09.240.
   D.   Tenant consent. Except where capital improvements are required by law,
any capital improvement to the interior of any covered rental unit shall only
be performed with the written consent of the tenant, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld, or the landlord shall not be entitled to add to the rent
the pass-through cost for such expenditure.
   E.   No collusion. No landlord shall be entitled to recover from a tenant
any pass-through cost based upon any capital improvement expense, the
computation or representation of which has been inflated in collusion between
the landlord and a contractor or other person.
   F.   Landlord's collection process.
      1.   A landlord shall provide written notice of a pass-through cost to
tenants in accordance with Cal. Civil Code § 827.
      2.   An approved pass-through cost is not considered rent. The approved
pass-through cost should appear as a separate line item on the rent statement
along with the end date of the amortization period.
      3.   A landlord must cease collecting the monthly pass-through cost when
the landlord has recovered the total pass-through costs approved by the housing
division pursuant to this §
15.09.225.
      4.   If an existing tenant who is paying a pass-through cost vacates the
unit, and the landlord is authorized to set an initial rent for a covered
rental unit without restriction at the commencement of a new tenancy vacancy in
compliance with §
15.09.215.D, then landlord may not collect pass-through costs from a new tenant
of the rental unit, but must recover the balance of the capital improvement
costs through the new rent.
      5.   In the event a tenant paid pass-through costs in excess of the
amount approved by the housing division, or continued payments beyond the date
of expiration of the pass-through, the landlord shall reimburse the tenant for
the amount of the overpayment. The landlord may elect to either: (a) pay the
tenant the amount of the overpayment directly in one lump sum; or (b) give the
tenant a credit against the rent otherwise due from the tenant over a period
not longer than six months.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.230 RENT REGISTRY.
   A.   Registration required. Upon issuance by the housing division of a valid
written rent registration certificate, as set forth in this §
15.09.230, no landlord shall demand or accept rent for a rental unit without
first serving on the tenant, or displaying in a conspicuous place, such rent
registration certificate.
   B.   Registration process.
      1.   A landlord shall provide rent amount and tenancy information for
every rental unit on a rent registration form provided by the housing division.
The rent registration form shall be submitted by July 31, 2021 and July 31 of
each year thereafter. Registration is complete only when all of the following
information is provided: ownership information; property information; year
built and certificate of occupancy date; number of bedrooms and bathrooms for
each rental unit; the amount of rent in effect at the time of registration; and
a description of housing services.
      2.   Rental unit rent registration certificates issued after August 12,
2019 shall expire at midnight on August 31, 2021 and if not replaced with a
newly issued certificate before that date, the landlord will be deemed out of
compliance with this §
15.09.230.
      3.   Every rental unit rent registration certificate shall be updated
annually, as required by §
15.09.230.B.1, upon a new tenancy, and when there are changes in housing
services for the covered rental unit.
      4.   A landlord of a rental unit which is not registered with the housing
division shall provide the housing division, on the form approved by the
housing division and accompanied by supporting documentation, a written
declaration stating the facts upon which the landlord bases a claim of
exclusion from the requirements of §
15.09.230. If a landlord fails to submit a written declaration and supporting
documents by July 31, 2021 and July 31 of each year thereafter, the rental unit
shall be deemed to be subject to the provisions of this §
15.09.230. If a landlord declares that the rental unit is not subject to the
registration requirements of this §
15.09.230 because the rental unit is vacant, the landlord shall provide a
certification to the housing division declaring that the rental unit is and
shall remain vacant, and the rental unit shall be secured against unauthorized
entry.
      5.   For every property for which a landlord is required to procure a
rent registration certificate pursuant to this §
15.09.230, the landlord shall post a notice in a form provided by the housing
division, providing information about this §§
15.09.200, et seq. and housing division contact information. Notices must be
posted in a conspicuous location in the common area, at the entry or entries to
the building or units, or other similar location or locations as necessary to
provide tenants a reasonable opportunity to view the notice. If there is no
common area or similar location, this requirement may be satisfied by mailing
the notice to each tenant of the building, by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The notice shall be written in English and Spanish, and in any other
languages as required by the housing division.
   C.   Notice of rent information deficiencies and opportunity to cure;
appeals; and final administrative decision.
      1.   The housing division shall provide written notification to the
landlord of a failure to comply with this §
15.09.230 and allow 15 calendar days to respond. The housing division shall not
issue a rent registration certificate for the rental unit until the landlord
has substantially complied by providing the rental information as required by §
15.09.230.A.
      2.   Any landlord disputing the housing division's notification of
deficient registration may file a written appeal with the Director within ten
calendar days of the date of the notice of deficiency. The Director shall
provide a written notice within 30 calendar days of its appeal decision, which
shall be a final administrative decision.
   D.   Registration fee.
      1.   A fee for the registration of rental units may be established by
resolution of the City Council. Such fees are intended to recover the city's
reasonable costs associated with the administration and enforcement of its
residential rent control program and tenant protection program, as set forth in
§§
15.09.200 et seq. and §§
15.09.300 et seq. of this code.
      2.   A landlord may pass-through to the tenant 50% of the initial fee for
the registration of tenant's rental unit (the "pass-through fee") if such
tenant continuously occupied the rental unit during the period of August 12,
2019 through October 31, 2020. The pass-through fee is not considered rent and
should appear as a separate line item on the rent statement. A landlord may
collect a maximum of one-twelfth of the pass-through fee per month.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.235 TENANT PETITION FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   A.   If a tenant contends that a proposed or actual rent increase is not in
compliance with this subchapter or that there has been a reduction in housing
services, the tenant may file a petition with the housing division. The tenant
shall mail a copy of the petition by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
landlord within five calendar days after the date the petition is filed. Within
ten calendar days after the date the petition is filed, the tenant shall file a
proof of service signed under penalty of perjury stating that a copy of the
petition was mailed to the landlord. The petition shall include a statement
indicating the basis on which the tenant contends that a proposed or actual
rent increase or a proposed or actual reduction in housing services is in
violation of this subchapter, together with any evidence that the tenant wants
the Director to consider. The tenant shall bear the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence at the hearing that the rent increase or
reduction in housing services is not in compliance with this §§
15.09.200 et seq.
   B.   Tenant petitions for noncompliance will be considered and determined by
the Director in accordance with housing division guidelines; and the Director's
decision may be appealed to a hearing officer, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in §
15.09.240.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.240 APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURES.
   The Director's decision on a rent adjustment application, pass-through cost
recovery application or a tenant petition for noncompliance will be given in a
notice of decision. In the case of a decision on a rent adjustment application
or pass-through cost recovery application, the landlord shall, within five
calendar days after the decision date identified in a notice of decision that
approves an increase in rent or a pass-through of capital improvement costs,
deliver a copy of the notice to each affected tenant. In the case of a decision
on a tenant petition for noncompliance, the Director shall serve the notice of
decision on the tenant and the landlord concurrently. The Director's decision
may be appealed to a hearing officer in accordance with the following
procedures:
   A.   Appeal. A landlord or an affected tenant who wishes to contest the
Director's decision on a rent adjustment application or pass-through cost
recovery application, or a landlord or tenant who wishes to contest the
Director's decision on a tenant petition for noncompliance, may file a request
for appeal of the Director's decision with the housing division requesting a
hearing, which will be heard in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this §
15.09.240.B.
      1.   Appeals shall be submitted in writing on a request for appeal form
and filed with the housing division within 15 calendar days after the decision
date identified in the notice of decision. If the filing deadline falls on a
weekend, holiday, or other day when city hall is officially closed, the filing
deadline will extend to the following city hall business day.
      2.   The request for appeal shall specifically state the pertinent facts
and the basis for the appeal as required by §
15.09.240.A.5.
      3.   A landlord who files a request for appeal shall do the following:
         a.   Mail a copy of the request for appeal by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to all tenants who would be subject to a rent increase or
pass-through of capital improvement costs, or the tenant who filed the petition
for noncompliance, as applicable, within five calendar days after the date the
request for appeal is filed with the housing division.
         b.   Within ten calendar days after the date the request for appeal is
filed with the housing division, the landlord shall file a proof of service
signed under penalty of perjury stating that a copy of the request for appeal
was mailed to all such tenants.
      4.   A tenant who files a request for appeal shall do the following:
         a.   Mail a copy of the request for appeal by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the landlord or landlord's agent within five calendar days
after the date the request for appeal is filed with the housing division.
         b.   Within ten calendar days after the date the request for appeal is
filed with the housing division, the tenant shall file a proof of service
signed under penalty of perjury stating that a copy of the request for appeal
was mailed to the landlord or landlord's agent.
      5.   The request for appeal shall include:
         a.   A general statement, specifying the basis for the appeal and the
specific aspect of the decision being appealed, and shall be based upon an
error in fact or dispute of findings.
         b.   Supporting evidence substantiating the basis for the appeal.
         c.   Any other documentation or information the appealing party wants
the hearing officer to consider.
   B.   Hearing procedure.
      1.   A hearing on a request for appeal will be scheduled before a hearing
officer for a date no sooner than 15 days and no later than 60 days after
receipt of the request for appeal and proof of service in compliance with the
requirements of §
15.09.240.A, unless the hearing officer determines that good cause exists for
an extension of time.
      2.   Upon setting the hearing date, the hearing officer shall send
written notice to the appealing party of the date, time and place set for the
hearing.
      3.   If the landlord is the appealing party, upon receipt of the notice
setting the date, time and place of the hearing, the landlord shall, in the
case of a request for appeal of a rent adjustment application or pass-through
cost recovery application, post such notice in a conspicuous place at the
affected property including the covered rental units that are the subject of
the appeal. Such notice shall be placed on a written instrument that is at
least 11 inches in width and 17 inches in length, and shall be placed not less
than four feet above ground level in the common area, at the entry or entries
to the building or units, or other similar location or locations as necessary
to provide tenants a reasonable opportunity to view the notice and be advised
of the hearing. Within five calendar days of receipt of the notice of hearing,
the landlord shall personally deliver a copy of the notice to each tenant in
the affected covered rental units. In the case of landlord's request for appeal
of a tenant petition for noncompliance, the hearing officer shall send a copy
of the notice setting the date, time and place of the hearing to the tenant
concurrently with sending the notice to the landlord.
      4.   If the tenant is the appealing party, the hearing officer shall send
a copy of the notice setting the date, time and place of the hearing to the
landlord concurrently with sending the notice to the tenant.
      5.   At the hearing, the appealing party shall be given the opportunity
to testify, call witnesses and to present evidence concerning the appeal. The
hearing officer may also hear testimony and consider written evidence offered
by the tenants in the affected covered rental units and, if a tenant is the
appealing party, hear testimony and consider written evidence offered by the
landlord.
      6.   The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the landlord, affected tenants, or petitioning tenant, as
applicable, prior to issuing a written decision.
      7.   The hearing officer shall have the power to issue orders to maintain
order and decorum during the hearing.
      8.   All hearings conducted by the hearing officer shall be open to the
public.
   C.   Hearing continuance. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion,
grant a continuance of the hearing date upon a request and a showing of good
cause. The request must be made in writing and be received by the hearing
officer at least five business days prior to the hearing date. If the landlord
is the party requesting an extension, the landlord must personally deliver a
copy of the request to the affected tenant(s). If a tenant is the party
requesting an extension, the tenant must personally deliver a copy of the
request to the landlord or landlord's agent. In no event shall the continuance
be longer than 15 calendar days from the originally scheduled hearing date.
   D.   Hearing officer decision. After considering all of the testimony and
evidence submitted at the hearing, within 20 calendar days after the conclusion
of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision denying,
affirming or modifying the Director's decision and shall adopt written findings
in support of that decision. The written decision shall be served by first-
class mail, postage prepaid on the appealing party. If the landlord is the
appealing party and the appeal concerned a rent adjustment application or pass-
through cost recovery application, the landlord shall post such notice in a
conspicuous place at the property containing the affected covered rental units
and within five calendar days of receipt of the written decision, the landlord
shall personally deliver a copy of the written decision to each tenant in the
affected covered rental units. If a tenant is the appealing party or if the
landlord is the appealing party and the appeal concerned a tenant petition for
noncompliance, the hearing officer shall serve a copy of the written decision
on the landlord and the tenant concurrently. The hearing officer's decision
shall be final, unless an administrative penalty has been assessed.
   E.   Judicial review of hearing officer decision. Any person directly
aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer pertaining to a
request for appeal of a Director's decision on a rent adjustment application or
pass-through cost recovery application, may seek judicial review in the
Superior Court pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 53069.4 and/or Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure §§ 1094.5 and 1094.6.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.245 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Administrative citations. The housing division is authorized to take
appropriate steps to enforce this subchapter, including conducting
investigations of possible violations by a landlord. The city, in its sole
discretion, may choose to enforce the provisions of this subchapter through the
administrative citation process set forth in
Chapter 1.02 of this code. Notwithstanding any provision in
Chapter 1.02 to the contrary, each violation of any provision of this
subchapter may be subject to an administrative fine of up to $1,000.
   B.   Administrative appeals and judicial review of administrative citations.
      1.   Administrative appeal. Any person who receives an administrative
citation may request an administrative hearing before a hearing officer in
accordance with
Chapter 1.02 of this code.
      2.   Judicial review of hearing officer decision. Any responsible person
may seek judicial review of a hearing officer's decision pertaining to the
imposition of an administrative fine in accordance with
Chapter 1.02 of this code.
   C.   Civil action. The City Attorney is authorized to bring a civil action
and/or proceeding for violation of this subchapter, or any guideline or rule
promulgated pursuant to §
15.09.265 of this subchapter, for civil penalties, injunctive, declaratory and
other equitable relief, restitution and reasonable attorneys' fees and costs
and may take such other steps as necessary to enforce this subchapter.
   D.   Criminal penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable
as provided in
Chapter 1.01 of this code.
   E.   Separate violation. Each separate day, or any portion thereof, during
which any violation of this subchapter occurs or continues, constitutes a
separate violation.
   F.   Remedies cumulative.
      1.   The remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in this subchapter
are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations, and penalties
set forth in this code, or in any other city, county, State or federal
ordinance, laws, rules or regulations.
      2.   The city's decision to pursue or not pursue enforcement of any kind
shall not affect a tenant's rights to pursue civil remedies in accordance with
§
15.09.250 of this subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.250 CIVIL REMEDIES.
   Any tenant aggrieved by a violation of this subchapter may bring a civil
suit in an appropriate State or federal court. A landlord found to be in
violation of this subchapter shall be liable to the aggrieved tenant for
damages and for tenant's attorneys' fees and costs. Tenants are not required to
exhaust their administrative remedies under this subchapter prior to filing
suit pursuant to this §
15.09.250.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.255 WAIVER PROHIBITED.
   Any waiver of rights under this subchapter shall be void as contrary to
public policy.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.260 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this subchapter or the application thereof to any
person, property, or circumstance, is held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect other provisions or applications of this subchapter that can be given
effect without the invalid provision(s) or application, and to this end, the
provisions of this subchapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.265 IMPLEMENTATION; RULEMAKING; AND SUBPOENA AUTHORITY.
   The Director is authorized to administer and enforce this subchapter, which
may include promulgating guidelines, procedures, and rules consistent with the
provisions of this subchapter. These housing division guidelines shall have the
force and effect of law and may be relied upon by parties to determine their
rights and responsibilities under this subchapter. In administering and
enforcing this subchapter, the Director may also issue subpoenas pursuant to
Cal. Government Code § 53060.4 and may report noncompliance therewith to the
judge of the Superior Court.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
§ 15.09.270 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   In the event of any conflict between this subchapter and any other provision
of this code, this subchapter shall control.
(Ord. No. 2020-014 § 2)
TENANT PROTECTIONS
§ 15.09.300 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   In accordance with Cal. Civil Code § 1946.2(g)(1)(B), the City Council finds
the provisions of this §§
15.09.300 et seq. regulating, among other things, just cause terminations of
tenancies are more protective than Cal. Civil Code § 1946.2 for the following
reasons:
   A.   The just cause for termination of a residential tenancy under this §§
15.09.300 et seq. is consistent with Cal. Civil Code § 1946.2.
   B.   This §§
15.09.300, et seq. provides additional tenant protections that are not
prohibited by any other provisions of applicable law.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.305 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE. The Culver City Municipal Code.
   CULVER CITY. The City of Culver City.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the City of Culver City, or
his or her designee.
   FOR CAUSE TERMINATION. A termination of tenancy for one of the reasons
specified in §
15.09.315.
   HOUSING DIVISION. The Housing Division of the Culver City Community
Development Department.
   HOUSING DIVISION GUIDELINES. The guidelines, procedures, and rules
promulgated pursuant to the authority set forth in §
15.09.265.
   HOUSING SERVICES. All services provided by the landlord related to the use
or occupancy of a rental unit, including, but not limited to, insurance,
repairs, replacement, maintenance, painting, utilities, heat, water, elevator
service, laundry facilities, recreational areas and/or pools, janitorial
service, refuse removal, furnishings, parking, storage, and security services.
   LANDLORD. Landlord shall mean an owner, lessor, or sublessor who receives or
is entitled to receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental unit or
portion thereof, and the representative, agent, or successor of such owner,
lessor, or sublessor.
   MATERIAL RENTAL AGREEMENT TERM. Any provision in a rental agreement that is
reasonable, legal, and accepted in writing by the tenant as material. New terms
added to an existing rental agreement cannot be considered a material rental
agreement term unless expressly consented to in writing by the tenant.
   NO FAULT TERMINATION. A termination of tenancy for one of the reasons
specified in §
15.09.320.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION. A written notice from a landlord to a tenant that is
in the form required by State law to terminate a residential tenancy and that
is served in accordance with State law.
   RENT or RENTS. The sum of all periodic payments and all nonmonetary
consideration demanded or received by a landlord from a tenant for the use or
occupancy of a rental unit, including tenant's access to and use of housing
services. Rent includes, without limitation, the fair market value of goods
accepted, labor performed, or services rendered.
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. A lease, sublease or other oral or written agreement
between the landlord and tenant establishing the terms and conditions of the
tenancy
   RENTAL UNIT. Any dwelling unit as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 1940(c),
including joint living and work quarters, located within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the City of Culver City and used for human habitation in
consideration of payment of rent, whether or not such use is legally permitted,
including mobilehomes rented by the owner of the mobilehome and accessory
dwelling units.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person responsible for, or alleged to be responsible
for, a violation of this subchapter.
   SMALL LANDLORD. A landlord who has no direct or indirect economic interest
in more than three rental units located within or outside of Culver City. SMALL
LANDLORD shall not include any of the following: (i) a real estate investment
trust, as defined in § 856 of the Internal Revenue Code; (ii) a corporation;
(iii) a limited liability company in which at least one member is, or is
controlled by, a corporation; or (iv) a partnership in which at least one
partner is, or is controlled by, a corporation.
   STATE.  The State of California.
   TENANCY. The legal right of a tenant to the use or occupancy of the rental
unit.
   TENANT. A person entitled, by a rental agreement, or by sufferance, or by
this code or State or federal law, to the use or occupancy of any rental unit.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.310 EVICTIONS.
   A.   Application.
      1.   Except as provided in §
15.09.310.A.2 and 3, this §
15.09.310 shall apply to any notice of termination, regardless of the date it
is delivered to a tenant of a rental unit, if the tenant has not vacated the
rental unit as of October 30, 2020.
      2.   This §
15.09.310 shall only apply after at least one tenant has continuously and
lawfully occupied the rental unit for 12 months or more.
      3.   This §
15.09.310 shall not apply to a rental unit that lacks its own bathroom or
kitchen facility and is occupied by a tenant who uses a bathroom or kitchen
facility in common with the landlord or a member of the landlord's immediate
family.
   B.   Cause required to terminate tenancy. No landlord may terminate a
tenancy unless the landlord can demonstrate all of the following:
      1.   The landlord served a notice of termination on the tenant in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §
1162; and
      2.   The termination qualifies as a for cause termination or no fault
termination; and
      3.   The notice of termination states the reason for termination in
reasonable detail and states whether the termination is a for cause termination
or a no fault termination; and
      4.   The landlord has given the notice to the tenant required by this §
15.09.310.B.4, as follows:
         (a)   The notice must be in writing of no less than 12-point type and
include the following: "The Culver City Municipal Code requires that after at
least one tenant has continuously and lawfully occupied a rental unit for 12
months or more, the landlord must provide a statement of cause in any notice to
terminate a tenancy. See §§
15.09.300 et seq., of the Culver City Municipal Code for more information."
         (b)   The notice must be signed by the tenant and with a copy
delivered to the tenant or as an addendum to the rental agreement.
         (c)   For a tenancy existing prior to October 30, 2020, the notice
must be given to the tenant no later than November 30, 2020.
      5.   If the termination is a no fault termination, the landlord has
provided the tenant with the notice of relocation assistance required by §
15.09.325.G.
      6.   The landlord has submitted to the Culver City Housing Division, 9770
Culver Boulevard, Culver City, CA 90232, via certified mail, return receipt
requested, within five calendar days after service on the tenant, a true and
complete copy of the notice of termination, with proof of such service on the
tenant(s) attached. Evidence of proof of service may include receipt of
delivery of the notice by the tenant or a sworn statement by the landlord under
penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that confirms
service of the notice of termination on the tenant in accordance with Cal. Code
of Civil Procedure § 1162. Landlord shall submit proof of service to the city
and shall submit copies of any notice of relocation assistance required by §
15.09.325.G as evidence that landlord has complied with this §
15.09.310.B. If the notice of termination was served on tenant prior to October
30, 2020 and landlord has not yet submitted the documentation required by §
5.B.4 of the interim rent control ordinance, landlord shall submit to the
housing division the documentation required by this §
15.09.310.B within five days of October 30, 2020.
   C.   Void notice of termination. If the landlord fails to satisfy the
requirements of §
15.09.310.B or if the landlord accepts rent for the continued use of the rental
unit beyond the term of the terminated tenancy, then the notice of termination
will be deemed void and of no further force or effect.
   D.   Challenge to termination of tenancy. A tenant may challenge the
validity of a landlord's legal action to terminate a tenancy, including a suit
for unlawful detainer, based on a landlord's failure to comply with any or all
of the requirements included in §
15.09.310.B, including the landlord's failure to provide the dousing division
with a true and accurate copy of the notice of termination with proof of
service. The housing division will accept copies of all notices of termination
received in accordance with this §
15.09.310 and, upon written request of a tenant who verifies residency in the
rental unit that is the subject of the notice of termination, and/or upon the
written request of the landlord who submitted the notice of termination, the
housing division will endeavor to provide confirmation to the requesting party
that such notice of termination was received. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the city assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions in its response, and
the city's response or lack thereof shall in no way create a city duty, impose
an obligation on the city with respect to the requirements of this §
15.09.310, or otherwise lead to legal or equitable liability on behalf of the
city.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.315 FOR CAUSE TERMINATION.
   If a landlord can show any of the following circumstances with respect to a
termination of tenancy, the termination will qualify as a for cause
termination:
   A.   Tenant failed to pay rent within three days of written notice being
served on tenant by landlord demanding payment as provided in Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1161(2);
   B.   Tenant violated a material rental agreement term and did not cure such
violation within ten days after receiving written notice from the landlord of
such violation, which ten-day period shall run concurrently with the notice
periods required by Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1161(3) and Cal. Civil Code
§ 1946.2(c);
   C.   Tenant has continued to refuse, after landlord has provided a written
request, reasonable access to the rental unit by the landlord in accordance
with Cal. Civil Code § 1101.5 and § 1954 and Cal. Health and Safety Code §
13113.7 and § 17926.1;
   D.   Tenant has used the rental unit to create a nuisance or for an illegal
purpose as provided in Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1161(4), including:
      1.   A crime committed by a tenant of a rental unit which involves use of
a gun, a deadly weapon or serious bodily injury and for which a police report
has been filed; or
      2.   A threat of violent crime, which includes any statement made by a
tenant, or at his or her request, by his or her agent to any person who is on
the premises that includes the rental unit or to the landlord, or his or her
agent, threatening the commission of a crime which will result in death or
great bodily injury to another person, with the specific intent that the
statement is to be taken as a threat, even if there is no intent of actually
carrying it out, when on its face and under the circumstances in which it is
made, it is so unequivocal, immediate and specific as to convey to the person
threatened, a gravity of purpose and an immediate prospect of execution of the
threat, and thereby causes that person reasonably to be in sustained fear for
his or her own safety or for his or her immediate family's safety; or
      3.   Tenant has created or is maintaining a dangerous condition or an
unsanitary condition that endangers health, safety and welfare or physically
damages the unit beyond normal wear and tear, and that condition has not been
promptly abated or repaired after written notice to the tenant from the
landlord and the passage of a reasonable cure period.
   It shall be a defense to an action for possession of a rental unit under
this §
15.09.315.D if the court determines that:
      1.   The tenant or the tenant's household member is a victim of an act or
acts that constitute domestic violence or sexual assault or stalking; and
      2.   The notice of termination is substantially based upon the act or
acts constituting domestic violence or sexual assault or stalking against the
tenant or a tenant's household member, including but not limited to an action
for possession based on complaints of noise, disturbances, or repeated presence
of police.
   E.   Tenant was employed by the landlord to serve as a resident manager or
other employee, was provided with the rental unit as part of or as a condition
of the employment and the employment has been terminated. This provision shall
not apply to any tenant whose tenancy in the building or complex housing the
rental unit commenced prior to assuming managerial responsibilities or whose
status as a tenant commenced prior to his or her status as a resident manager.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.320 NO FAULT TERMINATION.
   If a landlord can show any of the following circumstances with respect to a
termination of tenancy, the termination will qualify as a no fault termination:
   A.   Landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession in order to
imminently:
      1.   Demolish the rental unit.
      2.   Remove the rental unit permanently from rental housing use pursuant
to State law.
   B.   Subject to §
15.09.320.B.2, landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession of the rental
unit for use and occupancy by:
      1.   (a)   Landlord or landlord's spouse, registered domestic partner,
children, grandchildren, parents, or grandparents, as a primary place of
residence. The rental unit must be occupied as the primary residence within
three months of the tenant household vacating the rental unit, and the rental
unit must continue to be occupied as the primary residence for at least three
years. However, landlord may use this §
15.09.320.B.1 to qualify as a no fault termination only once for a particular
person in all rental units in Culver City owned by the landlord.
         (b)   If the rental agreement was entered into on or after July 1,
2020, this §
15.09.320.B.1 shall apply only if the tenant agrees, in writing, to the
termination, or if a provision of the rental agreement allows the landlord to
terminate the rental agreement if the landlord, or their spouse, domestic
partner, children, grandchildren, parents, or grandparents, unilaterally
decides to occupy the rental unit.
      2.   A landlord may not recover possession of a rental unit pursuant to
the provisions of §
15.09.320.B.1 if:
         (a)   Any tenant in the rental unit has continuously resided in the
rental unit for at least ten years, and a member of tenant's household is
either: (i) 62 years of age or older; or (ii) disabled as defined in Title 42
United States Code § 423 or handicapped as defined in Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 50072;
         (b)   Any tenant in the rental unit or member of tenant's household is
terminally ill as certified by a treating physician licensed to practice in the
State of California;
         (c)   Any tenant in the rental unit is a low-income tenant (low-income
tenant means a household whose income does not exceed the qualifying limits for
lower income families as established and amended from time to time pursuant to
§ 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, or as otherwise defined in Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 50079.5; or
         (d)   The rental unit is the primary residence of a school-aged
(grades Pre-K-12) child enrolled in a school located in the public school
district to which the rental unit is assigned, and the notice of termination
requires that the rental unit be vacated during the current school term.
      3.   A landlord may recover possession of a rental unit pursuant to the
provisions of §
15.09.320.B.1 if the rental unit has the same number of bedrooms needed by the
landlord or the landlord's eligible relative, and only if it is the most
recently occupied rental unit in the rental complex, and the tenant of that
rental unit is not protected from termination of tenancy pursuant to the
provisions of §
15.09.320.B.2. However, a landlord may recover possession of a different rental
unit if required because of a medical necessity of landlord or landlord's
eligible relative, as certified by a treating physician licensed to practice in
the State of California.
   C.   Landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession of the rental unit
in order to comply with a deed restriction, regulatory restriction contained in
an agreement with a government agency, or other recorded document as affordable
housing for persons and families of extremely low, very low, low, or moderate
income, or an agreement that provides housing subsidies for affordable housing
for persons and families for extremely low, very low, low, or moderate income,
as defined in this code or comparable State or federal statutes.
   D.   Landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession of the rental unit
in order to comply with a government agency's order to vacate, or any other
order that necessitates the vacating of the rental unit or the building housing
the rental unit, as a result of a violation of this code or any other provision
of law.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.325 RELOCATION ASSISTANCE.
   A.   If a notice of termination is based on the no fault termination grounds
set forth in §
15.09.320 of this subchapter, then the landlord shall pay a relocation fee in
the amount of three times the greater of tenant's current monthly rent in
effect or the small area fair market rent established by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development for a comparable unit in the same ZIP code, plus
$1,000. The relocation fee established by this §
15.09.325 shall be reduced by 50% for a small landlord, only in the case where
the no fault termination is based on grounds set forth in §
15.09.320.B.1.
   B.   The relocation fee shall be paid to the tenant or tenants as follows:
      1.   The entire relocation fee shall be paid to a tenant who is the only
tenant in a rental unit; or
      2.   If a rental unit is occupied by two or more tenants, then each
tenant of the rental unit shall be paid a pro-rata share of the relocation fee.
      3.   Landlord may deduct from the relocation fee payable any and all past
due rent owed by tenant during the 12 months prior to termination of tenancy
and may deduct from the relocation fee any amounts paid by the landlord for any
extraordinary wear and tear or damage cause by the tenant, cleaning, or other
purposes served by a security deposit as provided in the rental agreement, to
the extent the security deposit is insufficient to provide the amounts due for
such costs. The past due rent deductible under this §
15.09.325.B.3 excludes any rent that lawfully accrued during the city's
Residential Tenant Eviction Moratorium Period (March 16, 2020 through September
30, 2020) established by the 22nd Supplement to Public Order issued by the
Director of Emergency Services on August 4, 2020 and confirmed by the City
Council on August 10, 2020 by Resolution No. 2020-R080.
      4.   After taking into account any adjustments in the amount of the
relocation assistance set forth in §
15.09.325.B.3, the landlord shall pay one-half of the relocation assistance no
later than five business days following service of the notice of termination
and one-half of the relocation assistance no later than five business days
after the tenant has vacated the rental unit.
   C.   This §
15.09.325 shall not apply in any of the following circumstances:
      1.   Tenant received written notice, prior to entering into a rental
agreement, that an application to subdivide the property for condominium, stock
cooperative or community apartment purposes was on file with the city or had
already been approved, whichever the case may be, and that the existing
building would be demolished or relocated in connection with the proposed new
subdivision, and the notice of termination is based on the grounds set forth in
§
15.09.320.A.
      2.   Tenant received written notice, prior to entering into a rental
agreement, that an application to convert the building to a condominium, stock
cooperative or community apartment project was on file with the city or had
already been approved, whichever the case may be, and the notice of termination
is based on the grounds set forth in §
15.09.320.A.
      3.   The landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession of the rental
unit in order to comply with a governmental agency's or court's order to vacate
the rental unit or the building housing the rental unit due to conditions
caused by a natural disaster or act of God.
   D.   Notwithstanding the date of the notice of termination, this §
15.09.325 shall apply in any case where tenant has received a notice of
termination based on the no fault termination grounds set forth in §
15.09.320, but has not yet vacated the rental unit as of October 30, 2020.
   E.   The requirements set forth in this §
15.09.325 are applicable to all rental units, regardless of whether the rental
unit was created, leased, subleased or occupied in violation of any provision
of law.
   F.   Nothing in this §
15.09.325 relieves a landlord from the obligation to provide relocation
assistance pursuant to any other provision of local, State or federal law. If a
tenant is entitled to monetary relocation benefits from the landlord pursuant
to any other provision, of local, State or federal law or if the tenant
receives monetary relocation benefits from a government agency, then such
monetary benefits shall operate as a credit against monetary benefits required
to be paid to the tenant under this §
15.09.325.
   G.   When relocation assistance is required by this §
15.09.325, the landlord must provide written notice to the tenant of the
tenant's entitlement to relocation assistance at the same time the landlord
serves a notice of termination. Such notice shall be in at least 12-point type
and shall be substantially consistent with the following: "Pursuant to the
requirements of the Culver City Municipal Code, you may be entitled to
relocation assistance. Qualifying tenants are entitled to relocation assistance
in the amount of three (3) times Tenant's current monthly Rent in effect, plus
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The amount of relocation assistance provided
to you may be less if your Landlord qualifies as a Small Landlord. See Culver
City Municipal Code Section
15.09.325 for more information."
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.330 TENANT PROTECTIONS DURING TEMPORARY UNTENANTABLE CONDITIONS.
   A.   Temporary untenantable conditions resulting from the activities
described in §
15.09.330.C, below, are not a valid basis for no fault termination under §
15.09.320.
   B.   Landlords must mitigate untenantable conditions resulting from the
activities described in §
15.09.330..C, below, either through actions to ensure that tenants can safely
remain in their rental unit during the work or through the temporary relocation
of tenants to comparable alternative housing accommodations. These two
mitigation measures should not be regarded as mutually exclusive but rather as
complementary approaches that might be appropriate to different stages of the
construction. Untenantable conditions include the conditions described in Cal.
Civil Code § 1941.1 and any other condition that makes the rental unit
incapable of being safely occupied.
   C.   The activities described below will be subject to the mitigation
requirements of this §
15.09.330.:
      1.   Substantial rehabilitation consisting of the replacement or
substantial modification of any structural, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
system that requires a permit from a governmental agency, or the abatement of
hazardous materials, including lead-based paint, mold, or asbestos, in
accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws, that cannot be
reasonably accomplished in a safe manner with the tenant in place. Cosmetic
improvements alone, including painting, decorating, and minor repairs, or other
work that can be performed safely without having the residential real property
vacated, do not qualify as substantial rehabilitation.
      2.   Work performed in order to comply with housing, health, building, or
safety laws of the State or this code, including but not limited to work
performed to correct existing untenantable conditions.
      3.   Tenant is required to temporarily vacate a rental unit upon the
order of any government officer or agency.
      4.   Fumigation occurs that cannot be completed when a rental unit is
occupied.
   D.   In order to mitigate temporary untenantable conditions, in accordance
with §
15.09.330..B, a landlord must:
      1.   Provide mitigation measures that will meet the standards set forth
in applicable housing, health, building and safety laws, unless temporary
relocation benefits are provided;
      2.   Provide for protection of tenant's personal property during
construction;
      3.   Provide for reasonable alternative parking for a tenant otherwise
entitled to parking;
      4.   Provide for protection of tenants to exposure at any time to toxic
or hazardous materials including, but not limited to, lead-based paint and
asbestos;
      5.   Take reasonable steps to prevent the disruption of major systems
during construction;
      6.   Provide for the safe storage of construction equipment and
materials;
      7.   Provide for the safe ingress and egress of tenant and tenant's
guests;
      8.   Conform to permitted construction hours under this code or project
permits;
      9.   Post a notification to tenants 30 days prior to commencement of
construction or, as soon as practicable in the event of an emergency and in no
event less than 24 hours prior, in an easily observable location at or near
tenant entrances, which notice shall state the expected duration of the
construction work and briefly describe the nature of the work, and shall remain
posted throughout the course of construction.
   E.   Temporary relocation.
   1.   If the activities described in §
15.09.330.C will make the rental unit an untenantable dwelling, as defined in
Cal. Civil Code § 1941.1, or will expose the tenant at any time to toxic or
hazardous materials including, but not limited to, lead-based paint and
asbestos, the landlord shall provide tenant with the following temporary
relocation benefits during the temporary displacement period:
      (a)   Relocation to a motel or hotel accommodation which is safe,
sanitary, comparable to the tenant's sleeping arrangement, located in Culver
City, or if suitable accommodation is not available within Culver City, then
within two miles of the tenant's rental unit, and contains standard amenities
such as a telephone and television;
         (b)   Reasonable compensation for meals, if the temporary
accommodation lacks cooking facilities;
         (c)   Reasonable compensation for laundry, if tenant's rental unit
included laundry facilities inside the rental unit and the temporary
accommodation does not include laundry facilities inside the unit;
         (d)   Reasonable accommodation for pets that were permitted in
tenant's rental unit under the terms of the rental agreement or by law if the
temporary accommodation does not accept pets;
         (e)   Any costs related to relocating the tenant to temporary housing
accommodations, regardless of whether those costs exceed rent paid by the
tenant for tenant's rental unit; and
         (f)   Any costs related to returning tenant to his/her rental unit, if
applicable.
      2.   Unless otherwise agreed upon by landlord and tenant, the landlord
shall make payment directly to the motel or hotel as required under §
15.09.330.E.1.a. The landlord shall pay for lodging in the motel or hotel, even
if the cost of such lodging is more expensive than the tenant's existing rent
calculated on a daily basis. All other compensation under §
15.09.330.E.1 shall be payable directly to the tenant, unless otherwise agreed
upon by the landlord and tenant.
      3.   The landlord shall have the option, in lieu of providing tenant
relocation in accordance with §
15.09.3300.E.1.a, of providing the tenant with comparable housing at any time
during the period of the displacement, subject to the following:
         (a)   Such housing shall be comparable to the tenant's rental unit in
location, size, number of bedrooms, furnishings, appliances, accessibility,
type and quality of construction, proximity to services and institutions upon
which the displaced tenant depends, and amenities, including the allowance for
pets should the tenant have pets permitted under the rental agreement or by
law.
         (b)   If the landlord provides comparable housing at any time during
the period of displacement, the tenant shall be entitled to remain at that same
comparable housing unit throughout the period of displacement.
         (c)   The landlord shall pay all costs associated with the temporary
housing, including rent, even if the temporary housing is more expensive than
the tenant's existing rental unit.
         (d)   If the temporary housing is unfurnished, the landlord shall
provide essential furnishings and household items or pay reasonable moving
costs for the tenant to move essential furniture and household items to and
from the rental unit and the temporary housing.
         (e)   The landlord and tenant may agree that the tenant will occupy a
non-comparable replacement unit provided that the tenant is compensated for any
reduction in accommodations, amenities, and services.
      4.   A landlord and tenant may mutually agree to allow the landlord to
pay the tenant a per diem amount for each day of temporary relocation in lieu
of providing temporary replacement housing. The agreement shall be in writing
and signed by the landlord and tenant and shall contain the tenant's
acknowledgment that he/she received notice of his/her relocation rights under
this §
15.09.330.E and that the tenant understands his/her rights.
      5.   The temporary housing required by this §
15.09.330.E shall be available to tenant within 24-hours of service or posting
of any order or notice to vacate. In the event the tenant is not required to
immediately vacate, temporary housing shall be available to tenant as of the
date the tenant actually vacates.
      6.   The displacement and relocation of a tenant pursuant to this §
15.09.330.E shall not terminate the tenancy of the displaced tenant. The
displaced tenant shall have the right to reoccupy his or her rental unit upon
the completion of the work necessary for the rental unit to comply with
housing, health, building or safety laws or any governmental order and the
tenant shall retain all rights of tenancy that existed prior to the
displacement.
      7.   The tenant shall remain responsible to pay rent to the landlord that
is due for the tenant's existing rental unit during the period of displacement.
      8.   The landlord and the tenant may mutually agree upon a housing type
or benefits other than the temporary housing or benefits required by this §
15.09.330. A copy of the written agreement signed by both landlord and tenant
must be filed with the housing division within five business days after the
agreement has been fully executed.
      9.   The landlord shall provide written notice, before the tenant is
temporarily displaced advising the tenant of the right to reoccupy the rental
unit under the existing terms of tenancy once the work which necessitated the
displacement is completed and the projected completion date of such work.
Unless the landlord provides the temporary replacement housing, the tenant
shall provide the landlord with the address to be used for the notifications
required to be provided by the landlord under this §
15.09.330.E. When the date on which the rental unit will be available for
reoccupancy is known, or as soon as possible thereafter, the landlord shall
provide written notice to the tenant by personal delivery, or registered or
certified mail. If it became necessary to temporarily relocate the tenant for
over 30 days and the tenant has a separate tenancy agreement with a third party
housing provider, the landlord shall give the tenant a minimum of 30 days
written notice to reoccupy the rental unit. In all other cases, the landlord
shall give the tenant a minimum of seven days written notice to reoccupy,
unless the landlord gave the tenant written notice of the date of reoccupancy
prior to the start of temporary relocation.
      10.   A copy of all written notices to tenant required by this §
15.09.330.E shall be filed with the housing division within five business days
after providing such notice to tenant.
      11.   Nothing in this §
15.09.330 shall be construed as authorizing a landlord to require a tenant to
vacate a unit, except as permitted under federal, state, or local law.
      12.   The remedies under this §
15.09.330 are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available under
federal, State, or local law.
   F.   Option to voluntarily terminate tenancy.
      1.   If the temporary untenantable conditions of a rental unit are
projected to persist for 30 days or more, the tenant of that rental unit shall
have the option to voluntarily terminate the tenancy pursuant to a tenant
buyout agreement in accordance with the provisions of §
15.09.335, and the return of any security deposit that cannot be retained by
the landlord under applicable law.
      2.   If the temporary untenantable conditions of a rental unit continue
for 30 days longer than the projected completion date of the work, as set forth
in the written notice to tenant required by §
15.09.330.E.9, the tenant's option to voluntarily terminate the tenancy
pursuant to a tenant buyout agreement in accordance with the provisions of §
15.09.335 of this subchapter shall be renewed.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.335 TENANT BUYOUT AGREEMENTS.
   A.   Landlord's disclosure prior to buyout offer. Prior to making a buyout
offer, a landlord shall provide the tenant a written disclosure, on a form
approved by the housing division, that shall include all of the following:
      1.   A statement the tenant has a right not to enter into buyout
negotiations or a buyout agreement;
      2.   A statement the tenant may choose to consult with an attorney before
entering into a buyout agreement;
      3.   A statement the tenant may rescind the buyout agreement for up to 45
days after it is fully executed;
      4.   A statement the tenant may contact the housing division for
information about other buyout agreements in the tenant's neighborhood and
other relevant information;
      5.   Any other information required by the housing division consistent
with the purpose and provisions of this §
15.09.335; and
      6.   A space for tenant to sign and write the date the landlord provided
the tenant with the disclosure.
   B.   Requirement for buyout agreements. A buyout agreement that does not
satisfy all the requirements of this §
15.09.335 shall be deemed void and of no force or effect. The buyout agreement
shall:
      1.   Be in writing in the tenant's primary language. The landlord shall
give tenant a copy of the proposed buyout agreement at least ten business days
before it is executed.
      2.   Include the following statement in bold letters in at least 14 point
type in close proximity to the space reserved for the tenant's signature:
         (a)   "You may cancel this buyout agreement in writing at any time
before the forty-fifth (45th) day after all parties have signed this buyout
agreement."
         (b)   "You have a right not to enter into a buyout agreement."
         (c)   "You may choose to consult with an attorney before signing this
buyout agreement. The Culver City Housing Division may also have information
about other buyout agreements in your neighborhood."
      3.   Provide to the tenant a copy of the fully executed buyout agreement.
      4.   Include a buyout amount that is no less than the amount of
relocation assistance required by §
15.09.325.A.
   C.   Rescission of buyout agreement. A tenant shall have the right to
rescind a buyout agreement for up to 45 days after its execution by all
parties. In order to rescind a buyout agreement, the tenant must hand-deliver,
email, or send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a statement to the
landlord indicating the tenant has rescinded the buyout agreement.
   D.   Filing of buyout agreement and disclosure notice. The landlord shall
file a copy of the executed buyout agreement, along with proof of service to
the tenant of the disclosure notice as required in this §
15.09.335, within 20 days after the buyout agreement is executed by all
parties. Buyout agreements and disclosure notices shall be filed with the
housing division.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.340 RETALIATORY EVICTION AND ANTI-HARASSMENT.
   A.   Retaliatory eviction.
      1.   If the primary intent of the landlord in terminating a tenancy or
refusing to renew a tenancy is retaliatory in nature, and if the tenant is not
in default as to the payment of rent, then the landlord may not terminate the
tenancy or refuse to renew the tenancy or otherwise cause the tenant to vacate
the rental unit.
      2.   Retaliation against a tenant because of the tenant's exercise of
rights under this subchapter is prohibited. In an action to recover possession
of the rental unit, proof of the exercise by the tenant of rights under this
subchapter or other applicable law within six months prior to the alleged act
of retaliation shall create a rebuttable presumption that the landlord's act
was retaliatory.
      3.   Retaliation claims may be raised as a defense in an unlawful
detainer action or may be raised in other appropriate judicial proceedings and
the court may consider the protections afforded by this subchapter in
evaluating a claim of retaliation. Landlords shall not be subject to the city's
enforcement of this §
15.09.340.A under §
15.09.345.
   B.   Anti-harassment. No landlord, agent, contractor, subcontractor or
employee of the landlord shall violate the tenant protections in Cal. Civil
Code § 789.3 and § 1940.2, California's Fair Employment and Housing Act, the
federal Fair Housing Act, or similar state and federal laws, or engage in any
acts or omissions of such significance as to substantially interfere with or
disturb the comfort, repose, peace, or quiet of any person lawfully entitled to
occupancy of a rental unit, including but not limited to the following:
      1.   Acting in bad faith, interrupt, terminate, or fail to provide
housing services required by the rental agreement or by federal, State, county,
or local housing, health, or safety laws;
      2.   Acting in bad faith, fail to perform repairs and maintenance
required by the rental agreement or by federal, State, county or local housing,
health, or safety laws;
      3.   Acting in bad faith, fail to exercise due diligence in completing
repairs and maintenance once undertaken or fail to follow appropriate industry
standards or protocols designed to minimize exposure to noise, dust, lead,
paint, mold, asbestos, or other building materials with potentially harmful
health impacts;
      4.   Abuse the landlord's right of access into a rental unit as
established and restricted by State law. This includes, but is not limited to,
entries for inspections that are not related to necessary repairs or services;
entries that are unreasonable in frequency or duration; entries that improperly
target individual occupants or are used to collect evidence against an occupant
or are otherwise beyond the scope of a lawful entry;
      5.   Repeatedly mistreat an occupant of the rental unit during in-person
conversations, through social media postings or messages, or other
communications, with language that a reasonable person would consider likely to
cause fear or provoke violence;
      6.   Influence or attempt to influence a tenant to vacate a rental unit
through fraud, intimidation or coercion, which shall include but is not limited
to threatening to report a tenant to the United States Department of Homeland
Security;
      7.   Threaten an occupant of the rental unit, by word or gesture, with
physical harm;
      8.   Knowingly and intentionally violate any law which prohibits
discrimination against the tenant based on race, gender, sexual preference,
sexual orientation, ethnic background, nationality, religion, age, parenthood,
marriage, pregnancy, disability, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), occupancy by a minor child, or source of
income;
      9.   Make a sexual demand on a tenant in order for the tenant to obtain
needed maintenance on the rental unit, or to obtain a rent concession or
additional housing services, or to avoid an eviction, or make other quid pro
quo sexual demands on a tenant; subject a tenant to severe or pervasive
unwelcome touching, kissing, or groping; make severe or pervasive unwelcome,
lewd comments about a tenant's body; send a tenant severe or pervasive
unwelcome, sexually suggestive texts or enter the rental unit without
invitation or permission; or engage in other actions that create a hostile
environment;
      10.   Take action to terminate any tenancy, including serving any notice
of termination or bringing any action to recover possession of a rental unit,
based upon facts which the landlord has no reasonable cause to believe to be
true or upon a legal theory which the landlord knows is untenable under the
facts known to the landlord. No landlord shall be liable under this §
15.09.340.B.10 for bringing an action to recover possession unless and until
the tenant has obtained a favorable termination of that action;
      11.   Remove from the rental unit personal property, furnishings, or any
other items without the prior written consent of the tenant, except pursuant to
enforcement of a legal termination of tenancy;
      12.   Offer payments to a tenant to vacate, including the offer of a
buyout agreement under §
15.09.335, more frequently than once every six months, after the tenant has
notified the landlord in writing that the tenant does not desire to receive
further offers of payments to vacate;
      13.   Attempt to coerce a tenant to vacate with offers of payment to
vacate, including offers of a buyout agreement under §
15.09.335, which are accompanied with threats or intimidation. This shall not
include settlement offers made in good faith and not accompanied with threats
or intimidation in pending unlawful detainer actions;
      14.   Refuse to acknowledge receipt of a tenant's rent payment made
during the term of the tenancy and in accordance with the rental agreement;
      15.   Refuse to cash a rent check for over 30 days when the check is
given to cover rent during the term of the tenancy and in accordance with the
rental agreement;
      16.   Request information that violates a tenant's right to privacy
including, but not limited to, residency or citizenship status, protected class
status, or social security number, except as required by law or, in the case of
a social security number, for the purpose of determining the tenant's
qualifications for a tenancy; or release any such information that is in
landlord's possession, except as required or authorized by law;
      17.   Violate a tenant's right to privacy in the rental unit, including
but not limited to, entering, photographing, or video recording portions of a
rental unit that are beyond the scope of an authorized entry or inspection;
      18.   Interfere with a tenant's right to quiet use and enjoyment of a
rental unit as that right is defined by State law;
      19.   Other acts or omissions that cause, are likely to cause, or are
intended to cause any person lawfully entitled to occupancy of a rental unit to
vacate such rental unit or to surrender or waive any rights in relation to such
occupancy; or
      20.   Interfere with the right of tenant to:
         (a)   Organize as tenants and engage in concerted activities with
other tenants for the purpose of mutual aid and protection;
         (b)   Provide access to tenant organizers, advocates, or
representatives working with or on behalf of tenants living at the property;
         (c)   Convene tenant or tenant organization meetings in an appropriate
space accessible to tenants under the terms of their rental agreement; or
         (d)   Distribute and post literature in common areas, including lobby
areas and bulletin boards, informing other tenants of their rights and of
opportunities to participate in organized tenant activities.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.345 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Administrative citations. The housing division is authorized to take
appropriate steps to enforce this subchapter, including conducting
investigations of possible violations by a landlord. The city, in its sole
discretion, may choose to enforce the provisions of this subchapter through the
administrative citation process set forth in Chapter 1.02 of this code.
Notwithstanding any provision in Chapter 1.02 to the contrary, each violation
of any provision of this subchapter may be subject to an administrative fine of
up to $1,000.
   B.   Administrative appeals and judicial review of administrative citations.
      1.   Administrative appeal. Any person who receives an administrative
citation may request an administrative hearing before a hearing officer in
accordance with Chapter 1.02 of this code.
      2.   Judicial review of hearing officer decision. Any responsible person
may seek judicial review of a hearing officer's decision pertaining to the
imposition of an administrative fine in accordance with
Chapter 1.02 of this code.
   C.   Civil action. The City Attorney is authorized to bring a civil action
and/or proceeding for violation of this subchapter, or any guideline or rule
promulgated pursuant to §
15.09.365, for civil penalties, injunctive, declaratory and other equitable
relief, restitution and reasonable attorneys' fees and costs and may take such
other steps as necessary to enforce this subchapter.
   D.   Criminal penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable
as provided in
Chapter 1.01 of this code.
   E.   Separate violation. Each separate day, or any portion thereof, during
which any violation of this subchapter occurs or continues, constitutes a
separate violation.
   F.   Remedies cumulative.
      1.   The remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in this subchapter
are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations, and penalties
set forth in this code, or in any other city, county, State or federal
ordinance, laws, rules or regulations.
      2.   The city's decision to pursue or not pursue enforcement of any kind
shall not affect a tenant's rights to pursue civil remedies in accordance with
§
15.09.350.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.350 CIVIL REMEDIES.
   Any tenant aggrieved by a violation of this subchapter may bring a civil
suit in an appropriate State or federal court. A landlord found to be in
violation of this subchapter shall be liable to the aggrieved tenant for
damages and for tenant's attorneys' fees and costs. Tenants are not required to
exhaust their administrative remedies under this subchapter prior to filing
suit pursuant to this §
15.09.350.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.355 WAIVER PROHIBITED.
   Any waiver of rights under this subchapter shall be void as contrary to
public policy.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.360 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this subchapter or the application thereof to any
person, property, or circumstance, is held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect other provisions or applications of this subchapter that can be given
effect without the invalid provision(s) or application, and to this end, the
provisions of this subchapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.365 IMPLEMENTATION; RULEMAKING; AND SUBPOENA AUTHORITY.
   The Director is authorized to administer and enforce this subchapter, which
may include promulgating guidelines, procedures, and rules consistent with the
provisions of this subchapter. Such housing division guidelines shall have the
force and effect of law and may be relied upon by parties to determine their
rights and responsibilities under this subchapter. In administering and
enforcing this subchapter, the Director may also issue subpoenas pursuant to
Cal. Government Code § 53060.4 and may report noncompliance therewith to the
judge of the Superior Court.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
§ 15.09.370 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   A.   In the event of any conflict between this subchapter and any other
provision of this code, this subchapter shall control.
   B.   In the event of a conflict between a provision of this subchapter and a
provision of the COVID-19 Tenant Relief Act of 2020 (Code of Civil Procedure §§
1179.01 et seq.), the provision of the COVID-19 Tenant Relief Act of 2020 shall
control.
(Ord. No. 2020-015 § 2)
CHAPTER 15.10: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
15.10.005      Short title
   
15.10.010      Purpose
   
15.10.015      Definitions
   
15.10.020      Authority
   
15.10.025      Types of maps required
   
15.10.030      Disapproval where use prohibited
   
15.10.035      References to other laws
   
15.10.040      Severability clause
   
15.10.045      Violation a misdemeanor
   
15.10.050      Remedies not barred
   
15.10.055      Existing subdivision, agreement and covenant
   
15.10.060      Compliance required for sale, lease or financing
   
15.10.065      Sale voidable if deed made contrary to chapter provisions
   
15.10.070      City responsibility in land sales or conveyance
   
15.10.075      Separated parcels
   
15.10.080      Exceptions
   
15.10.085      Fees
   
15.10.090      Property value in event of eminent domain proceedings
   
15.10.095      Map findings
Tentative Map
   
15.10.200      Tentative map preparation
   
15.10.205      Conditions of approval for tentative map
   
15.10.210      Map of proposed uses in land planned for future subdivision
   
15.10.215      Copies of tentative map and accompaniments
   
15.10.220      Vesting tentative map procedure
   
15.10.225      Information to be submitted prior to filing a vesting tentative
map
   
15.10.230      Items to be submitted with tentative map
   
15.10.235      Tentative map requirements
   
15.10.240      Alternate plans
   
15.10.245      Tentative map distribution
   
15.10.250      Geological report
   
15.10.255      Departmental reports
   
15.10.260      Findings
   
15.10.265      Action on tentative map
   
15.10.270      Public hearing
   
15.10.275      Time limits and extension of time
   
15.10.280      Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map
   
15.10.285      Amendments to an approved or conditionally approved tentative
map
Administrative Review
   
15.10.300      Purpose
   
15.10.305      Applicability
   
15.10.310      Action on administrative review
   
15.10.315      Findings
   
15.10.320      Conditions of approval
Final Maps
   
15.10.400      Acceptance for checking
   
15.10.405      Final map processing
   
15.10.415      Map checking fee
   
15.10.420      Transmittal of final map to county
   
15.10.425      Separated parcels
   
15.10.430      Final map contents
   
15.10.435      Final map form
   
15.10.440      Reversion to acreage map requirements
   
15.10.445      Survey procedure and practice
   
15.10.450      Dedication exceptions
   
15.10.455      Additional copy of map to show structures
   
15.10.460      Easement certificate
   
15.10.465      Waiver of signatures
Parcel Maps
   
15.10.600      Purpose
   
15.10.605      Additional filing requirements
   
15.10.610      Exceptions
   
15.10.615      Permits or certificates not to be issued where property sold or
divided in violation of provisions
   
15.10.620      Tentative parcel maps
   
15.10.625      Action on parcel map
   
15.10.630      Findings
   
15.10.635      Dedications and improvements
   
15.10.645      Final parcel map requirements
Design Standards
   
15.10.700      Access and easements
   
15.10.705      Roads and streets
   
15.10.710      Private streets
   
15.10.715      Radius
   
15.10.720      Grades
   
15.10.725      Soil conditions
   
15.10.730      Design standards for commercial subdivisions
   
15.10.735      Design standards for industrial subdivisions
   
15.10.740      Design standards for residential subdivisions
   
15.10.745      Design standards for special areas
   
15.10.750      Park dedication requirements
   
15.10.755      Subdivider to provide park and recreational facilities
   
15.10.760      Exemptions from park dedication requirements
   
15.10.765      Parkland dedication or payment of in lieu fee
   
15.10.770      Recreational facilities credit
   
15.10.775      Choice of land or fee
   
15.10.780      Development of recreational facilities and disposition of fees
   
15.10.785      Limitation on use of land and fees
   
15.10.790      Alternative procedure
Improvements
   
15.10.900      Requirement
   
15.10.905      Improvement plans
   
15.10.910      General improvement standards
   
15.10.915      On-site improvements required
   
15.10.920      Off-site improvements required
   
15.10.925      Dedication
   
15.10.930      Agreements and bonds
   
15.10.935      Deposit of bond
Urban Lot Splits and Small Lot Subdivisions
   
15.10.940      Urban lot splits
   
15.10.950      Ministerial lot subdivisions
   
15.10.950      Small lot subdivisions
Lot Mergers
   
15.10.960      Lot mergers
Lot Line Adjustment
   
15.10.970      Lot line adjustment
Certificate of Compliance
   
15.10.980      Certificate of compliance
Condominium Conversions
   
15.10.985      Condominium conversions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 15.10.005 SHORT TITLE.
   This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance
of the City of Culver City."
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter and any rules, regulations, standards, and
specifications adopted pursuant thereto is to control and regulate the division
and subdivision of land within the City of Culver City and such land as may be
annexed to said City.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.015 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever words or phrases used in this Chapter are not defined herein but
are defined in the California Business and Professions Code and/or Subdivision
Map Act, and/or the Culver City Municipal Code, such definitions are
incorporated and shall apply as though set forth in full herein, unless the
context clearly indicates a contrary intention. All words used in the singular
shall include the plural, and plural the singular; each gender shall include
the others; any tense shall include the other tense; the word SHALL is
mandatory; and the word MAY is permissive.
   ACREAGE. Any land or portion of land which may be divided into individual
parcels of land conforming to the provisions of this Chapter.
   ALLEY. A public or private way at the rear or side of property, permanently
reserved as a means of secondary vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting
property.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line depicting the required setback within which
special legal restrictions may be established to prevent by the provision of
setbacks, the building or rebuilding of structures on land required for the
eventual widening of streets, or on land required for the establishment of
projected streets.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE provides a means for
conferring legal lot status to parcels of land which were not created by, or
cannot be proven to have been created by, the legal subdivision process
pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and Culver City Municipal Code (CCMC) Title
15,
Chapter 15.10.
   CITY. The City of Culver City.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Culver City.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Culver City.
   COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission of the City of Culver City.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Culver City.
   DESIGN.
      1.   Street alignments, grades and widths;
      2.   Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments
and grades thereof;
      3.   Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;
      4.   Fire roads and firebreaks;
      5.   Lot size and configuration;
      6.   Traffic access;
      7.   Grading;
      8.   Land to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes; and
      9.   Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of
the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to ensure conformity
to and implementation of the General Plan required by applicable State law or
any specific plan adopted pursuant to State law.
   DIVISION OF PROPERTY. Other than a "subdivision" as defined in this Section,
shall mean any land, improved or unimproved shown on the last preceding tax
roll as a unit or contiguous units, which is divided for the purpose of lease,
sale or financing, either immediate or future, into two (2) or more lots or
building sites and for which a "Parcel Map or Map" is required. Such definition
shall not apply to the leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space
within an apartment building, commercial building or trailer park, nor shall
this definition apply to mineral, oil or gas leases.
   DRAINAGE AREA. An area which would require storm water drainage within the
drainage zone as such zone is delineated upon the official drainage zone map of
Los Angeles Flood Control District.
   FINAL MAP. A map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
and those of any applicable local ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act, which
map is designed to be placed on record in the office of the County Recorder of
the County of Los Angeles.
   FRONTAGE. The line where a lot abuts a dedicated street or highway right-of-
way line. FRONTAGE is expressed in lineal feet and is measured along said
right-of-way line, unless otherwise specified.
   GENERAL PLAN. The long range, comprehensive general plan for the orderly
development of the City, adopted by the Commission and the Council, which may
include all of the elements listed in the State Conservation and Planning Act.
   HIGHWAYS. Any thoroughfare existing or proposed, indicated as such on the
adopted Select System, Master Plan of Streets and Highways, General Plan or
similar document for the City of Culver City. The minimum right-of-way for such
highway shall be as required by the aforesaid official plans.
   IMPROVEMENT.
      1.   Such street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be
installed by the Subdivider on the land to be used for public or private
streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of
the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage
needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the Final Map
thereof.
      2.   Also refers to such other specific improvements or types of
improvements, the installation of which, either by the Subdivider, by public
agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the local
agency or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to ensure
conformity to or implementation of the General Plan required by State law or
any specific plan adopted pursuant to State law.
   LOCAL STREET. A street intended wholly or principally for local neighborhood
traffic.
   LOT.
      1.   A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or
other designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County
Recorder; or
      2.   A parcel of real property delineated on an approved map of a record
of survey, lot split, Parcel Map, or Map, as filed in the office of the County
Recorder or in the office of the City Engineer, and abutting at least one (1)
public street or right-of-way; or
      3.   A parcel of real property containing not less area than required by
the zone in which it is located, abutting at least one (1) public street or
right-of-way.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection or interception of two (2) or
more streets at an angle of not more than one hundred twenty (120) degrees. If
the angle is greater than one hundred twenty (120) degrees the lot shall be
considered an "Interior Lot."
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
   LOT, FLAG. A parcel of land which, due to unusual conditions, cannot meet
the requirements for frontage on a dedicated or private street. Where such
conditions exist, the lot may be provided access by way of a "stem" extending
from the main body of the lot to the street. Said "stem" shall be a part of the
subject lot and not a separate parcel or an easement across adjoining property.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
   LOT, KEY. The first lot to the rear of a corner lot, the front line of which
is a continuation of the side line of the corner lot, and where the KEY LOT
fronts on the street which intersects the street upon which the corner lot
fronts.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT (LLA). A LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT between four (4) or fewer
existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one (1) lot is added to
the adjoining lot, and where a greater number of lots than originally existed
is not thereby created.
   LOT MERGER. The joining of two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of
improved or unimproved land, which are held by the same owner or owners, into
fewer parcels pursuant to this title. Parcels or units may include land
division or subdivision lots, or lots created by deed.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two (2) dedicated streets and having
the right of access to both of said streets, not including corner and reversed
corner lots.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the side line of which is substantially
a continuation of the front lot lines of the lots to its rear; whether across
an alley or not.
   MULTI-FAMILY LOT SPLIT. A subdivision that results in ten (10) or fewer
parcels and consists of ten (10) or fewer residential units on a lot zoned for
multi-family residential development pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65852.28,
65913.4.5, and 66499.41.
   OWNER. Any person having title to the land proposed to be divided under the
provisions of this Chapter.
   PARCEL MAP. A map showing the division of land into four (4) or fewer lots
or condominium units (common areas are not counted toward this threshold),
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision
Map Act;
   PARCEL OF LAND. The same as LOT.
   PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
      1.   Includes park areas designed for passive use without any installed
recreational facilities or parks designed for active recreational use where
facilities are installed or to be installed.
      2.   The term shall include property subjected to recorded covenants
running with the land limiting the use of such areas to passive park purposes
if the covenant was approved by the City Attorney and City Council prior to
recordation.
      3.   This definition shall not be construed to vest any discretion or
right in the subdivider to dedicate or provide "Passive Use" park and
recreational facilities. The City Council shall have the sole determination
whether to accept any land for park and recreation purposes. The City Council
may accept passive parks, recreational areas or any combination of the two (2)
concepts.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, company, firm, association,
partnership, co-partnership, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver,
syndicate, club, estate, business trust, organization, or any other legal
entity or authorized representative thereof.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Culver City; may
also be referred to as "Commission."
   PLANNING DIRECTOR. The staff planning official of the City of Culver City or
their designated representative, sometimes referred to as the "Planning and
Development Director."
   PLAT MAP. A document drawn to scale, prepared by a Licensed Surveyor of
qualified Engineer, showing the divisions of a piece of land. The PLAT MAP is
the graphical representation of the legal description. The PLAT MAP is recorded
as Exhibit B with the legal description as Exhibit A. The PLAT MAP gives the
legal description of pieces of real property, lot, street, and block number.
The map shows the land subdivided into lots, showing the location and
boundaries of individual parcels with the streets, alleys, and easements. The
PLAT MAP shall be based upon a field survey. Boundary location and
determination is the practice of land surveying according to Cal. Bus. and
Prof. Code § 8726 and as such, PLAT MAPS must include the signature and seal of
a licensed land surveyor pursuant to Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code § 8761(d).
Boundaries shown on PLAT MAPS that are not previously shown on a subdivision
map, record of survey or official map must have a record of survey filed
pursuant to Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code § 8762. PLAT MAPS, as part of a conveyance
document, must be accompanied by a written legal description. PLAT MAPS will
not be accepted for recordation without a legal description.
   PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT. A report prepared by a registered civil engineer
specializing in soil mechanics and shall be based on test borings or
excavations. Soil report shall set forth sufficient engineering data to explain
the proposed solution to any geological hazards disclosed by the geological
report and any geological hazards that may be created by the proposed grading
and any structural defects which may occur due to the presence of critically
expansive soils or other soil problems. The PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT may be
waived in accordance with Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17953.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES. This term shall include, but not be limited to, all
electrical power and telephone and telegraph service installation, community
antenna television cables and gas mains and water mains.
   RESERVE STRIP or OUT LOT. A strip of land one (1) foot or more in width
dedicated to the City for
the purpose of controlling the access to streets or other public rights-of-way
from adjoining property.
   REVERSION OF ACREAGE. The voiding of a previous subdivision resulting in the
merger of all lots created by the subdivision and re-establishment of the lot
lines as they existed prior to the subdivision.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any public or private right-of-way, including any area
required by public use pursuant to the General Plan or Official Plan of the
legislative body of the City of Culver City.
   SMALL LOT SUBDIVISION. A subdivision which creates alternative fee-simple
ownership small lot homes within multi-family zoned parcels.
   STREET. Any public dedicated right-of-way for street, highway, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, road, lane, walk, alley, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge,
public road easement or other roadways except freeways.
   STREET, PRIVATE. Any land established by easement of record and used or
intended to be used for ingress or egress from a lot or lots but not dedicated
as a public street.
   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, partnership, corporation, or association who
proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for themselves or for others.
   SUBDIVISION.
      1.   The division of any improved or unimproved land, shown on the latest
equalized County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the
purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future. Property
shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads,
streets, utility easements, or railroad rights-of-way.
      2.   SUBDIVISION shall also include all the following:
         a.   Any planned development, as defined in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code §
11003.
         b.   Any community apartment project as defined by Cal. Bus. and Prof.
Code § 11004.
         c.   Any condominium project, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 783 and
1351.
         d.   Any stock cooperative as defined in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code §
11003.2, including any legal or beneficial interests therein.
      3.   Any such developments shall be subject to any specific provisions of
this Chapter pertaining to such a subdivision; provided that, absent specific
provisions relating to such developments, any reference to a condominium
subdivision or condominium conversion in Chapter 15.10 (Subdivisions) and the
Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, and the Subdivision Map Act
(Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66410 et seq.) shall be deemed to refer to any condominium
subdivision, condominium conversion, stock cooperative apartment, or community
apartment project.
      4.   Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or
public utility, shall not be considered a division of land for the purpose of
computing the number of parcels.
   SUBDIVISION MAP ACT. Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66410 et seq.
   TENTATIVE MAP. A map made for the purpose of showing the design of the
proposed subdivision and the existing conditions or detailed final survey of
the property.
   TRACT. A portion of land comprised of an entire subdivision and to which an
official tract number has been assigned by the County Engineer's office for the
purpose of legal description and filing.
   URBAN LOT SPLIT. A subdivision of an existing, legally subdivided lot into
two (2) lots in accordance with the requirements of this section and the
provisions identified in Cal. Gov't Code § 66411.7.
   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP. Refers to a map which meets all of the requirements
of a Tentative Map and has the words "Vesting Tentative Map" printed
conspicuously on its face at the time the map is filed.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.020 AUTHORITY.
   This Chapter is enacted pursuant to Cal. Const. Art. XI, § 2, the Charter of
the City of Culver City, and the general laws of the State of California,
including the Subdivision Map Act. The provisions of this Chapter are in
addition to the regulations of the Subdivision Map Act and are supplemental
thereto and shall apply to all divisions, subdivisions, or parts of
subdivisions of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels.
   This Chapter is intended to establish the applicable review authority for
maps, Lot Line Adjustments, mergers, and other approvals provided for in
Chapter 15.10 (Subdivisions). Below are the descriptions of roles for each
review authority.
Table 1-1 provides an additional summary of review authority for subdivision
maps. Additional details on the procedures for different types of subdivision
maps and services are detailed in subsequent sections.
   A.   City Council shall review and have final approval authority for:
      1.   Appeals of the Planning Commission's actions on Parcel Maps,
Tentative Maps, and Vesting Tentative Maps.
   B.   Planning Commission shall review and approve:
      1.   Any map accompanying a residential development application heard by
the Planning Commission; and
      2.   Any map accompanying a non-residential development application heard
by the Planning Commission; and
      3.   Appeals of the Planning Director actions except where appeal is not
allowed as described in §
15.10.020.C.
   C.   The Planning Director, or designee, shall:
      1.   Review and have final approval authority for:
         a.    Non-discretionary Urban Lot Splits (SB 9) with no appeal
process;
         b.    Non-discretionary Multi-Family Lot Splits (SB 684) with no
appeal process;
         c.   Parcel Maps, including Small Lot Subdivisions and commercial
condominium airspace lots that are between five thousand (5,000) to fifteen
thousand (15,000) gross square feet; and
         d.   Tentative Maps, including Small Lot Subdivisions and commercial
condominium airspace lots that are between five thousand (5,000) to fifteen
thousand (15,000) gross square feet; and
         e.   Tentative Map extensions.
      2.   Review:
         a.    Non-discretionary Lot Line Adjustments with no appeal process;
         b.    Non-discretionary Lot Mergers with no appeal process;
         c.   Tentative Maps and Vesting Tentative Maps, including Small Lot
Subdivisions, when processed in conjunction with a Site Plan Review (twenty-
seven (27) or more residential units); and
         d.   Tentative Maps and Vesting Tentative Maps for commercial
condominium airspace lots when processing proposed developments that are more
than fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet.
   D.   The City Engineer shall:
      1.   Review and have final approval authority for:
         a.    Non-discretionary Lot Line Adjustments with no appeal process;
         b.    Non-discretionary Lot Mergers with no appeal process;
         c.   Final Map with no appeal process; and
         d.   Certificate of Compliance.
      2.   Review:
         a.   Parcel Map, including Small Lot Subdivisions and commercial
condominium airspace lots;
         b.   Tentative Maps and Vesting Tentative Maps, including Small Lot
Subdivisions and commercial condominium airspace lots;
         c.    Non-discretionary Urban Lot Splits (SB 9) with no appeal
process; and
         d.    Non-discretionary Multi-Family Lot Splits (SB 684) with no
appeal process.
Table 1-1: Subdivision Review Authorities
Type of Application Role of Review Authority
                    Director 1 City Engineer Commission Council
Table 1-1: Subdivision Review Authorities
Type of Application               Role of Review Authority
                                  Director 1 City Engineer Commission Council
Lot Line Adjustments2             Review     Approve       -          -
Lot Mergers2                      Review     Approve       -          -
Urban Lot Splits (SB9)2           Approve    Review        -          -
Multi-Family Lot Splits (SB 684)2 Approve    Review        -          -
Parcel Map3                       Approve    Review        Appeal     Appeal
Tentative Map3, 4                 Approve    Review        Appeal     Appeal
Tentative Map3, 5                 Review     Review        Approve    Appeal
Vesting Tentative Map3            Review     Review        Approve    Appeal
Final Map2                        -          Approve       -          -
Certificates of Compliance2, 6    -          Approve       -          -
1 Planning Director or Designee (Current Planning Staff)
2 Non-discretionary with no appeal process
3 Including Small Lot Subdivisions
4 When processed in conjunction with an Administrative Site Plan Review
5 When processed in conjunction with a Site Plan Review
6 Including Conditional Certificates of Compliance
 
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.025 TYPES OF MAPS REQUIRED.
   Map requirements for the maps previously described as well as some other
types of subdivision projects are summarized in
Table 1-2-Maps Required for Various Subdivision Projects.
 
Table 1-2: Maps Required for Various Subdivisions
Project Type                            Maps Required
Subdivisions creating four (4) or fewer Tentative Parcel Map or Vesting
lots or condominiums                    Tentative Parcel Map and Final Parcel
                                        Map.
Subdivisions creating five (5) or more  Tentative Map or Vesting Map and Final
lots or condominiums                    Map.
                                        Existing and proposed Site Plan
Lot Line Adjustments between four (4)   verifying compliance, Plat Map drawn to
or fewer existing adjoining parcels     scale, and legal description, for
                                        recording.
Lot Mergers                             Plat Map drawn to scale and legal
                                        description, for recording.
 
Certificates of Compliance and         Plat drawn to scale and legal
Conditional Certificates of Compliance description, for recording.
                                       Administrative Site Plan or Site Plan
Residential condominium conversions    Review, Vesting Tentative Map or
                                       Tentative Map and Final Map. See §
                                       15.10.985
                                       Administrative Site Plan Review or Site
Commercial Condominium                 Plan Review, Parcel Map, Vesting
                                       Tentative Map, or Tentative Map and
                                       Final Map.
 
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.030 DISAPPROVAL WHERE USE PROHIBITED.
   The designated review authority may disapprove a Tentative Map if the only
practical use which can be made of the property as proposed to be divided or
subdivided is a use prohibited by any ordinance, law, statute, general plan, or
other valid regulation.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.035 REFERENCES TO OTHER LAWS.
   Whenever references are made to any portion of this Chapter or any other
ordinance or statute, such references shall apply to all amendments and
additions now or hereafter made.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.040 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If a portion of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held to be invalid, the remainder of this Chapter and the
application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.045 VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.050 REMEDIES NOT BARRED.
   This Chapter does not bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which
the City of Culver City or other political division or subdivision, or any
person, firm or other corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the City of
Culver City or other political division or subdivision or person, firm or
corporation, may file suit in any court of competent jurisdiction, to restrain
or enjoin any attempted or proposed division or subdivision or sale in
violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.055 EXISTING SUBDIVISION, AGREEMENT AND COVENANT.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a
part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to April 9, 1969, unless said
lots are hereafter proposed for future division or subdivision. Nor is it
intended by the ordinance codified herein to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any
way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by the ordinance codified herein, or with
existing provisions of private restrictions placed upon property by deed,
covenant, or other private agreement, or with restricted covenant running with
the land, to which the City is a party. Where this Chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the land than is imposed or required by such existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract, or deed, the provisions of this Chapter
shall control where the Final Map is not recorded before expiration date of
existing Tentative Map.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.060 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED FOR SALE, LEASE OR FINANCING.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person as principal, agent, or otherwise, to
divide or subdivide for lease, sale or financing into two (2) or more parcels
of land, or to lease, sell, convey, quitclaim, or transfer by contract, deed,
or otherwise, or after such division or subdivision, to offer for lease, sale
or financing any land or part thereof, whether improved or unimproved, in the
City of Culver City, unless and until all of the requirements hereinafter
provided in relation thereto shall have been complied with. Such requirements
shall not apply to the financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or
similar spaces within an apartment building, industrial building, commercial
building, or trailer park, nor shall this section apply to mineral, oil, gas
leases, solar electrical generation device, electrical energy storage system,
hydrogen fueling station, electrical vehicle charging station, or other project
types listed in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66412.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person as seller, buyer, agent, or otherwise,
for the purpose of violating or nullifying the provisions of this Chapter,
knowingly to allow a transfer of title to property, or any part thereof, to
take place by adverse possession or prescription; or to conspire or collude
with another or others to effect a successive series or division or subdivision
of a larger parcel into smaller parcels and then each or any of the smaller
parcels into smaller parcels; or to be or become a party to a friendly or sham
lawsuit or litigation, the purpose of which shall be to cause or to permit a
transfer of title of any land or part thereof, whether improved or unimproved,
in the City of Culver City; or to do or perform any other act, or willfully
omit to do any act for the purpose of evading or nullifying the provisions of
this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.065 SALE VOIDABLE IF DEED MADE CONTRARY TO CHAPTER PROVISIONS.
   Any deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell made contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter is voidable at the sole option of the grantee,
buyer, or person contracting to purchase, their heirs, personal representative,
or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one (1) year after the date of
execution of the deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell, but the deed of
conveyance, sale, or contract to sell is binding upon any assignee or
transferee of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, other than
those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to
sell, or their assignee, heir, or advisee. However, nothing in this Section
contained shall be deemed to render void or voidable any trust deed, mortgage,
or other encumbrance in the hands of a bona fide holder for value.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.070 CITY RESPONSIBILITY IN LAND SALES OR CONVEYANCE.
   The City of Culver City shall be held free of involvement in, or
responsibility for, any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell made
contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. No building or occupancy permit
shall be granted for buildings or structures on lots or parcels created without
the approval required by the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.075 SEPARATED PARCELS.
   Where land is separated by a means other than a street, highway, alley,
railroad right-of-way, flood control right-of-way, or public utility right-of-
way from other land in a proposed division or subdivision, a separate map shall
be prepared for each of the divisions or subdivisions so separated and each of
the maps prepared shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.080 EXCEPTIONS.
   It is realized that certain parcels of land exist of such size, subject to
such title restrictions, sold and devoted to such usage, that it is impossible
for the owner to conform to certain requirements of this Chapter when divided
or subdivided. In such cases, the Planning Commission shall make a
determination as to whether the conditions affecting the property in question
warrant and require that exceptions be made; provided, however, that no
exceptions may be made to any requirement imposed by the Subdivision Map Act.
No exception shall be made unless the Planning Commission makes a finding or
findings in writing that such exceptions are necessary stating the reasons and
grounds therefor. The Planning Commission's determination may be appealed to
the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.085 FEES.
   A.   Tentative Map fees. The filing fee for a Tentative Map and a Tentative
Parcel Map shall be as set forth by Resolution of the City Council. Said fee
shall be paid to the City of Culver City through its Planning and Development
Department upon initiation of Tentative Map review.
   B.   Final Map filing fees. At the time of filing the Final Map, the fees
established by Resolution of the City Council for the following functions shall
be
paid to the City of Culver City through the City Engineer; or as to engineering
and plan checking fees, to the Engineer's Office of the County of Los Angeles,
if the City has in effect an Agreement whereby the County performs such
functions:
      1.   Engineering and Planning Checking Fees.
      2.   Recording Fee.
      3.   Inspection Fees.
   C.   Final Parcel Map fees. Upon filing a Final Parcel Map, a checking fee
in an amount established by Resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the
City of Culver City through the City Engineer, or to the County Engineer, if
such checking is to be done by that office.
   D.   Agreement with County. Provided, nevertheless, that if the City has, in
effect an Agreement whereby the County of Los Angeles performs any of the
functions set forth in Subsections A., B. or C. of this Section, the fees to be
charged shall be equal to the fees currently charged by the County of Los
Angeles. This Subsection D. shall prevail over any contradictory provisions
contained in any of the three previous Subsections or the Resolution of the
City Council setting forth the fees therefor.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.090 PROPERTY VALUE IN EVENT OF EMINENT DOMAIN PROCEEDINGS.
   In the event that the City of Culver City should, at any time in the future
institute eminent domain proceedings with respect to any property, or a part of
any property, which has been subject to covenants by the owner thereof in
accordance with the provisions of §§
15.10.770 or 15.10.790, the land shall be valued as though said covenants had
never been imposed and the market value of the property shall be the value of
the property, disregarding the effect of such covenants.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.095 MAP FINDINGS.
   A Parcel Map, Tentative Map, or a map requiring an Administrative Review
shall be approved when the findings have been made that the map, including the
provisions for design and improvement is consistent with the General Plan of
the City or any related elements or specific plans. The review authority shall
approve the Tentative Map pursuant to the following findings:
   A.   The proposed division conforms to the provisions of the Zoning Code
requirements, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, to the General Plan and
any applicable specific plans adopted by the Council of the City of Culver City
or to any policies or standards adopted by the Commission or the Council and on
file in the office of the City Clerk at or prior to the time of filing of the
application hereunder.
   B.   Each lot in the proposed division will front on a dedicated street or
have a vehicular access to a dedicated street approved by the City.
   C.   Each lot in the proposed division is so designed and arranged that
drainage to an approved drainage facility is provided for each lot.
   D.   The proposed division will not interfere with the widening, extension,
or opening of any street or Master Plan highway.
   E.   Lot lines are so designed that easements will be located in such
positions as to be suitable for the proposed use.
   F.   That the site is physically suitable for the type of development and
proposed density.
   G.   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are not
likely to cause public health problems, substantial environmental damage or
substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat, and will
not be materially detrimental to the public welfare nor injurious to the
property or improvements in the immediate vicinity.
   H.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or
use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the
governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for
access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially
equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This Subsection shall
apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to a
legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements
for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
TENTATIVE MAP
§ 15.10.200 TENTATIVE MAP PREPARATION.
   The subdivider shall cause the Tentative Map covering the area proposed to
be subdivided to be prepared by a registered civil engineer who is authorized
to prepare Tentative Maps or licensed land surveyor and such Tentative Map
shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.205 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL FOR TENTATIVE MAP.
   The review authorities of the Tentative Map may establish conditions of
approval for Tentative Maps, including residential and commercial condominium
subdivisions. Any conditions so established which are applicable to a
particular Tentative Map shall be made a part of that map at the time of
approval thereof and the Final Map shall not be approved until all of such
conditions have been performed or satisfied.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.210 MAP OF PROPOSED USES IN LAND PLANNED FOR FUTURE SUBDIVISION.
   A.   Where the Vesting Tentative Map covers only a portion of the area owned
by the subdivider, and the balance is planned for future subdivision, a map
showing proposed land use, contours of the entire area, and a proposed street
and street grade, storm drain and sanitary sewer layout within the area shall
accompany the Vesting Tentative Map. Such map is to be used as a guide for the
Vesting Tentative Map under consideration and for future Tentative Maps in the
area, but it shall not be deemed to be a Vesting Tentative Map and no rights
shall accrue thereunder.
   B.   The Planning Director may require any subdivider to submit a map in
accordance with Subsection A. whenever necessary for review of a Tentative Map.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.215 COPIES OF TENTATIVE MAP AND ACCOMPANIMENTS.
   The Planning Director shall determine the required number of copies of the
Tentative Map. The subdivider shall provide the owner's statement with the
required filing fee to the Planning Director for staff consideration. A
Tentative Map shall not be deemed complete for processing until it complies
with all provisions of this Section and any additional information as required
by the Planning Director, or their designee, and that a tract number shall have
been secured from the office of the County Engineer. The Tentative Map shall
then be deemed complete unless the Tentative Map or the accompanying drawings,
statements or other data are found to be incomplete or incorrect, and the
subdivider shall be advised in writing of the changes or additions within
thirty (30) days, specifying where the Tentative Map fails to meet the
requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.220 VESTING TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURE.
   Any Tentative Map, whether Parcel or Map, may be a Vesting Map. A Vesting
Tentative Map must have the term "vesting" clearly stated on the map. All other
procedures applicable to other Tentative Maps apply.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.225 INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED PRIOR TO FILING A VESTING TENTATIVE
MAP.
   A.   Prior to the filing of a Vesting Tentative Map, a subdivider shall
submit to the Division, plans and other information concerning a proposed or
contemplated development as may be required by the Division to adequately
evaluate the proposed project. The required plans shall be prepared by a
licensed architect, engineer or other equivalently licensed and qualified
professional. The plans shall include a site plan, parking plan, typical floor
plans, four (4) sided exterior building elevations specifying all exterior
finish materials, colors and textures, landscape plans, and site area
calculations in both gross building area and gross leasable floor area. All
plans shall be drawn legibly and to scale, and specify the dimensions, design,
and intended use of the proposed buildings and structures. Plans shall also
specify how building and structures conform with current zoning and other
development regulations, and are to be compatible with the character of
adjacent conforming developed parcels and the existing neighborhoods.
   B.   The Planning Director, or designee, shall schedule a meeting with the
subdivider on such plans and other data, and shall recommend consultation by
the subdivider with other interested public or private agencies and public
utilities.
   C.   The subdivision conference established by Subsection B. is a mandatory
procedure for filing a Vesting Tentative Map and otherwise is an optional
procedure which may be elected by a subdivider. The Planning Director, or
designee, may elect to schedule an optional subdivision conference upon
submission of preliminary plans.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.230 ITEMS TO BE SUBMITTED WITH TENTATIVE MAP.
   The following items shall be submitted with the Tentative Map:
   A.   A statement of the general character of the improvements proposed for
the streets in the proposed subdivision shall be filed with the Tentative Map.
This statement of intent shall include such items as street trees, lighting
system, sidewalk, curb, gutter, paving, conduits, storm drains and sewers, and
all public utilities, mains, and services.
   B.   A statement of the proposed restrictions shall be furnished with the
Tentative Map if the proposed subdivision includes private streets or is
proposed to be a condominium or other joint or co-ownership type of
development.
   C.   A statement that the applicant is the owner or is legally empowered to
act for the owner of the property for which the application is filed.
   D.   A preliminary soil report shall be submitted for every subdivision as
required by the California Health and Safety Code.
   E.   Where open spaces for park and recreational uses are indicated, the
methods of providing for maintenance of these areas shall be submitted.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.235 TENTATIVE MAP REQUIREMENTS.
   Said Tentative Map shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The minimum
dimensions of this map shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches.
The scale of the map shall be large enough to show clearly all details thereof,
but is in no case to be smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet. Said map, and the accompanying owners' statements, shall contain the
following information:
   A.   The tract number as secured from the County Engineer.
   B.   The approximate boundaries of the property subdivided and suitable ties
to government corners or corners of recorded subdivisions or other recognized
survey corners or lines and, if the property is a portion of a governmental
legal subdivision, the section, half-section, and quarter-section lines
thereof, or if the property is a portion of a prior recorded private
subdivision, the lot and block boundaries of such existing subdivision.
   C.   Name and address of record owner or owners of property to be subdivided
and record owners of property immediately abutting.
   D.   Name and address of subdivider.
   E.   Name, business address, and registration number, certificate, or other
acceptable evidence of professional certification of person who prepared map.
   F.   Location, size, and character of all existing public utility facilities
in the proposed subdivision or adjacent thereto.
   G.   The locations, names, and widths of all existing or proposed streets,
and freeways in or adjacent to the subdivision and their approximate grades. If
any proposed street in the subdivision is a continuation or approximately a
continuation of an existing street, the conformity or the extent of
nonconformity of such proposed street with such existing street shall be
accurately shown.
   H.   The approximate width and location of all existing and proposed
easements, whether public or private, for streets, drainage, sewerage, and
public utilities.
   I.   Approximate radius of each curve.
   J.   Approximate lot layout, lot numbering, and approximate dimensions for
each lot.
   K.   Area of smallest lot in tract and total area of subdivision.
   L.   Approximate boundaries of area subject to inundation, storm water
overflow, or high ground water, and the location, width, and direction of flow
of all water courses.
   M.   Plan for drainage and for handling storm water. Direction of flow of
surface water shall be shown by arrows. Show approximate grades for proposed
drainage.
   N.   Existing use or uses of the property and, to scale, outline of any
existing buildings not to be moved in the development of the subdivision and
their locations in relation to existing or proposed street and lot lines.
   O.   Statement of the present use zone and proposed use or uses of the
property.
   P.   Source of water supply.
   Q.   Provision for sewerage and sewer disposal, including approximate grade,
and estimate of maximum sewage rate of flow (c.f.s.).
   R.   Proposed public areas to be dedicated.
   S.   Approximate contour of the land at intervals not more than two (2) feet
if the general slope of the land is less than five (5) percent, or at not more
than five (5) feet if the general slope of the land is greater than five (5)
percent.
   T.   Statement of the improvements and public utilities proposed to be made
or installed.
   U.   Approximate location of all trees or stands of trees over six (6)
inches in diameter standing within the boundaries of proposed public rights-of-
way.
   V.   Reserve strips, walls, or other devices for controlling access to
restricted access streets.
   W.   Height and location of street lights proposed by subdivider.
   X.   Date, north arrow, and scale.
   Y.   A statement of a street tree-planting schedule in accordance with the
provisions of CCMC Title 9, Chapter 9.10.
   Z.   A sketch at the corner of the Tentative Map at a minimum scale of one
(1) inch to one thousand (1,000) feet indicating the location of the proposed
subdivision in relation to the surrounding area or vicinity.
   AA.   The boundary of city, county, school, park, or other public grounds or
property in or adjacent to the subdivisions.
   BB.   The areas designated for parks, recreation, schools, and other public
uses.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.240 ALTERNATE PLANS.
   In the event the subdivider shall elect to submit one (1) or more different
plans for subdivisions, they may file all simultaneously paying a filing fee
for each. In such event, the Planning Director, or designee, shall proceed to
take the same action for each as is provided in this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.245 TENTATIVE MAP DISTRIBUTION.
   Upon receipt of the specified number of copies of the Tentative Map and the
accompanying owners' statements, the Planning Director, or designee, shall
distribute the Tentative Map and documents to the applicable divisions and
agencies.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.250 GEOLOGICAL REPORT.
   If required, a geological report shall be transmitted along with a copy of
the Tentative Map to the City Engineer for their determination. The subdivider
shall be notified at the earliest opportunity and be given full information as
to the type of information and statistical report required by the City which
shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the City Engineer.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.255 DEPARTMENTAL REPORTS.
   Upon receipt of a copy of such Tentative Map and owners' statements, each
officer, department, or division to whom or to which same has been transmitted
pursuant to §
15.10.245 shall examine same to ascertain if the same conforms to the
requirements coming within the authoritative scope of such officer, division,
or department. Each officer, division, or department shall provide to the
Planning Director, or designee, a report in writing thereon stating if the map
conforms to the requirements coming within their authoritative scope. If the
map does not conform, each officer, division, or department shall so state and
set forth the particulars wherein said map or owners' statements do not conform
and what changes are necessary to bring them into conformity. When the Planning
Director, or designee, has received all such reports, they shall provide a
written staff recommendation for approval. The Planning Director, or designee,
shall promptly refer copies of the Tentative Map, owners' statement and staff
report to the review and approval authority and to the subdivider.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.260 FINDINGS.
   The map shall be approved when the findings have been made that the map,
including the provisions for design and improvement is consistent with the
General Plan of the City or any related elements or specific plans. The review
authority shall approve the Tentative Map pursuant to the findings listed in §
15.10.095.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.265 ACTION ON TENTATIVE MAP.
   A.   The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer shall review
Vesting Tentative Maps and Tentative Maps for twenty-six (26) units or more
when processed in conjunction with a Site Plan Review prior to approval by the
Planning Commission.
   B.   Approval of Tentative Map by the Planning Director. The Planning
Director, or designee, shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove a
Parcel Map and a Tentative Map for twenty-five (25) or fewer units or
commercial condominium airspace development between five thousand (5,000) and
fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet. The action of the Planning
Director, or designee, and City Engineer on the Parcel Map or Tentative Map, or
any portion thereof, shall be reported in writing to the subdivider within
fifty (50) days after receipt of a complete application.
   C.   Approval of Tentative Map by the Commission. The Commission shall
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove a Tentative Map for twenty-six
(26) or more units and commercial condominium airspace development that is more
than fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet or a Vesting Tentative Map.
Unless otherwise required by CEQA or the Permit Streamlining Act, within fifty
(50) days after a Tentative Map has been deemed complete, the Commission shall
consider the Tentative Map at a regularly scheduled public hearing. Such time
period may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning
Director.
   D.   Appeal. Within ten (10) days after approval, any aggrieved person may
appeal the decision of a Tentative Parcel Map or Tentative Map pursuant to CCMC
Title 17,
Chapter 17.640. After a decision on an appeal has been made and required
findings of fact have been adopted, that decision shall be considered final and
no other appeals may be made.
      1.   A decision rendered by the Director may be appealed to the
Commission.
      2.   A decision rendered by the Commission may be appealed to the
Council.
   E.   The City shall determine whether the discharge of waste from the
proposed subdivision into an existing community sewer system would result in
violation of existing requirements prescribed by a California regional water
quality control board pursuant to Cal. Water Code Div. 7 (commencing with §
13000). In the event that the City finds that the proposed waste discharge
would result in or add to violation of requirements of such board, it may
disapprove the Tentative Map or Maps of the subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.270 PUBLIC HEARING.
   A.   A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission for the
appeal of Parcel Map and/or Tentative Map when processed for twenty-five (25)
or fewer units, or for the approval of a Vesting Tentative Map and/or Tentative
Map for twenty-six (26) or more units.
   B.   A public hearing shall be held by the City Council for the appeal of
the decision of the Planning Commission of a Parcel Map, a Tentative Map when
processed for twenty-five (25) or fewer units, a Tentative Map when processed
for twenty-six (26) or more units, and/or a Vesting Tentative Map.
   C.   Whenever a public hearing is held by the Planning Commission or City
Council on a matter described in this Section, notice of the time and place of
such hearing, including a general location of the subdivision or proposed
subdivision, shall be given in the manner prescribed for public hearings set
forth in the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.275 TIME LIMITS AND EXTENSION OF TIME.
   Time limits required in this Subchapter for acting on a Tentative Map or
Vesting Tentative Map, may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and
Planning Director.
   A.   An approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map or Vesting
Tentative Map shall expire thirty-six (36) months after its approval or
conditional approval, except when a time extension has been granted by the
Planning Director or designee or meets the terms allowed by Cal Gov’t Code §
66452.6. Once a tentative map has expired, no further subdivision action shall
take place until a new tentative map is filed. Upon withdrawal, a record of
survey shall be required and monuments set to replace those destroyed, damaged
or missing.
   B.   Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the
approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map or Vesting Tentative Map, the
time at which the Tentative Map expires may be extended by the Planning
Director by twelve (12) months.
   C.   The time extension shall be approved by the Planning Director if the
following findings are made:
      1.   The subdivider has made reasonable progress toward satisfying
project conditions;
      2.   Extenuating circumstances as documented in the map extension request
have delayed filing of the final map; and
      3.   The tentative map remains consistent with the zoning and goals of
the general plan.
   D.   Time extension requests shall be limited to year increments and can be
customized for a period exceeding one (1) year if the maximum extension period
identified in Subsection E. below is not exceeded.
   E.   Consistent with Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66452.6 (e) and 66463.5(c), the
maximum time of all extensions granted shall be seventy-two (72) months (six
(6) years).
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.280 VESTING ON APPROVAL OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.
   A.   The approval or conditional approval of a Vesting Tentative Map shall
confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with ordinances, policies, and standards described in Cal. Gov't Code §
66474.2, or with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time
the Vesting Tentative Map is approved or conditionally approved, whichever is
later in time.
   B.   Notwithstanding Subsection A., a permit, approval, extension, or
entitlement in conjunction with the Vesting Tentative Map may be made
conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:
      1.   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or
the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or
safety, or both.
      2.   Imposition of the condition or denial of the permit, approval,
extension or entitlement is required in order to comply with state or federal
law.
   C.   The approved or conditionally approved Vesting Tentative Map referred
to herein shall expire if a Final Map is not approved prior to the expiration
of the vesting tentative map. If a Final Map is approved, these rights shall
last for the following periods of time:
      1.   An initial time period of one (1) year after recordation of the
Final Map. Where several Final Maps are recorded on various phases of a project
covered by a single Vesting Tentative Map, this initial time period shall begin
for each phase when the Final Map for that phase is recorded.
      2.   The initial time period set forth in subsection C.1. shall be
automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application
for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing
exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed.
      3.   A subdivider may apply for an extension of twelve (12) months at any
time before the initial time period set forth in Subsection C.1. expires.
   D.   Submittal of a grading or building permit for the project associated
with the Vesting Tentative Map will keep the map active until the Final Map is
approved and recorded. Regular inspections consistent with the requirements of
the grading or building permit will need to occur to keep the Vesting Tentative
Map active.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.285 AMENDMENTS TO AN APPROVED OR CONDITIONALLY APPROVED TENTATIVE MAP.
   A.   Minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved Tentative
Map or conditions of approval may be approved by the Planning Director upon
application by the subdivider or on the Planning Director's own initiative,
provided:
      1.   The number of building sites or structures does not increase by more
than ten (10) percent;
      2.   The number of units does not increase by more than ten (10) percent
or twenty-five (25) units, whichever is less;
      3.   Changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original
tentative map approval;
      4.   There are no resulting violations of this code or of any objective
development standards;
      5.   The lot area does not increase or decrease by more than twenty-five
(25) percent.
   B.   The amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally
approved Tentative Map and certified by the Planning Director. Amendments to
the Tentative Map conditions of approval which are not minor, shall be
presented to the original approval authority for its approval. Major amendments
meaning that the number of legal buildings or the lot area increases or
decreases by more than twenty-five (25) percent. Processing shall be in
accordance with the provisions for processing a Tentative Map as set forth in
this title. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the
Tentative Map, but extensions may be granted under the provisions of §
15.10.275.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
§ 15.10.300 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter establishes an Administrative Review process for Parcel and
Tentative Map applications submitted in conjunction with an Administrative Site
Plan Review. An Administrative Review authorizes the Planning Director, or
designee, and the City Engineer's review and approval of Parcel and Tentative
Map applications that comply with all applicable regulations and standards of
this Subdivision Code. The specific purposes of this section are as follows.
   A.   Develop property in a manner that respects the physical and
environmental characteristics of each site, and will complement surrounding
properties and the City in general;
   B.   Ensure that each new small lot development is designed to best comply
with the purpose and intent of the zoning district in which the property is
located, and does not have an adverse effect on the aesthetic, architectural,
health, and safety-related qualities of adjoining properties or upon the City
in general;
   C.   Ensure access to each property and a circulation pattern that is safe
and convenient for both pedestrians and vehicles;
   D.   Ensure the orderly and harmonious appearance of structures with
associated site improvements (e.g., landscaping, parking areas, and the like);
and
   E.   Implement and promote the goals and policies of the General Plan.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.305 APPLICABILITY.
   The Administrative Review shall be required for all Parcel Map or Tentative
Maps of this Code including Small Lot Subdivisions and commercial condominiums,
that are filed in conjunction with the Administrative Site Plan Reviews.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.310 ACTION ON ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   A.   Filing. An application for an Administrative Review shall be completed,
filed, and processed in compliance with CCMC Title 17,
Chapter 17.500 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). The application package
shall include all information specified in the application, any applicable
Division handout, and any additional information required by the review
authority in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the
findings required by §
15.010.315 below.
   B.   Timing of review. When required, the final subdivision determination
shall be processed concurrently with the Administrative Site Plan Review
determination.
   C.   Designated review authority. The Planning Director, or designee, and
the City Engineer shall be the designated review authorities on each
Administrative Review application, provided that the Planning Director, or
designee, shall refer any application to the Commission for final decision if
any of the following criteria apply.
      1.   The proposed development project otherwise requires Commission
review of a land use permit, such as a Variance, Conditional Use Permit, or
zone change application. In such cases, the subdivision application shall occur
concurrently with the review of the other land use permits.
   D.   Referral to the Planning Commission. If the Planning Director, or
designee, determines that there are unusual circumstances or special conditions
related to an application, the Planning Director, or designee, may defer action
and refer such application to the Commission for final decision.
   E.   The applicant or any interested person or City official may appeal the
decision of the Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer on a Small
Lot Subdivision, or Tentative Parcel Map or Map to the Planning Commission by
written notice thereof submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10) days
following their notification of the Planning Director's, or designee, and City
Engineer's action pursuant to CCMC Title 17, Chapter 17.640.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.315 FINDINGS.
   Following an Administrative Review, the Parcel or Tentative Map shall not be
approved unless findings have been made that the map, including the provisions
for design and improvement, is consistent with the General Plan of the City,
Map Standards, or any related elements or specific plans. The Planning
Director, or designee, and City Engineer shall approve a Parcel or Tentative
Subdivision Map if it makes any of the following findings:
   A.   That the proposed map is consistent with the Map Standards;
   B.   That the proposed map is consistent with the findings listed under §
15.10.095.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.320 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   The Planning Director and City Engineer may approve or recommend approval of
an Administrative Review for a proposed project in compliance with the Map
Standards and §
15.10.300 (if applicable) and may impose conditions upon the project. As a
condition of approval, all Small Lot Subdivisions, Tentative Maps, and Parcel
Maps, shall be required to conform to the plans approved during the
Administrative Site Plan review process. These plans shall be included in the
related subdivision map case file.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
FINAL MAPS
§ 15.10.400 ACCEPTANCE FOR CHECKING.
   If a Final Map is submitted to the County Engineer for checking under an
agreement for examination of Tentative Maps and Parcel Maps, the subdivider
shall pay a map checking fee to the County Engineer in addition to all other
fees and charges required by law. This fee shall be equal to the fee
established by the County of Los Angeles for checking Tentative Maps and Parcel
Maps. In addition to County fees, City fees will be assessed for review and
processing as established by City Council resolution. If a Final Map is
submitted to a professional consultant for checking under an agreement for
examination of Maps and Parcel Maps with the City, the subdivider shall pay a
map checking fee to the City to cover fees for the professional consultant in
addition to all other fees and charges required by law
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.405 FINAL MAP PROCESSING.
   The City Engineer shall conduct a non-discretionary review and have final
approval of a subdivision Final Map. No appeal process shall be involved. The
Final Map shall be considered complete for filing when it complies with all
provisions of this Subchapter and is accompanied with the statements,
agreements, cash and/or bonds required.
   A.   Filing. The subdivider shall file the following with the City Engineer:
      1.   Sufficient documents and plans, as prescribed by the City Engineer,
to allow them to estimate accurately the amount of bond required to guarantee
such improvements; and the required filing and checking fees. Said map shall be
accompanied by traverse sheets showing the closure within allowable limits of
the exterior boundary of each irregular block and lot.
      2.   Title guarantee, deed restrictions, as required by §
15.10.230 B., improvement agreement and bond, if not previously filed.
   B.   Departmental approvals. The following functions shall be acted upon
within twenty (20) days after filing:
      1.   The City Engineer shall examine the Final Map. If they shall
determine that said map is technically correct, substantially conforms to the
Tentative Map and any approved alteration thereof, and to the provisions of the
ordinance codified herein and the State Map Act, they shall so certify on said
map and transmit the same to the City Clerk. If they shall find that full
conformity has not been made, they shall so advise the subdivider in writing
and afford them an opportunity to make the necessary changes.
      2.   The Planning Director, or designee, shall examine the Final Map. If
they shall determine that the map substantially conforms to the approved
Tentative Map and any condition imposed thereon, they shall so certify on said
map.
      3.   When filing is completed and approved as outlined above, the City
Engineer shall transmit the final approved map, with all accompanying
statements, agreements, cash and/or bonds required to the County for their
review and recordation.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.415 MAP CHECKING FEE.
   After approval by the City Engineer, or County of Los Angeles if the City
Engineer refers map to the County, and after signatures and seals have been
affixed, the original Final Map, accompanied by the necessary filing fee, shall
be transmitted to the Land Development Division of Los Angeles County Public
Works or other applicable department for a final check for compliance with the
State Map Act, for the obtaining of the necessary guarantee of title, and for
filing with the County Recorder. No map shall have any force or effect until it
has been approved by the City Engineer and no title to any property described
in any offer of dedication shall pass until filing of the Final Map. No
building permit shall be issued until filing of the Final Map.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.420 TRANSMITTAL OF FINAL MAP TO COUNTY.
   After approval by the City of a Final or Parcel Map of a subdivision, the
map shall be transmitted to the Land Development Division of Los Angeles County
Public Works or other applicable department, unless the City Engineer or
subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. It shall be the
obligation of the subdivider to submit a copy of the approved Final Map to the
Land Development Division of Los Angeles County Public Works or other
applicable department in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code § 66466(f).
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.425 SEPARATED PARCELS.
   No land shall be subdivided on any single map when such land is separated or
divided into two (2) or more parcels or portions by any parcel of land, other
than a street, alley, railroad right-of-way, public utility right-of-way, or
flood control right-of-way, and when such land is so separated, each separated
parcel or portion thereof, if subdivided, shall be subdivided as a separate
parcel and shown on a separate subdivision map.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.430 FINAL MAP CONTENTS.
   A.   The Final Map shall show the following:
      1.   Boundaries and streets. The exterior boundaries of the property; the
borderlines and centerlines of all proposed streets and alleys, with their
width and names; any other portions intended to be dedicated for public use. In
case of branching streets, the line of departure from one street to another
shall be indicated.
      2.   Adjacent streets. The lines of all adjoining properties; the lines
of adjacent streets and
alleys showing their widths and names.
      3.   Lot lines and numbers. All lot lines and numbers for all lots,
easements, and their purposes. All lots are to be numbered consecutively
throughout the subdivision starting with the number "1," except units of a
total development, which shall be numbered consecutively throughout the
development.
      4.   Dimensions. All dimensions, both linear and angular, for locating
boundaries of the subdivision, lots, street and alley lines, and easements. The
linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot.
      5.   Monuments. All permanent monuments, both found and set, together
with their description, shall fully include their location and size, and if any
points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated.
      6.   Titles and description. Title and description of property being
subdivided showing its location and extent, points of compass, scale of plan,
basis of bearing, and names of subdivider and of engineer or surveyor platting
the tract.
      7.   Inundation. Boundaries of any areas within the proposed subdivision
which are subject to periodic inundation by water.
      8.   Private restrictions. Any private restrictions required to be filed
with the City by this Chapter shall be shown on the plat or reference to them
thereon; and the plats shall contain proper acknowledgment of owners and
mortgagees accepting said platting and restrictions.
      9.   City boundaries. City boundaries which adjoin a subdivision shall be
clearly designated and located in relation to adjacent lot or block lines. No
lot shall be subdivided by a City boundary line.
      10.   Title sheets. Title sheets shall indicate where vehicular access
rights have been surrendered on major, thoroughfare, and expressway streets.
      11.   Acreage. On each lot containing .75 acres or more, show the acreage
to the nearest one hundredth (1/100) acre.
   B.   The following additional material shall be submitted with the Final
Map.
      1.   Traverse sheets. The subdivider shall provide the City Engineer
traverse sheets prepared by a registered civil engineer or a license surveyor
showing the mathematical closure within one (1) foot to ten thousand (10,000)
feet perimeter of the exterior boundary of the tract and of each block within
the tract and each irregular lot.
      2.   Guaranty of title. The subdivider shall furnish to the Council a
guaranty of title or letter from a competent title company, certifying that the
names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the
land being subdivided, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper
certificate and are correctly shown on said map, both as to consent as to the
making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary. Such a guaranty
shall be issued for the benefit of the City of Culver City and protection of
the Council and shall be continued complete up to the instant of filing for
record with the County of Los Angeles.
      3.   Improvement agreement. The subdivider shall file an agreement for
all improvements as herein required and as may be further required by the
Council or by law, and shall secure the performance in accordance with the
standards of the Cal. Business and Professions Code and §
15.10.930 of this Chapter.
      4.   Taxes.
         a.   Prior to the filing of the Final Map, the subdivider shall file
with the Clerk of the County of Los Angeles a certificate from the official
computing redemptions in Los Angeles County and in the City of Culver City,
showing that according to the records of their office there are no liens
against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid state, county,
municipal, or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except
taxes or special assessments not yet payable.
         b.   As to taxes or special assessments collected as taxes not yet
payable, the subdivider shall file with the City Clerk of the City of Culver
City a certificate by each proper office, giving their estimate of the amount
of taxes and assessments which are a lien, but which are not yet payable.
         c.   Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for
taxes or special assessment collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the
Final Map shall not be filed for record until the owner or subdivider executes
and files with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of Los Angeles County a
good and sufficient bond to be approved by the Board and by its terms made to
inure to the benefit of the County guaranteeing the payment of all state,
county, municipal, and local taxes and all special assessments collected as
taxes, which, at the time the Final Map is filed for record, are a lien against
the property, which are not yet payable. In lieu of a bond, a deposit may be
made of money or negotiable bonds in the amount, and of the kind approved for
securing deposits of public money.
      5.   A dedication, on the title page, dedicating all streets, alleys,
public improvements, and utility easements to the City, and, if requested by
City, a deed or document of dedication in proper form for recordation separate
from the Final Map.
      6.   Proper notation and identification of soil reports on the title
sheet as required by the State Map Act.
      7.   If required by §
15.10.230 B., three (3) copies of the proposed restrictions, in the final form
as a Declaration of Restrictions, signed by all of the owners of any interest
in the subdivision who sign the Final Subdivision Map. All three (3) copies
shall be acknowledged by the signers before a Notary Public, and in a form
which will enable it to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Los
Angeles County, California.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.435 FINAL MAP FORM.
   A.   The Final Map or plan shall be made to a minimum scale of one hundred
(100) feet to the inch, using more than one (1) sheet if necessary to furnish
the desired space. The original shall be drawn in black ink upon tracing cloth
or polyester base film of good quality, and the size of the sheet shall be
eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches, all sheets having a one (1)
inch margin on all other borders.
   B.   Each sheet shall be numbered and the total number of sheets comprising
the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, the relation of one (1) sheet to
another clearly shown, and the number of sheets used in the map shall be set
forth in the title of said map. If more than two (2) sheets are necessary for
the map, an index map shall be required.
      C.   Title sheet. The title of each such Final Map shall consist of
"Tract No ..... in the City of Culver City," which shall be shown at the top
center of all sheets comprising the map.
      D.   Subtitle. The title sheet shall also contain a subtitle giving a
general description of the property being subdivided by reference to maps which
have been previously recorded or by reference to the plat of a United States
Survey. Each reference in such description, to any tract or subdivision, shall
be spelled out and worded identically with the original record thereof and
references to book and page of record must be complete.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.440 REVERSION TO ACREAGE MAP REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirements for a reversion to acreage map shall be the same as stated
in §
15.10.435, except that upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose
of reverting subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the
words "A reversion to acreage of ...." (insert a legal description of the land
being reverted).
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.445 SURVEY PROCEDURE AND PRACTICE.
   A.   The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision,
whether for preparation of Final Map or Parcel Map, shall conform to the
details set forth in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code Div. 3, Ch. 15 (commencing with §
8700). The allowable error of closure of any portion of a Final Map or approved
Parcel Map shall be 1/10,000.
   B.   In the event that the City Engineer, County Engineer, or the State
Highway Engineer, shall have established the centerline of any street or alley
in or adjoining a subdivision, the Final Map or approved Parcel Map shall show
such centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If determined
by ties, that fact shall be stated upon the Final Map or approved Parcel Map.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.450 DEDICATION EXCEPTIONS.
   Dedication is not required on any map referred to in Cal. Gov't Code §§
66499.11 et seq. and/or on any map made for the sole purpose of establishing
existing land title boundaries; except that dedications may be required
however, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66499.11 et seq. if so determined by
the Council.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.455 ADDITIONAL COPY OF MAP TO SHOW STRUCTURES.
   Any Final Map of a subdivision presented to the City for acceptance of
easements and filing for record shall be accompanied by an additional copy on
which is delineated all the structures existing within the easements, except
publicly-owned storm drains, water lines, sewers, and other sanitary
facilities, whether such structures are on recorded easements or not.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.460 EASEMENT CERTIFICATE.
   Any Final Map presented to the City for acceptance and filing for record
shall have written thereon, in addition to or as a part of any other
certificate required, a certificate signed by the owner and the subdivider and
by all persons claiming any interest other than a right-of-way, easement, or
other interest, none of which can ripen into a fee, and the land shown included
within the subdivision shown on the map, in substantially the following form:
   "We hereby certify that, except as shown on a copy of this map on file in
the office of the City Engineer, we know of no easement or structure existing
within the easement hereby offered for dedication to the public, other than
publicly-owned water lines, sewers, or storm drains; that we will grant no
right or interest within the boundaries of said easement offered to the public,
except where such right or interest is expressly made subject to the said
easements. Further, that there are no leaseholds or other interests relating to
such easements which would prevent the use of the easements for the purpose
intended."
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.465 WAIVER OF SIGNATURES.
   If the owner of an easement or right-of-way of any kind or nature in any
right-of-way offered for dedication, who has no other interest whatever in any
part of the lands included within the subdivision, refuses to make their
easement subject to any right-of-way offered to the public, but the Final Map
in all other respects complies with this Subchapter and with the Subdivision
Map Act, and the Council finds that the subdivider has in good faith attempted
to obtain the necessary signature from such owner and has been unable to do so,
and that a refusal to accept the Final Map for filing would work an undue
hardship on the subdivider, then by a majority vote of all its members, the
Council may accept such map, if the City Attorney finds that the dedicated
easements will be legally sufficient and usable by the City and the public even
if such signatures are omitted.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
PARCEL MAPS
§ 15.10.600 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subchapter is to supplement the Subdivision Map Act in
order to provide for a division of land into four (4) lots or fewer, and to
govern such a division of land under the provisions of this Chapter. The
regulations outlined are intended to assure compliance with the Zoning Code, as
set forth in Title 17 of this Code, and the various elements of the General
Plan; to provide necessary street dedication and improvements, and to prevent
interference with the opening or extension of streets necessary for emergency
vehicular access, proper traffic circulation, drainage, and the future
development of adjacent properties.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.605 ADDITIONAL FILING REQUIREMENTS.
   Parcel Maps shall be filed for all divisions of land coming within Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 66425 et seq. Such maps may be processed as a Tentative Parcel
Map to be followed by a Final Parcel Map; or as a Parcel Map and subject to all
the provisions of the State Map Act and this Chapter relating to Parcel Maps.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.610 EXCEPTIONS.
   Provisions of this Subchapter do not apply to the following divisions of
land:
   A.   Those complying with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the
provisions of this Chapter pertaining to division of land under control of said
Map Act in the City of Culver City.
   B.   Those of record prior to April 9, 1969.
   C.   Those made solely for the purpose of opening or widening of a public
street, flood control channel, or other public improvement, provided no lots
are created other than those directly caused by such opening or widening.
   D.   Those where the resulting number of lots remains the same or is
decreased, and such division is not in conflict with the provisions of this
Chapter or the Zoning Code, as set forth in CCMC Title 17.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.615 PERMITS OR CERTIFICATES NOT TO BE ISSUED WHERE PROPERTY SOLD OR
DIVIDED IN VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS.
   No building permits or certificate of occupancy or license to use shall be
issued for a building, structure, use or construction on any property where a
portion of the property has been sold or divided in violation of this
Subchapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.620 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS.
   Persons applying for approval hereunder shall file with the Planning
Director, or designee, and the City Engineer a Tentative Parcel Map showing the
proposed land division together with sufficient copies of the map to permit
said Planning Director, or designee, to furnish copies to other departments,
which, in the opinion of said Director, or designee, and City Engineer, may
have an interest in the proposed division of land. Said map shall be drawn to
scale, showing size, dimensions, elevations, and location of the property,
size, dimensions and construction, and relative location of existing or
proposed improvements thereon (including without limitation, streets, alleys,
driveways, and parking areas), and the proposed division thereof.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.625 ACTION ON PARCEL MAP.
   A.   Upon the filing of an application as herein provided, the Planning
Director, or designee, and City Engineer shall review and shall approve,
approve with a condition or disapprove said Tentative Parcel Map. The Planning
Director, or designee, and City Engineer shall have final approval.
   B.   When all requirements of the Planning Director, or designee, and City
Engineer, made as a condition of approval, as authorized by this Subchapter,
have been met, the City Engineer shall
approve the Parcel Map, which shall then be duly filed with the County Recorder
within the time set forth in §
15.10.275 of this Chapter.
   C.   The applicant or any interested person or City official may appeal the
decision of the Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer on a
Tentative Parcel Map or Parcel Map to the Planning Commission or the City
Council by written notice thereof submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10)
days following notification of the Planning Director, or designee, and City
Engineer's action pursuant to CCMC Title 17,
Chapter 17.640.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.630 FINDINGS.
   The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer may approve or
conditionally approve the dividing of property into four (4) or fewer lots as
shown on the Tentative Parcel Map pursuant to the findings listed in §
15.10.095.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.635 DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   A.   The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer may require as a
condition to the approval of a Final Map, the dedication or improvement or both
of highways, streets, alleys, other public ways, or easements included by the
review authority to be necessary for local traffic, drainage, utilities, or
sanitary needs.
   B.   The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer in approving the
Final Map shall require the owner or applicant to install or enter into a
suitable agreement and to post a bond in the amount recommended by the City
Engineer guaranteeing the installation of such improvements as shall be
required of the applicant under the provisions of this Chapter. In addition,
the Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer shall not approve any
division of property which fails to provide that each lot created has access on
either a dedicated public thoroughfare or an easement of record providing
access to and from such dedicated public thoroughfare.
   C.   Any offer of dedication or easement required as a condition of approval
shall be binding upon the owner, their heirs, assigns, or successors in
interest. Such offer may not be withdrawn, nor shall any action be taken to
jeopardize the City's interests in such offer of dedication until the City
Engineer vacates or quitclaims such offer or approves and there is filed with
the County Recorder a resubdivision or reversion to acreage map over said
offer. In the event the review authority does not approve the Final Parcel Map,
the offer of dedication is automatically revoked and canceled.
   D.   All improvements shall be in accordance with the standards of the City
Engineer.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.645 FINAL PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS.
   A Final Parcel Map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor and shall show:
   A.   A title consisting of the words "Final Parcel Map" and the words "in
the City of Culver City" and a subtitle consisting of a description of all
property being divided.
   B.   If the Final Parcel Map is based on a field survey, all monuments
found, set, reset, replaced, or removed, describing their size, kind, and
location, and giving other data relating thereto. Monuments shall be set at all
boundary corners or angle points not previously shown on a record map or on any
street, dedicated as a condition of the tentative approval at centerline
intersections, beginning of a curve (BC), at the end of a curve (EC), or points
of intersection (PI), and angle points.
   C.   Bearing or witness monuments, basis of bearings, electric lines, and
scale of map.
   D.   Signature and license or registration number of the licensed survey or
registered civil engineer who prepared the map.
   E.   Date of survey.
   F.   Statement of the City Engineer or City Surveyor as required by Cal.
Gov't Code § 66450.
   G.   On each lot containing an area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
or more, shall show the size to the nearest square foot.
   H.   The lots shall be numbered beginning with numeral "1" and continuing
consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the Final Parcel Map.
   I.   All drainage channels shall be shown.
   J.   Name of person for whom survey was made.
   K.   Any other data necessary for an intelligent interpretation of the
various items and locations of points, lines, and areas shown may be required
by the City Engineer.
   L.   If the Parcel Map creating four (4) or fewer lots does not, in the
opinion of the City Engineer, satisfy the requirements of Cal. Gov't Code §
66445, a field survey shall be performed at the expense of the applicant to
establish the boundaries of the Parcel Map. The survey shall be checked for
conformance to the standards and details set forth in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code
Div. 3, Ch. 15 (commencing with § 8700), the Land Surveyor's Act, § 95 of
Parcel Map Form. The Parcel Map shall conform to all requirements of Cal. Gov't
Code § 66445.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 15.10.700 ACCESS AND EASEMENTS.
   The following general design standards shall govern the approval of any
subdivision map:
   A.   Blocks shall not be longer than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet
between intersecting street lines, except on major streets and thoroughfares,
where longer blocks may be required. Frontage on more than one (1) street will
not be permitted except on corner lots and reversed corner lots unless
necessary because of topographic conditions, and then only upon approval of the
review authority and when access rights are released on one (1) street.
   B.   Improved walkways of not less than ten (10) feet in width, and
landscaped as required by the Parks Superintendent, may be required through
blocks more than nine hundred (900) feet in length and through other blocks
where necessary to provide access to schools, parks, and/or scenic easements.
   C.   All lots shall front on a dedicated public street or have access to
same via a private street or the "stem" of a "flag lot." Flag lots shall be
allowed only when, in the opinion of the review authority, there is no
reasonable alternative. The stem of any flag lot shall be a minimum width of
fifteen (15) feet; however, if two (2) or more such stems are contiguous for
fifty (50) percent or more of their length, each stem may have a minimum width
of ten (10) feet. Not more than four (4) such stems may be permitted
contiguously. This standard shall not apply for a Small Lot Subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.705 ROADS AND STREETS.
   A.   Existing streets shall be continued as required by the review
authority.
   B.   Street stubs shall be required to adjacent un-subdivided property
where, in the opinion of the review authority, they are necessary. A
satisfactory, temporary turn-around may be required.
   C.   Half streets shall be allowed only when, in the opinion of the review
authority, there is no practical alternative thereto.
   D.   Streets shall intersect at as near right angles as is practical. Radius
of curvature, where the property lines intersect, shall be a minimum of fifteen
(15) feet, except for those streets designated as a part of the Select Street
System, where Select Street System standard minimums shall apply. An optional
method of diagonal cutoff may be used provided the dimensions thereof do not
reduce visibility, sidewalk width, or curve radius obtained by the above-
specified radii. Streets intersecting at an angle other than ninety (90)
degrees shall have sufficient radius or cut-off to provide the same results as
the traffic movement, visibility, and designs provided by the foregoing.
   E.   "T" or three-way intersections may not be located closer than one
hundred fifty (150) feet to another street intersection.
   F.   Alleys conforming to Culver City engineering and design standards shall
be required to be constructed in industrial, commercial, and in multiple-family
areas where necessary to control vehicular access to thoroughfares and major
streets.
   G.   Turn-around areas at the end of cul-de-sac streets shall have the
following limiting dimensions.
      1.   Forty (40) foot minimum radius to property line on streets in
hillside areas.
      2.   Fifty (50) foot minimum radius to property line on all other
streets.
      3.   Thirty-five (35) foot minimum radius to curb in hillside area.
      4.   Forty (40) foot minimum radius to curb, flat area.
      5.   Names for proposed new streets shall be assigned or approved by the
Department of Planning and shown on Tentative and Final Parcel Maps.
      6.   Streets shall conform as to alignment and width, defined on the
circulation element of the General Plan of the City of Culver City.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.710 PRIVATE STREETS.
   A.   The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer may approve
private streets which shall be physically closed to the public for public
traffic and are posted as a private street. On any Tentative Map or Final Map,
either as a Parcel Map or as a subdivision map, such private streets shall be
shown. The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer may approve only
on conditions which guarantee reasonable maintenance of such streets. Every
Final Parcel Map and Final Subdivision Map which has private streets shall
contain an offer of dedication which shall remain open and may be accepted by
the Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer at any time. A plan and
profile of any such street as required by this Chapter must be submitted with
either a Final Parcel Map or a Final Subdivision Map. No street may be accepted
unless it meets all existing City standards at the time of acceptance.
   B.   The map and deed restrictions shall contain provisions for free and
unimpeded access by emergency vehicles and persons or vehicles necessary to
perform public service functions such as refuse collection, utility
installation and repair, and the like.
   C.   All private streets shall meet the requirements prescribed by this
Chapter for public streets.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.715 RADIUS.
   Minimum center-line radius on streets shall be:
   A.   Major streets—five hundred (500) feet.
   B.   Secondary streets—two hundred fifty (250) feet.
   C.   Flat and hillside, local—one hundred (100) feet.
   D.   Steep hillside, local—seventy-five (75) feet.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.720 GRADES.
   A.   Maximum grades permitted shall be: Seven (7) percent on major streets;
ten (10) percent on secondary; fifteen (15) percent on a local street; and
streets shall be graded to full right-of-way. Where topography makes it
necessary, grades of not more than twenty (20) percent may be allowed for
distances not to exceed one hundred (100) feet when approved by the City
Engineer.
   B.   Normal Minimum grades permitted: One (1) percent (absolute minimum
permitted; .03 percent cross slope across intersections; .02 percent when
approved by City Engineer).
   C.   Maximum grade permitted on "switch-backs" or curves with a radius of
less than two hundred (200) feet shall not exceed five (5) percent.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.725 SOIL CONDITIONS.
   The soil conditions in any proposed subdivision shall be analyzed by a
recognized testing laboratory approved by the City Engineer, and the results
thereof shall be submitted to them. The City Engineer shall instruct the
resting laboratory as to location and number of soil tests required, and the
laboratory's report shall contain recommendations for pavement design and safe
soil-bearing values for footings, and the like. The City Engineer may accept or
reject any recommendations of the laboratory without prejudice. All costs in
connection with the soil test shall be borne by the subdivider.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.730 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The following design standards shall govern the approval of any commercial
subdivision and do not apply to mixed use subdivisions.
   A.   Minimum alley right-of-way shall be twenty-five (25) feet, with twenty-
five (25) feet paved. Deadend alleys shall be provided with a twenty-five (25)
foot radius hammerhead turnaround.
   B.   All other applicable regulations set forth in this Chapter and the
Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, shall be complied with in
the development of a commercial subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.735 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The following design standards shall govern the approval of any industrial
subdivision.
   A.   Minimum alley right-of-way shall be twenty-five (25) feet paved.
Deadend alleys shall be provided with a twenty-five (25) foot radius hammerhead
turn-around.
   B.   All other applicable regulations set forth in this Chapter and the
Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, shall be complied with in
the development of industrial subdivisions.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.740 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The following design standards shall govern the approval of any residential
subdivision map, including maps for mixed use developments:
   A.   Lot frontage. A lot shall front upon the street which parallels the
long dimension of the block, except that a lot shall not front on a primary or
secondary arterial street. A key lot shall not be permitted unless it is
established that it cannot be avoided. A double frontage lot shall not be
permitted, unless the review authority, or the Planning Commission or City
Council upon appeal, in the exercise of its discretion, approves the same after
it has been established that a double frontage lot cannot be avoided if the
dimensions set forth in this Section are to be secured for a majority of other
lots in the same subdivision. Vehicular access may be limited to one (1)
frontage of a double frontage lot. The side lot lines of each rectangular lot,
and each other lot (so far as possible) shall be at approximate right angles to
the street on which the lot fronts.
   B.   Large lots. When parcels of land are subdivided into larger than
building lots, such parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening and
ultimate extension of adjacent local streets. When parcels are so divided, each
lot indicated shall be of such size and shape as to permit any individual owner
to resubdivide, giving each lot legal size, shape, and access, independent of
the adjoining owners.
   C.   Conformity with zoning ordinance. Residential lot dimensions and area
shall comply with the provisions of the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17
of this Code, for the zone or zones within which the subdivision is located.
   D.   Drainage - sewering. In all subdivisions, the layout of streets,
alleys, lots, and easements shall be such as to provide for sanitary sewers and
storm drainage in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. When construction
is considered necessary to care for such flow, such construction shall be
guaranteed by a bond in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney and an amount
satisfactory to the City Engineer. When, in the opinion of the City Engineer,
after consultation with the Los Angeles County Flood Control District, off-site
construction is considered necessary to care for such flow, the subdivider
shall pay a portion of the cost for said construction in the amount and manner
as outlined in Cal. Gov't Code § 66483.
   E.   Building setback lines. Front line setbacks greater than those required
in the Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, may be required
whenever the review authority determines that the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare will be conserved or furthered by such
requirements. Setbacks may also be required in lieu of street widenings. When
required, such building lines shall be indicated on Final and Parcel Maps at
the distance from the street lines as specified.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.745 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL AREAS.
   A.   Intent and purpose. Areas included within a proposed subdivision upon
which a geological survey or report has been required pursuant to §
15.10.250 shall receive special attention under the subdivision regulations of
the City of Culver City in order to safeguard the health, safety and general
welfare and to protect the natural beauty and economic advantages related to
the hillside living environment. In carrying out the general purposes, the
following policies shall be complied with in all such developments.
      1.   When a proposed subdivision includes property concerning which the
County Engineer has recommended that a geological report be required, such
report shall be submitted to the City Engineer setting forth all relevant
geological data pertaining to the proposed subdivision and including separately
stated conclusions, listing any potential hazards to public health, safety, and
welfare which could result from grading or building upon the proposed site.
      2.   Insofar as practical, the architecture of the buildings and
structures shall be designed to fit the terrain upon which they are to be
constructed rather than grading a hillside area into pads to fit a flat land
house plan.
      3.   Natural hillsides and vegetation shall be retained wherever possible
in order to prevent erosion and preserve the natural beauty.
      4.   Wherever grading is done, either by cutting or filling, the land
shall be compacted to the standards of the City of Culver City over the entire
area being changed or modified, and all slopes shall be provided with
appropriate drainage structures, landscaping, and a water system adequate to
maintain growth and prevent hillside fires.
      5.   Where clustering or development is proposed, the total number of
dwelling units within a subdivision or parcel shall not exceed the density
permitted in the zoning district in which the property is located or exceed the
density policies set forth in the General Plan, whichever is more restrictive.
Dedication of development rights for open area shall be offered to the City on
the Final or Parcel Map.
      6.   Development shall be prohibited in areas where the City Council,
upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, finds that street and highway
access is inadequately provided for; or where protection against fire or
flooding cannot be provided without excessive cost to the City; or where
grading would endanger the valley areas due to potential erosion and slides; or
where geological conditions indicate that unstable situations would exist if
the earth form or vegetation were disturbed.
   B.   Design standards.
      1.   Maximum height of cut or fill slopes. All grading shall comply to
Code regulations relating to grading. No cut or fill slope shall exceed twenty
(20) feet in height as measured from the base of the slope on the lot at the
bottom to the top of the slope on the upper lot unless special provisions are
made for landscaping, maintenance, and such drainage structures as may be
required by the City Engineer.
      2.   Drainage. Wherever a drainage pattern is modified or changed, or
where storm water tends to concentrate, special drainage facilities shall be
provided as deemed necessary by the City Engineer to prevent erosion on the
upper lot and the sloping surfaces and flooding or land slippage onto the lower
lot.
      3.   Fire prevention. Where landscaping is provided, the materials used
shall be fire resistant. All dense growth shall be removed from the areas under
and adjacent to buildings and structures in accordance with good fire
prevention practices and fire regulations.
      4.   Fire protection.
         a.   In areas where, in the opinion of the Fire Chief of the City,
there will be a fire hazard, unobstructed access for fire protection equipment
or firebreak easements shall be required. The Fire Chief shall recommend to the
review authority where such easements or firebreaks are needed.
         b.   Water systems shall be sized to provide a sufficient amount of
water to meet the fire fighting requirements of the area involved. The Fire
Chief shall review locations for proposed fire hydrant systems in relation to
the National Board of Fire Underwriters standards and make recommendations to
the review authority.
      5.   Street design standards.
         a.   Hillside streets (streets serving more than four (4) lots).
            (1)   Maximum grade is fifteen (15) percent unless approved by the
City Engineer. Streets with grades in excess of fifteen (15) percent shall only
be allowed for short distances and they shall be designed and improved with
special construction standards as determined by the City Engineer.
            (2)   Minimum right-of-way shall not be less than forty-four (44)
feet where access is
permitted from one (1) side only. The minimum right-of-way where access is
permitted from both sides shall not be less than fifty (50) feet.
            (3)    Sidewalks shall be required on at least one (1) side in both
instances mentioned in the last paragraph.
            (4)   Minimum curb to curb width shall be thirty-six (36) feet. A
thirty-two (32) foot pavement shall be allowed where lots exist along only one
(1) side.
            (5)   Minimum centerline radius shall not be less than two hundred
(200) feet.
            (6)   Maximum cul-de-sac length shall not exceed five hundred (500)
feet.
         b.   Minor hillside streets (streets serving four (4) lots or fewer).
            (1)   Maximum grade is fifteen (15) percent, provided all grades
over fifteen (15) percent shall be designed and improved with special
construction standards as determined by the City Engineer. Streets with grades
in excess of fifteen (15) percent shall only be allowed for short distances.
            (2)   Minimum right-of-way shall not be less than forty (40) feet,
unless specifically waived by the City Council.
            (3)    Sidewalks shall be required.
            (4)   Curb to curb width shall be not less than thirty-two (32)
feet. A twenty-eight (28) foot pavement may be allowed where lots exist among
only one (1) side.
            (5)   Minimum centerline radius shall not be less than one hundred
(100) feet.
            (6)   Maximum cul-de-sac length shall not exceed five hundred (500)
feet.
         c.   Site drainage. No building site shall be approved for
construction which does not have provisions for conducting water drainage from
the site to a natural drainage course, a drainage channel or a public street in
accordance with good engineering practice and in a manner approved by the City
Engineer.
         d.   Sewerage. Sewerage facilities such as local sewerage pipes shall
be required. However, upon approval of the Council, individual septic tanks may
be permitted if deemed necessary for temporary facilities. Sewers, however,
shall be installed to permit future connections.
         e.   Excavations. The following requirements shall supplement and/or
supersede the requirements of the adopted Uniform Building Code and the Grading
Ordinance of the City.
            (1)   No excavation or fill shall be permitted on any hillside area
prior to the approval of a site plan and a grading plan and the securing of a
grading permit as required by City Code.
            (2)   A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the Tentative
Map or Parcel Map.
            (3)   Excess dirt shall be carried to a disposal area designated on
the grading plan or to an approved off-site location.
         f.   Lot boundaries. Lots shall have their boundaries at the top
rather than at a midway point or at the bottom of a slope.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.750 PARK DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   It is hereby found and determined:
   A.   That the public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety
require that ten (10) acres of
property, for each one thousand (1,000) persons residing within the City be
devoted to park and recreational purposes.
   B.   That said requirements will be satisfied in part by the development of
regional parks to make available six (6) acres of property for each one
thousand (1,000) persons residing in the City for park and recreational
purposes.
   C.   That said requirement will be further satisfied in part by cooperative
arrangements between the City and the local school districts and/or the local
park and recreation districts to make available one (1) acre of property for
each one thousand (1,000) persons residing within the City for park and
recreational purposes.
   D.   That the remainder of the required acres, which is three (3) acres of
property for each one thousand (1,000) persons, shall be supplied by the
requirements of this Chapter in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code § 66477, and
the General Plan of the City of Culver City.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.755 SUBDIVIDER TO PROVIDE PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
   A.   Every subdivider who subdivides land for residential development, or
creates a condominium project as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 783, or planned
developments, real estate developments, stock cooperatives, and community
apartments, as defined in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 11003, 11003.1, 11003.2,
11003.4 and 11004, respectively, shall, as a condition precedent to filing for
a Final Map, dedicate parkland, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, for
neighborhood and community park or recreation purposes in conformity with §§
15.10.750 et seq.
   B.   Only the payment of fees may be required in subdivisions containing
fifty (50) parcels or fewer, except that when a condominium project, stock
cooperative, or community apartment project exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units,
dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels
may be less than fifty (50).
   C.   Nothing in this Section restricts the authority of the City to require
dedication of land, payment of fees or construction of improvements for needs
other than or in addition to neighborhood and community parks, or to require a
subdivider to mitigate, through dedication of land, construction of
recreational facilities, or payment of fees, any adverse impacts created by the
proposed development.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.760 EXEMPTIONS FROM PARK DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Subdivisions containing fewer than five (5) parcels and not used for
residential purposes shall be exempted from the park dedication or in lieu
fees; provided, however, notice shall be placed on the approval of such
Tentative Map or Tentative Parcel Map of a requirement that if a building
permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures
on any of the parcels within four (4) years of the recordation of the Final
Map, the in lieu fees shall be required and shall be satisfied by the owner of
each such parcel pursuant to the provisions of §
15.10.765.C.
   B.   The park dedication or in lieu fees requirements do not apply to
condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist solely of the
subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than
five (5) years old and in which no new dwelling units are added.
   C.   Units which are covenanted for low- and moderate-income households or
senior citizens within a subdivision shall be exempted from the requirements of
§
15.10.755 during the period the unit or units remain covenanted for such use.
Prior to the date these restrictions terminate, the then-current owner of each
such unit shall dedicate additional parkland or pay additional fees in lieu
thereof, or both, based on the then-current fair market value of the land and
in accordance with the density factor in effect at the time the restrictions
terminate.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.765 PARKLAND DEDICATION OR PAYMENT OF IN LIEU FEE.
   A.   Parkland dedication or payment of fee.
      1.   The public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety
require that three (3) acres of property for each one thousand (1,000) persons
residing within this City be devoted to neighborhood and community serving
parks.
      2.   The amount of land to be dedicated for neighborhood and community
park or recreation facilities or fees to be paid in lieu thereof shall be based
on the residential density of the proposed development, which shall be
determined on the basis of the number of residential dwelling units to be
constructed and the density factor, as set forth in Subsection A.3., so as to
provide three (3) acres of park area for one thousand (1,000) residents,
exclusive of and in addition to those school properties used cooperatively for
recreational purposes.
      3.   As used herein, the term "density factor" means the average number
of persons per household for the type of dwelling unit proposed to be
constructed, based on the most recent available federal census, or census taken
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 40200 et seq., according to the following:
         a.   Single-family detached dwelling unit: Two and seventy-five
hundredths (2.75) persons per dwelling unit;
         b.   Single-family attached dwelling unit: Two and forty-four
hundredths (2.44) persons per dwelling unit;
         c.   Multi-family residential developed with four (4) or fewer units:
Two and thirty-one hundredths (2.31) persons per dwelling unit;
         d.   Multi-family residential developed with more than five (5) units:
Two (2.00) persons per dwelling unit; and
         e.   Mobile homes: One and seventy-eight hundredths (1.78) persons per
dwelling unit.
      4.   Where the development contains more than one (1) type of dwelling
unit, the density factor for the number of each type of dwelling unit shall be
calculated separately, and the totals thereof shall be combined, to determine
the total amount of land dedicated or fees to be paid in lieu thereof.
      5.   If, at the time the Tentative Map is presented to the City for
approval or conditional approval, the proposed subdivision is presented without
a specific development proposal, such as an application for site plan review,
specific plan, conditional use permit, variance, planned development or similar
application, the parkland dedication or in lieu fee payment shall be
established in accordance with the presumed residential density as set forth in
Subsection B.
      6.   If, at a time subsequent to the recordation of a Final Map, there is
an increase in the number of units to be built or a change in the type of
dwelling unit which results in an increase in residential density, the
subdivider shall be required to dedicate additional parkland or pay additional
fees in lieu thereof in accordance with the density factor in effect at the
time the additional units or change in type of dwelling unit is approved.
      7.   When a fee is to be paid in lieu of or in addition to parkland
dedication, the amount of such fee shall be the fair market value, as
determined in Subsection C., per acre of the land within the proposed
subdivision multiplied by the number of acres required to be dedicated pursuant
to this Section.
   B.   Determination of parkland dedication or payment of fee in absence of a
development proposal.
      1.   If, at the time the Tentative Map is presented to the City for
approval or conditional approval, the proposed subdivision is presented without
a specific development proposal, the amount of land dedicated or fees to be
paid in lieu thereof shall be determined on the following basis:
         a.   The total number of residential dwelling units to be constructed
shall be the maximum number of such units permitted by the City's General Plan,
any applicable specific plan, or existing zoning, whichever is greater, on the
land included within the proposed subdivision.
         b.   The type of dwelling unit which yields the highest density factor
shall be used to determine the residential density of the proposed subdivision.
      2.   Nothing in this Section shall constitute an approval for
construction of the maximum number or type of residential dwelling units in the
absence of an approved site plan review for the proposed development.
   C.   Determination of fair market value.
      1.   The fair market value of the subdivision shall be determined by the
City based on a written appraisal report provided by the subdivider and
prepared and signed by an appraiser acceptable to the City. The appraisal shall
be paid for by the subdivider.
      2.   The date of the appraisal shall be no more than six (6) months prior
to the payment of the fee. If more than six (6) months elapses from the date of
the appraisal to the time of payment of the fee, the City may require
preparation of an updated appraisal. The subdivider shall pay for the cost of
any such updated appraisal.
      3.   For the purposes of this Section, fair market value shall be
determined based on the assumption that the Tentative Map or Tentative Parcel
Map is approved and in accordance with acceptable standards of the real estate
appraisal profession.
      4.   The determination of fair market value by the City shall be final
and conclusive.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
Cross-reference:
   Residential development park dedication and in lieu parkland fees, see §§
15.06.300 through
15.06.330
§ 15.10.770 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES CREDIT.
   A.   Where private open space area is developed for park or recreational
facilities in a proposed development, and the area is to be privately owned and
maintained by the future residents of the development, the park or recreational
facilities may be partially credited against the parkland dedication
requirement established in §
15.10.765, as provided in this Section.
   B.   The City shall determine at the time the Tentative Map is approved or
conditionally approved, whether it is in the public interest to determine a
maximum of fifty (50) percent of the parkland dedication requirement is
satisfied by the proposed development if there is private open space area with
recreational facilities, or such area is reasonably adaptable for use for
recreational or park purposes, taking into consideration factors such as the
size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location of such area within the
development.
   C.   Yards, setbacks, and other open space areas required to be maintained
by zoning and building regulations shall not be considered as credit against
the parkland dedication requirement.
   D.   The private ownership and maintenance of the private open space area as
park or recreational facilities is adequately provided for by written
agreement, and the use of such area is restricted by recorded covenants which
run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property within the
development and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of
the City.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.775 CHOICE OF LAND OR FEE.
   A.   Procedure. The procedure for determining whether the subdivider is to
dedicate land, pay a fee, or both, shall be as follows:
      1.   Subdivider. At the time of filing a Tentative Map for approval, the
owner of the property shall, as a part of such filing, indicate whether he or
she desires to dedicate property for park and recreational purposes, or whether
he or she desires to pay a fee in lieu thereof. If he or she desires to
dedicate land for this purpose, he or she shall designate the area thereof on
the Tentative Map as submitted.
      2.   Action of City. At the time of the Tentative Map approval, the
Council shall determine as a part of such approval, whether to require a
dedication of land within the subdivision, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or
a combination of both.
      3.   Pre-requisites for approval of Final Map. Where dedication is
required, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act. Where fees are required the same shall be deposited with
the City prior to the approval of the Final Map. Open space covenants for
private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the City Attorney
for their approval prior to the approval of the Final Map and shall be recorded
concurrently with the Final Map.
   B.   Determination.
      1.   Whether the City accepts land dedication or elects to require
payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined
by consideration of the following:
         a.   Recreation Element of the City General Plan; and
         b.   Topography, geology, access, and location of land in the
subdivision available for dedication; and
         c.   Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for
dedication.
      2.   The determination of the City as to whether land shall be dedicated,
or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and
conclusive. On subdivisions involving fifty (50) lots or fewer, only the
payment of fees shall be required.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.780 DEVELOPMENT OF RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   A.   At the time the Final Map is approved, the City Council shall develop a
schedule specifying when development of the park and recreational facilities
shall commence.
   B.   In lieu fees collected pursuant to §
15.10.765 shall be committed by the City within five (5) years after the
payment of such fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the
lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If such fees are not
committed, the then record owners shall be entitled to a refund of the fees in
the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all
lots within the subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.785 LIMITATION ON USE OF LAND AND FEES.
   The parkland dedicated or in lieu fees received pursuant to §
15.10.765 shall be used only for the purpose of developing new or
rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park or recreational
facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.790 ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE.
   As an alternative to and in lieu of the requirements of §§
15.10.750 through
15.10.775 the following procedure may be followed, subject to the approval of
the Council, by the subdivider.
   A.   If the owner of the land being subdivided is also the owner of adjacent
land upon which they are willing to impose restrictive covenants which will
provide open green areas for the benefit of future occupants of the land being
subdivided, as well as the public generally, and if the following conditions,
in the opinion of the Council, are met, then owner may submit a plan showing
the area to be made subject to the restrictive covenants and, if in the opinion
of the Council, the plan is a reasonable substitute for the park dedication or
fee requirements, the Council may approve and accept such offer in lieu of the
park dedication or payment of fees provisions herein contained.
   B.   The conditions which the Council must determine to be met are:
      1.   That the plans for the development of the subdivision contain
provisions for landscaping and open areas which the Council finds are adequate
to permit this alternative procedure.
      2.   That the restrictive covenants will assure open, green area within
reasonable proximity of the subdivision located in areas zoned either
residential or commercial.
      3.   That the City Council, upon the recommendation of the City Attorney,
has approved the legal sufficiency and form of the covenants to be recorded.
      4.   That the covenants will run with the land being subdivided and will
inure to the general public represented by the Council.
      5.   That the covenants may not be released or in any manner be rendered
ineffective without the prior written consent of the Council.
      6.   That the area of the property to be subject to such covenants is in
the opinion of Council, adequate. The Council shall consider the design,
layout, style and landscaping of the subdivision, and other adjoining areas in
reaching its determination.
      7.   That the method of maintaining the open, green area is acceptable to
the Council, provided; that if for any reason such areas are not maintained to
the satisfaction of the Council, the City shall have the right to go upon all
such areas and maintain them.
   C.   Such open, green areas need not be the site of active recreational
pursuits, but may be designed for passive use; however, the owner shall have
the proposed covenants drafted so as to clearly indicate any restrictions on
use by owners or residents of the proposed subdivision, or restrictions as to
the public generally, or restrictions as to all persons.
   D.   If this alternative procedure is selected by the subdivider and
approved by four (4) members of the Council, the Council shall then make the
necessary determination by resolution setting out the terms of approval.
   E.   All approved covenants shall be recorded prior to filing for record the
Final Map, or to the filing for record of any Final Map which represents a
portion of the Tentative Map.
   F.   No part of this Section shall be amended, repealed, or otherwise
modified without at least four (4) affirmative votes of the Council; further
that prior to any amendment, repeal or modification of said Section, the City
Council shall by resolution establish the date for a public hearing, which
shall be held only after giving at least ten (10) days notice by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation within Culver City; further that no
covenants or conditions or restrictions imposed upon such property may be
modified or damaged by any means without an affirmative vote of four (4)
members of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 15.10.900 REQUIREMENT.
   All areas required by the City for dedication and improvement as a condition
of approval of the Tentative Map shall be offered by the subdivider for
dedication and shall be improved by the subdivider.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.905 IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   The subdivider shall furnish the following information to the City Engineer,
prior to applying for any permit or permits for doing the work required to make
the improvements in accordance with the Final Map and the approved improvement
plans:
   A.   A grading plan consisting of typical cross-sections and finished grades
of all lots, streets, and highways in the proposed new subdivision, and grading
requirements, all in accordance with the American Public Works Association
guidelines, City of Culver City's Public Works Department, other standards as
may be adopted by the City.
   B.   Plan and profile drawings on all street, sewer, and drainage
improvements and utility mains (gas, water, electricity, and telephone). All
tracings or duplicate tracings shall be filed with the City Engineer; all work
to be submitted to and signed by a registered engineer and approved by the City
Engineer.
   C.   Provided, however, notwithstanding the opening paragraph of this
Section, any other pertinent information required by conditional approval shall
be provided before submission of the Final Map.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.910 GENERAL IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   All improvements shall conform to standards and specifications as determined
by American Public Works Association guidelines, City of Culver City's Public
Works Department, other standards as may be adopted by the City, and shall be
installed at the subdivider's expense. Permits shall be obtained from the City
Engineer, where required, before any construction is started. The following
general standards shall apply:
   A.   Utilities. All utilities shall be located underground except when
otherwise approved by the review authority. It shall be the responsibility of
the subdivider to meet this requirement.
   B.   Water courses. Water courses shall be shown as easements, and storm
drains shall be placed in easements when public right-of-way is not available
or adequate. The review authority, when so advised by the City Engineer or
Flood Control District, may require water courses to be placed entirely in
underground conduits or adequately fenced or otherwise improved.
   C.   Monuments.
      1.   Durable, metal monuments consisting of galvanized iron pipes twenty-
four (24) inches in length, or as approved by the City Engineer, shall be
installed or referenced to the following locations:
         a.   Boundary corners.
         b.   At intervals of not more than five hundred (500) feet along
boundary lines, at such lesser intervals as required by the City Engineer to
assure accuracy and ability to re-establish such monuments.
         c.   At the beginning and ending of property lines, curves, or P.I. at
the discretion of the City Engineer.
         d.   Lot corners and, in addition, set a lead and tack in the sidewalk
or curb on the prolongation of side lot lines.
      2.   Standard monuments shall be placed along the center lines of public
streets and alleys as follows: All intersections, all P.I.'s, or beginning and
ending of curves.
   D.   Street design. Street design shall conform to the American Public Works
Association guidelines, City of Culver City's Public Works Department, and
other standards as may be adopted by the City, but in no event shall streets be
paved with less than four (4) inches of asphaltic concrete paving and such sub-
base preparation as required for the design wheel loads and traffic volume.
Where the side slope of street embankments extends onto private property, slope
easements shall be required. Said slope shall not exceed the angle of repose
for the soil as determined by a soils engineer.
   E.   Commencement of work. Improvement work, including grading shall not be
commenced until the improvement plans for such work have been submitted to and
approved by the City Engineer, except grubbing and clearing. At the option of
the City Engineer, soil tests may be made in areas of substantial cut after the
over-burden has been removed.
   F.   Inspection. All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection
of and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
   G.   Commercial and industrial subdivision improvements. Improvements for
industrial and commercial subdivisions shall be as set out herein, except that
suitable planting areas may be substituted for street trees, at the discretion
of the review authority.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.915 ON-SITE IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   Improvements to be installed by each subdivider shall include the following:
   A.   Curb, gutter, sidewalks and walkways (for parking bays, where
required), including those on the subdivision's side of streets bordering upon
the boundaries of the subdivision.
   B.   Water lines, gas, electric, and other utility services to serve each
lot and the stub to back of curb in front or to lot line in rear.
   C.   Fire hydrants, including gate valves for same, size, and location to be
approved by Fire Chief.
   D.   Sanitary sewers and laterals to serve each lot and stubs to back of
curb, prior to paving.
   E.   Storm sewers, drains, and channel improvements.
   F.   Slope planting, silt basins, or other form of erosion control.
   G.   Paved streets, including those bordering upon the boundary of the
subdivision, to the center line of the full proposed street width. Half streets
shall be allowed only when, in the opinion of the review authority, there is no
practical alternative thereto.
   H.   Street lights, complete, including electroliers, conduits, tunnels, and
other necessary structures.
   I.   Street trees, as recommended by Parks Superintendent.
   J.   Street nameplate signs, including posts and hardware, at location
approved by the City Engineer to standard City specifications.
   K.   Stop signs and other traffic control signs and signals required by the
City Engineer after recommendation of the Chief of Police.
   L.   Fire alarm call boxes to be located as approved by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.920 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   The following off-site improvements may be required:
   A.   The development of a water supply system for domestic and fire
protection purposes which shall meet all standards of the City of Culver City
and such standards established by the Public Utilities Commission of the State
of California as may be applicable.
   B.   The development of sewage disposal facilities, or financial
contributions for the improvement of any existing sewage disposal systems, and/
or the construction of transmission lines from the proposed improvement to the
site of disposal.
   C.   Properly graded, drained, and paved access roads.
   D.   The extension of other utilities.
   E.   Storm drainage facilities as approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.925 DEDICATION.
   Every street, alley, right-of-way, and easement, or other public place,
shown on any subdivision or Parcel Map of land within the City of Culver City
shall be dedicated to the City when such dedication is deemed necessary by the
Council for public use, but this shall not be construed as acceptance of such
dedication until such dedication is formally accepted by resolution of the
Council. The following specific regulations shall apply:
   A.   Streets. Streets, alleys, and other rights-of-way in any subdivision or
minor division of land shall be offered for dedication. Part-width streets
shall be accepted for dedication only where extraordinary conditions warrant
such dedication as determined by the City Engineer. In any case, no less than
one-half (½) of the full width required for the ultimate street shall be
dedicated in addition to the reserve below.
   B.   Reserve strips.
      1.   Reserve strips or outlets where required to control access over
certain lot lines or over the end of street stubs shall be dedicated to the
City. When adjacent to the boundary of a tract or subdivision, a one (1) foot
reserve strip or outlot in addition to the street right-of-way shall be
dedicated along the boundary of the subdivision.
      2.   A reserve strip, in addition to other easements, shall be dedicated
to the City for the installation of a permanent wall or fence when required by
the review authority.
   C.   Park and recreation areas. The subdivider shall be required to dedicate
a park or recreational site sufficient in size and topography to serve the
immediate and future needs of the residents of such subdivided territory,
subject to the specific standards and conditions of §§
15.10.750 et seq. of this Chapter, or obtain the approval of the City Council
in following the alternative procedure provided in §
15.10.790.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.930 AGREEMENTS AND BONDS.
   A.   If the required improvements are not completed satisfactorily before
the Final Map is filed, the owner or owners of the subdivision shall, prior to
the approval of the map, enter into an Agreement with the Council to complete
the work within the time specified in the Agreement. The Agreement may provide
for the improvements to be installed in units, for extensions of the time under
specified conditions, or for the termination of the Agreement upon a reversion
of the subdivision or a part thereof to acreage. Such Agreement shall be
secured by good and sufficient bonds payable to the City approved by the
Council, or by the deposit of money or negotiable securities with the City as
provided in the Subdivision Map Act. Provided, however, that the faithful
performance bond shall be in an amount not less than one hundred (100) percent
of the total estimated costs of improvements and the materials bond shall be in
an amount not less than fifty (50) percent of the total estimated cost of
improvements.
   B.   The foregoing shall not preclude the owner or owners of the subdivision
from entering into a contract with the Council by which such owner or owners
agree to initiate and to consummate proceedings under an appropriate special
assessment act for the formation of a special assessment district covering the
subdivision or part thereof, for the financing and construction of designated
improvements upon the streets or easements dedicated by the Map.
   C.   The subdivider shall be responsible for safety and maintenance of all
improvements until accepted by the City and shall hold the City harmless.
   D.   After the Final Map has been recorded, all subdivision improvements
shall be accepted by the Council immediately upon satisfactory completion, and
the subdivider and any other person or agency having an interest in such
completion shall be notified in writing by the Council of such completion and
acceptance. At the time of such acceptance, the City shall take over the
subdivision public improvements for maintenance.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.935 DEPOSIT OF BOND.
   A.   After submission of the Tentative Map and before the approval and
acceptance of the Final Map, the City Engineer shall estimate the cost of all
improvements of every kind and character required to be installed by the
subdivider, and the subdivider shall thereon post with the City cash or a
surety company bond issued by a corporate surety company authorized to do
business in the State in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney in an amount
ten (10) percent in excess of the engineer's estimate of the cost of the
improvements to insure the installation of all improvements within the time
fixed by the City Engineer, but not to exceed one (1) year; provided, however,
that such time may be extended upon the renewal of any bond and for a time
approved by the City Engineer, but not to exceed one (1) year.
   B.   The City Engineer shall also estimate the cost of all general
supervision and inspections required to insure proper installation and
completion of all improvements in accordance with the City's general
requirements therefor. The subdivider shall thereupon post with the City the
amount so estimated, and upon completion of all the work, any amount not
actually used shall be refunded to the subdivider or, if the fund is exhausted
before completion of all the improvements, the subdivider shall forthwith pay
to the City an amount estimated by the City Engineer to be sufficient to cover
completion; provided, however, that if the subdivision is of such magnitude
that the installation and completion of improvements will extend over a period
in excess of six (6) months, or if the amount of inspections and general
supervision as estimated will exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the
subdivider may deposit an amount estimated to be sufficient for the first six
(6) months, or the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and the City
shall bill the subdivider monthly as the work progresses, which amount shall be
promptly paid by the subdivider until the City Engineer is satisfied that the
total amount paid to the City will be sufficient to cover the costs of all
general supervision and inspections by the City.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
URBAN LOT SPLITS AND SMALL LOT SUBDIVISIONS
§ 15.10.940 URBAN LOT SPLITS.
   A.   Purpose. This section is adopted pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§
65852.6, 65852.21, and 66411.7 for the purpose of implementing the City's
regulation of two (2)-unit residential development and Urban Lot Splits in the
City's Single-Family Residential Zone. Cal. Gov't Code § 65852.21(a) requires
the City to ministerially approve certain housing developments containing no
more than two (2) residential units within a single-family residential zone.
Cal. Gov't Code § 66411.7(a) requires that the City ministerially approve a
Parcel Map for an Urban Lot Split, subject to standards set forth in Cal. Gov't
Code § 66411.7(a)(1), (2), and (3).
   B.   Lot standards. The proposed Urban Lot Split subdivision shall conform
to the following standards:
      1.   An Urban Lot Split shall be prepared in accordance with requirements
set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66410 et. seq., 66444 - 66450 and the
applicable sections of this Chapter;
      2.   An urban lot split shall not be approved except in conjunction with
a concurrently submitted application for building permits for a two (2) unit
residential development pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 65852.21 and subject to
the provisions of this Section as applicable;
      3.   Development on the resulting parcels shall be limited to the
residential development approved in the concurrently submitted building permit
applications;
      4.   The parcel shall be located entirely within a Single-Family
Residential (R1) Zoning District;
      5.   The site shall not be located within an area subject to the Historic
Preservation Program as designated in CCMC Title 15,
Chapter 15.05, or included on the State Historic Resources Inventory;
      6.   The Urban Lot Split will subdivide an existing parcel to create no
more than two (2) new parcels;
      7.   The parcel proposed for subdivision shall not result in more than
two (2) dwelling units of any type per parcel involved in an Urban Lot Split,
including principal dwelling units, ADUs and JADUs, and residential development
permitted by Cal. Gov't Code § 65852.21;
      8.   One (1) principal unit is required per parcel;
      9.   Neither the owner of the parcel being subdivided nor any person
acting in concert with the owner shall have previously subdivided an adjacent
parcel under the provisions of this Chapter or Cal. Gov't Code § 66411.7.
ADJACENT means situated near or close by. Adjacent includes real property
across alleys, streets, public waterways or other public property;
      10.   The parcel proposed for subdivision shall not have been established
through a prior exercise of an Urban Lot Split as provided for by this Chapter
or Cal. Gov't Code § 66411.7;
      11.   The land uses proposed for the parcels created by the Urban Lot
Split shall be residential uses only and not include mixed-use or commercial or
other non-residential uses;
      12.   Rental terms of any unit created by the subdivision shall not be
less than thirty (30) consecutive days, nor shall rental terms allow
termination of the tenancy prior to the expiration of at least one (1) thirty
(30) day period occupancy by the same tenant;
      13.   The owner shall not have withdrawn rent or price-controlled
accommodations from rent or lease on this parcel within fifteen (15) years
prior to the date of application for the proposed project;
      14.   The proposed housing development shall not require the demolition
or alteration of any of the following types of housing:
         a.   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law
that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of moderate,
low, or very low income;
         b.   Housing that is subject to any form of public agency rent or
price control; or
         c.   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three
years.
   C.   Fire standards. All new development on a proposed Urban Lot Split
parcel shall be subject to the fire protection standards set forth in §
15.10.745 of this chapter as well as the California Fire Code (CFC) and
California Building Code (CBC).
   D.   Building and design standards. The proposed subdivision shall conform
with the objective design and development standards of the underlying zone.
   E.   Permit procedures.
      1.   An application for an Urban Lot Split shall be filed by the property
owner or an agent of the property owner on the City's approved form, subject to
a fee in an amount established by City Council resolution. The City will inform
the applicant in writing of any incompleteness within thirty (30) days after an
application is submitted;
      2.   An application shall include an affidavit stating that the applicant
intends to occupy one (1) of the housing units as their principal residence for
a minimum of three (3) years from the date of the approval of the Urban Lot
Split. An affidavit shall not be required of an applicant that is either a
"community land trust" (as defined by Cal. Rev. and Tax Code § 402.1(a)(11)(C)
(ii) or a "qualified nonprofit corporation" (as defined by Cal. Rev. and Tax
Code § 214.15);
      3.   An application for an Urban Lot Split shall meet the requirements
set forth in this Chapter;
      4.   The City shall act upon an application for an Urban Lot Split
without a discretionary review or public hearing, within sixty (60) calendar
days after a complete application for an Urban Lot Split is filed. The time
limit specified in this chapter may be extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and the City;
      5.   The Planning Director, or planning staff acting as designee, or the
City Engineer shall review and have final approval authority for Urban Lot
Splits without public hearings or discretionary review.
   F.   Denial. A proposed Urban Lot Split subdivision shall not be approved if
any of the following apply:
      1.   The proposed residential development would have a specific, adverse
impact, as defined and determined in Cal. Gov't Code § 65589.5(d)(2), upon
public health and safety for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact;
      2.   The site is located within wetlands, as defined in US Fish and
Wildlife Service Manual, Part 660, PW 2 (June 21, 1993);
      3.   The site is located on a hazardous waste site that is listed per
Cal. Gov't Code § 65962.5 or designated by Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25356;
      4.   The site is located within a delineated earthquake fault zone as
determined by the State Geologist in any official maps published by the State
Geologist, unless the development complies with applicable seismic protection
building code standards adopted by the California Building Standards Commission
under the California Building Standards Law;
      5.   The site is located within a special flood hazard area for the one
hundred (100)-year flood (any Zone A, Zone AO, or Zone B), unless the site has
been subject to a Letter of Map Revision prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and issued to the local jurisdiction, or the site meets
Federal Emergency Management Agency requirements necessary to meet minimum
flood plain management criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program
pursuant to Part 59 (commencing with § 59.1) and Part 60 (commencing with §
60.1) of Subchapter B of Chapter 1 of Title 44 of the Code of Federal
Regulations;
      6.   The site is located within a regulatory floodway as determined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency in any official maps published by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, unless the development has received a no-
rise certification in accordance with § 60.3(d)(3) of Title 44 of the Code of
Federal Regulations;
      7.   The site is located on lands identified for conservation in an
adopted natural community conservation plan pursuant to the Natural Community
Conservation Planning Act (Chapter 10 (commencing with § 2800) of Division 3 of
the Fish and Game Code), habitat conservation plan pursuant to the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531 et seq.), or other adopted
natural resource protection plan;
      8.   The site is located within habitat for protected species identified
as candidate, sensitive, or species of special status by state or federal
agencies, fully protected species, or species protected by the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531 et seq.), the California
Endangered Species Act (Chapter 1.5 (commencing with § 2050) of Division 3 of
the Fish and Game Code), or the Native Plant Protection Act (Chapter 10
(commencing with § 1900) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code);
      9.   The site is located on lands under conservation easement; or
      10.   The proposed housing development would result in fewer dwelling
units than would otherwise be allowed on the site by the General Plan Land Use
Element, in accordance with the State's No Net Loss requirements.
   G.   Map requirements. The proposed Urban Lot Split subdivision shall
confirm to the following requirements:
      1.   The two (2) new parcels shall be of approximately equal lot area and
one (1) parcel shall not be smaller than forty (40) percent of the lot area of
the original parcel;
      2.   Both newly created parcels shall be no smaller than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square-feet each;
      3.   All easements required for the provision of public services and
facilities shall be provided to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;
      4.   Each parcel shall be served by a separate water service meter, a
separate sewer connection, and gas connection if required;
      5.   Each parcel shall drain to the street or to a developed drainage
easement;
      6.   Both newly created parcels shall not be subject to the minimum lot
width and area requirements in CCMC Title 17,
Chapter 17.210;
      7.   LOT WIDTH means the horizontal distance between the midpoints of the
side lot lines, measured at right angles to the line measuring lot depth;
      8.   Each of the proposed parcels shall have public right-of-way frontage
(public street or alley) abutting the original parcel;
      9.   A flag lot, or a lot with a narrow projecting strip of land
extending to or along a public right-of-way frontage, shall not be permitted
unless the configuration of the parcel requires a flag lot in order to create
two (2) parcels as allowed in this Section;
      10.   Lot depth shall be measured at average distance between the front
and rear lot line of the newly created lot;
      11.   New lot lines shall be straight lines, unless there is a conflict
with existing improvements or the natural environment in which case the line
may not be straight but shall follow the appropriate natural course;
      12.   Interior lot lines not facing the street shall be at right angles
perpendicular to the street on straight streets, or radial to the street on
curved streets;
      13.   Lot lines shall be contiguous with existing zoning boundaries;
      14.   The placement of lot lines shall not result in an accessory
building or accessory use on a lot without a main building or primary use on
the same lot, as defined in CCMC Title 17;
      15.   Lot lines shall not render an existing structure as nonconforming
in any respect (e.g. setbacks, open yard, Floor Area Ratio, parking) except as
may be allowed per Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65852.6, 65852.21, and 66411.7, and/ or
CCMC Title 17,
Chapter 17.610.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.945 MINISTERIAL LOT SUBDIVISIONS.
   A.   Purpose. This section is adopted pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§
65852.28, 65913.4.5, and 66499.41 for the purpose of implementing the State's
and City's regulations to ministerially approve a parcel map for a subdivision
resulting in ten (10) or fewer parcels and the proposed development projects
resulting in ten (10) or fewer units. Subdivisions subject to Cal. Gov't Code
§§ 65852.28, 65913.4.5, and 66499.41 shall comply with all applicable standards
listed therein and as amended.
   B.   Multi-family zoned ministerial lot subdivisions requirements.
      1.   The lot shall be zoned as Low Density Multiple-Family Residential
district (RLD), Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential district (RMD), or
High Density Multiple-Family Residential district (RHD).
      2.   The lot shall be no larger than five (5) acres and is substantially
surrounded by qualified urban uses. QUALIFIED URBAN USE has the same meaning as
defined in Cal. Public Resources Code § 21072.
      3.   The newly created parcels shall be no smaller than 600 square feet.
   C.   Single-family zoned ministerial lot subdivisions requirements.
      1.   The lot shall be zoned as Single-Family Residential district (R1) or
Two-Family Residential district (R2).
      2.   The lot shall be vacant. VACANT means having no permanent structure,
unless the permanent structure is abandoned and uninhabitable.
      3.   The lot shall also be no larger than one and one-half (1½) acres and
surrounded by urban uses.
      4.   The newly created parcels shall be no smaller than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet.
   D.   Fire standards.
      1.   For the purpose of deploying industry-standard hose packs, all
dwelling units must be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the
public right-of-way of a dry standpipe installed on the property with approval
of the Fire Chief;
      2.   Where two (2) dwelling units are configured as sharing a common
wall, a one (1)-hour fire wall between the units is required;
      3.   All new dwelling units are required to have fire sprinklers. All new
dwelling units are required to use fire-resistant building materials.
   E.   Housing unit standards. The housing units on the lot proposed to be
subdivided are one (1) of the following:
      1.   Constructed on fee simple ownership lots.
      2.   Part of a common interest development.
      3.   Part of a housing cooperative, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 817.
      4.   Constructed on land owned by a community land trust. For the purpose
of this subparagraph, "community land trust" means a nonprofit corporation
organized pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as per Cal.
Gov't Code § 66499.41(a)(4)(D).
      5.   Part of a tenancy in common, as described in Cal. Civil Code § 685.
   F.   Development requirements. The proposed development will, pursuant to
the requirements of this division, meet one (1) of the following, as
applicable:
      1.   If the parcel is identified in the Housing Element for the current
planning period that is in substantial compliance with Article 10.6 (commencing
with § 65580) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 (California Government Code
Planning and Land Use), the development will result in at least as many units
as projected for that parcel in the housing element. If the parcel is
identified to accommodate any portion of the City's share of the regional
housing need for low- or very low-income households, the development will
result in at least as many low- or very low-income units as projected in the
Housing Element. These units shall be subject to a recorded affordability
restriction of at least forty-five (45) years.
      2.   If the parcel is not identified in the Housing Element for the
current planning period that is in substantial compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code
Article 10.6 (commencing with § 65580) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7,
the development will result in at least sixty-six (66) percent of the maximum
allowable residential density as specified by local zoning or sixty-six (66)
percent of the applicable residential density specified in Cal. Gov't Code §
65583.2(c)(3)(B), whichever is greater.
      3.   Where Title 17 Zoning does not specify a maximum allowable
residential density, the development will result in at least sixty-six (66)
percent of the applicable residential density as specified in Cal. Gov't Code §
65583.2(c)(3)(B).
   G.   Building and design standards.
      1.   The average total area of floorspace of the proposed housing units
cannot exceed one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) net habitable square
feet;
      2.   All electrical and utility services to a new dwelling unit shall be
underground.
      3.   The parcels must comply with applicable objective standards of the
Subdivision Map Act;
      4.   The parcels must be served by a public water system and municipal
sewer system;
   H.   Permit review process.
      1.   An application for a ministerial lot subdivision shall be filed by
the property owner or an agent of the property owner on the City's approved
form, subject to a fee in an amount established by City Council resolution. The
City will inform the applicant in writing of any incompleteness within thirty
(30) days after an application is submitted;
      2.   An application for a ministerial lot subdivision shall meet the
requirements set forth in this Chapter;
      3.   The City shall act upon an application for a ministerial lot
subdivision without a discretionary review or public hearing, within sixty (60)
days calendar days after a complete application is filed. The time limit
specified in this chapter may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant
and the City;
      4.   The Planning Director, or designee, shall review and have final
approval authority for ministerial lot subdivisions without public hearings or
discretionary review.
   I.   Denial. A proposed ministerial lot subdivision shall not be approved in
any of the following:
      1.   The lot to be subdivided was created by an Urban Lot Split;
      2.   The proposed residential development would have a specific, adverse
impact, as defined and determined in Cal. Gov't Code § 65589.5(d)(2), upon
public health and safety and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact;
      3.   The site is located within wetlands, as defined in U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service Manual, Part 660, PW 2 (June 21, 1993);
      4.   The site is located on a hazardous waste site that is listed per
Cal. Gov't Code § 65962.5 or designated by Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25356;
      5.   The site is located within a delineated earthquake fault zone as
determined by the State Geologist in any official maps published by the State
Geologist, unless the development complies with applicable seismic protection
building code standards adopted by the California Building Standards Commission
under the California Building Standards Law;
      6.   The site is located within a special flood hazard area for the 100-
year flood (any Zone A, Zone AO, or Zone B), unless the site has been subject
to a Letter of Map Revision prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and issued to the local jurisdiction, or the site meets Federal Emergency
Management Agency requirements necessary to meet minimum flood plain management
criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program pursuant to Part 59
(commencing with § 59.1) and Part 60 (commencing with § 60.1) of Subchapter B
of Chapter 1 of Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
      7.   The site is located within a regulatory floodway as determined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency in any official maps published by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, unless the development has received a no-
rise certification in accordance with § 60.3(d)(3) of Title 44 of the Code of
Federal Regulations;
      8.   The site is located on lands identified for conservation in an
adopted natural community conservation plan pursuant to the Natural Community
Conservation Planning Act (Chapter 10 (commencing with § 2800) of Division 3 of
the Cal. Fish and Game Code), habitat conservation plan pursuant to the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531 et seq.), or other adopted
natural resource protection plan;
      9.   The site is located within habitat for protected species identified
as candidate, sensitive, or species of special status by state or federal
agencies, fully protected species, or species protected by the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531 et seq.), the California
Endangered Species Act (Chapter 1.5 (commencing with § 2050) of Division 3 of
the Cal. Fish and Game Code), or the Native Plant Protection Act (Chapter 10
(commencing with § 1900) of Division 2 of the Cal. Fish and Game Code);
      10.   The site is located on lands under conservation easement;
      11.   The proposed housing development would result in fewer dwelling
units than would otherwise be allowed on the site by the General Plan Land Use
Element, in accordance with the State's No Net Loss requirements; or
      12.   The proposed subdivision will result in any existing dwelling unit
being alienable separate from the title to any other existing dwelling unit on
the lot.
   J.   Map requirements.
      1.   The proposed subdivision will result in ten (10) or fewer parcels
and the housing development project on the lot proposed to be subdivided will
contain ten (10) or fewer residential units;
      2.   All easements required for the provision of public services and
facilities shall be provided to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;
      3.   Each parcel shall be served by a separate water service meter, a
separate sewer connection, and gas connection if required;
      4.   Each parcel shall drain to the street or to a developed drainage
easement;
      5.   A flag lot, or a lot with a narrow projecting strip of land
extending to or along a public right-of-way frontage, shall not be permitted
unless the configuration of the parcel requires a flag lot in order to create
two (2) parcels as allowed in this Section;
      6.   Lot depth shall be measured at average distance between the front
and rear lot line of the newly created lot;
      7.   New lot lines shall be straight lines, unless there is a conflict
with existing improvements or the natural environment in which case the line
may not be straight but shall follow the appropriate natural course;
      8.   Lot lines shall not render an existing structure as nonconforming in
any respect (e.g. setbacks, open yard, Floor Area Ratio, parking), nor increase
the nonconformity of an existing nonconforming structure;
      9.   The proposed subdivision conforms to all applicable objective
requirements of the Subdivision Map Act.
   K.   Fees. The City Council resolution may establish and set by resolution
all fees and charges, consistent with applicable law, as may be necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
§ 15.10.950 SMALL LOT SUBDIVISIONS.
   The purpose of this Section is to create alternative fee-simple home
ownership within multi-family zones. A Small Lot Subdivision shall be permitted
in the RLD, RMD, and R2 zones pursuant to an approved Map or Parcel Map. A
subdivision for the purposes of small lots enables the construction of new
small lot homes.
   A.   Construction of new Small Lots. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
Code relating to minimum lot area, in the RLD, RMD, and R2 zones, parcels of
land may be subdivided into lots which may contain one (1) or more dwelling
units, provided that the density of the subdivision does not exceed the maximum
density requirement established for each zone prior to the subdivision.
      1.   A Parcel Map or Map shall be required for the creation of Small Lot
Subdivision. Processes for Small Lot Subdivisions shall be the same as those
prescribed in §§
15.10.265,
15.10.310,
15.10.405, or
15.10.625, as applicable or as otherwise required by State law. The map must
comply with the Small Lot Map Standards; and
      2.   For Small Lot Subdivision projects, no demolition, grading, building
permit or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued unless the Planning Director, or designee, has
reviewed the application (Administrative Review), and determined that the Small
Lot Subdivision project complies with the Planning Commission's Small Lot
Design Standards.
         a.   The Planning Director, or designee, shall establish guidelines,
requirements, and forms as may be necessary to review the Administrative Site
Plan Review to determine conformance with the Small Lot Design Standards.
         b.   The application for this Administrative Site Plan Review shall be
filed concurrent with the Map or Parcel Map application and at any time a
subsequent alteration or addition is proposed.
         c.   As a condition of approval, all Small Lot Subdivisions shall be
required to conform to the plans approved by the Planning Director, or
designee.
      3.   The minimum lot width shall be eighteen (18) feet and the minimum
lot area shall be nine hundred (900) square feet. The review authority shall
designate the location of front yards in the subdivision Map or Parcel Map
approval.
      4.   Access shall be provided to a lot containing a dwelling unit and to
its parking spaces, pursuant to §
17.300.015 of the Municipal Code by way of a public or private street, an
alley, or an access easement.
      5.   The lot area coverage by all structures shall not exceed seventy-
five (75) percent of an approved small lot, unless the Map or Parcel Map
provides an open space easement equivalent to twenty-five (25) percent of the
lot area of each lot not meeting this provision.
      6.   No front, side, or rear yard setbacks shall be required between
interior lot lines created within an approved Small Lot Subdivision except as
required by the California Building Code. If individual dwellings are separated
beyond the minimum required setback by the California Building Code, then the
front, side, or rear yard setbacks between interior lot lines created within an
approved Small Lot Subdivision shall be at least two (2) feet if the
subdivision provides common access and use agreement for both adjacent lots or
four (4) feet if there is no common access and use agreement between both
adjacent lots.
      7.   The provisions of the front street facing yard of the underlying
zone shall apply to the front lot line of the perimeter of the subdivision.
      8.   The following shall apply to the perimeter of the subdivision:
         a.   For any subdivision that shares a property line with an R1 or
more restrictive single-family zone, the provisions of the front yard, side
yard and rear yard of the underlying zone shall apply. A minimum five (5)-foot
side yard shall be required.
         b.   For any subdivision that does not share a property line with an
R1 or more restrictive single-family zone, the following shall apply:
            (1)   A minimum five (5)-foot yard shall be required along the Side
Lot Line of the perimeter of the subdivision; and
            (2)   A minimum ten (10)-foot yard shall be required along the Rear
Lot Line of the perimeter of the subdivision, except that where the Rear Lot
Line abuts an alley a minimum five (5)-foot rear yard shall be required along
the perimeter of the subdivision.
      9.   Fences and walls within the yard setback areas adjacent to a public
right-of-way and along the perimeter of the proposed subdivision shall be no
more than four (4) feet in height in accordance with §
17.300.030 of this Code. Fences and walls
within the side and rear yard setback areas along the perimeter, not adjacent
to the public right-of-way, of the proposed subdivision shall be no more than
six (6) feet in height in accordance with §
17.300.030 of this Code.
   B.   The Small Lot Subdivision must comply with the following findings for
approval:
      1.   The general layout of the project, including orientation and
location of buildings, open space, vehicular and pedestrian access and
circulation, parking and loading facilities, building setbacks and heights, and
other improvements on the site, is consistent with the purpose and intent of
this Chapter, the requirements of the zoning district in which the site is
located, and with all applicable development standards and design guidelines.
      2.   The architectural design of the structure(s) and landscaping shall
be consistent with the Small Lot Subdivision Design standards listed in the
Culver City Objective Design Standards.
      3.   The design and layout of the proposed project will not interfere
with the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future development, will
not result in vehicular or pedestrian hazards, and will be in the best interest
of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      4.   The existing or proposed public facilities necessary to accommodate
the proposed project (e.g., fire protection devices, parkways, public
utilities, sewers, sidewalks, storm drains, streetlights, traffic control
devices, and the width and pavement of adjoining streets and alleys) will be
available to serve the subject site.
      5.   The proposed project is consistent with the General Plan and any
applicable specific plan.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
LOT MERGERS
§ 15.10.960 LOT MERGERS.
   A.   Purpose. The ordinance codified in this section is enacted for the
purpose of providing ministerial procedures and setting forth standards
regulating the merger and unmerger of parcels, and for compliance with Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 66451.10 - 66451.24.
   B.   Voluntary lot merger. Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code §
66499.20.3, a merger and certificate of merger of existing adjoining parcels of
real property under common ownership may be reviewed and authorized by the City
Engineer and Planning Director and filed for record by the County Recorder only
where the City Engineer and Planning Director make all of the following
findings:
      1.   The merger will not affect any fees, grants, easements, agreements,
conditions, dedications, offers to dedicate or security provided in connection
with any approvals of divisions of real property or lot line adjustments;
      2.   The boundaries of the parcels to be merged are well-defined in
existing recorded documents or filed maps and were legally created or have
certificates of compliance issued on them;
      3.   The merger will not alter the exterior boundary of the parcels to be
merged;
      4.   The document used to effect the merger contains an accurate
description of the exterior boundaries of the resulting parcel;
      5.   All parties having any record title interest in the real property
affected have consented to the merger upon a form and in a manner approved by
the City Engineer, excepting all those interests that are excepted from the
requirement to consent to the preparation and recordation of Final Maps under
the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code § 66436 and according to the terms,
provisions, reservations and restrictions provided therein for such consent;
      6.   All necessary fees and requirements, including a fee for recording
the document have been provided;
   C.   City initiated merger of parcels. The City may require a merger of a
parcel or unit when two (2) or more contiguous lots, parcels or units of land
are held by the same owner; such lots, parcels, or units may be merged where
any one (1) of the contiguous lot, parcels, or units held by the same owner
does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size under the city zoning
ordinance, and if all of the following requirements are satisfied:
      1.   Lots must be adjacent.
      2.   At least one (1) of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any
structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit
was not required at the time of construction; or is developed only with an
accessory structure or accessory structures; or is developed with a single
structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a
contiguous lot, parcel or unit; and
      3.   One (1) or more of the following conditions exists for the parcels
involved in the lot merger:
         a.   Comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at
the time of the determination of merger;
         b.   Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances
in effect at the time of its creation;
         c.   Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic
water supply;
         d.   Does not meet slope stability standards;
         e.   Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety
equipment access and maneuverability;
         f.   Its development would create health or safety hazards;
         g.   Is inconsistent with the city's general plan and any applicable
specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.
   D.   Lot merger conditions. The subdivision shall not apply if one (1) of
the following conditions exists:
      1.   On or before July 1, 1981, one (1) or more of the contiguous parcels
or units of land is enforceable restricted open-space land pursuant to a
contract, agreement, scenic restriction, or open-space easement, as defined and
set forth in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 421.
      2.   On July 1, 1981, one (1) or more of the contiguous parcels or units
of land is timberland as defined in Subdivision (f) of § 51104, or is land
devoted to an agricultural use as defined in Subdivision (b) of § 51201.
      3.   On July 1, 1981, one (1) or more of the contiguous parcels or units
of land is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of the site on which an
existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or
not the extraction is being made pursuant to a use permit issued by the local
agency.
      4.   On July 1, 1981, one (1) or more of the contiguous parcels or units
of land is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a future commercial
mineral extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other
permit authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction has been issued by
the local agency.
   E.   Extent of merger. Merger shall occur only to the extent necessary to
create lots conforming to the current standards for minimum lot area and
dimensions, or, if the lots, parcels, or units are developed with a structure
or structures, merger shall occur only to those lots, parcels, or units, which
are developed as a single unit.
   F.   Treatment of lots after merger. After merger has occurred with respect
to any contiguous lots, parcels, or units of land under this section, such
lots, parcels, or units of land shall be treated as a single lot under the
provisions of the Culver City Municipal Code.
   G.   Contiguity. Property shall be considered as contiguous lots, parcels or
units of land only if such lots, parcels or units of land are adjoining, but
not if such lots, roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way
separate parcels or units of land.
   H.   Notice to affected property owners. Whenever the Planning Director, or
designee, determines that real property has merged pursuant to this Section,
they shall cause to be filed for record with the County Recorder, and mailed by
certified mail to the then current record owner of the property, a notice of
intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected lots,
parcels, or units may be merged pursuant to this Section, and advising the
owner of the opportunity to request a hearing before the Planning Commission on
determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the
property does not meet the criteria for merger.
   I.   Permit process. The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer
will review and have final approval of all non-discretionary Lot Mergers
without hearing. The following materials shall be submitted along with a
completed and signed application:
      1.   One (1) copy of a preliminary title report providing the legal
description of the properties included in the application dated not more than
three (3) months prior to submittal of the application;
      2.   Signatures of all record owners included in the application; and
      3.   Site plan or map legibly drawn to a scale of sufficient size to show
full detail.
      4.   Plat Map prepared by a licensed Surveyor or qualified engineer.
   J.   Recording of merger. The Planning Director shall forward the Notice of
Merger to the County Recorder. The applicant may record a record of survey or
parcel map to finalize the voluntary lot merger at their own discretion if Cal.
Bus. and Prof. Code § 8762 is not applicable.
   K.   Fees. The City Council resolution may establish and set by resolution
all fees and charges, consistent with applicable law, as may be necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this section.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
§ 15.10.970 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.
   A.   Purpose. Pursuant to § 66412(d) of the Subdivision Map Act, Lot Line
Adjustments between four (4) or fewer adjacent legal lots are streamlined map
processes that can be used for a variety of purposes, including:
      1.   Meeting, or more closely meeting, the minimum lot size and area
requirements of the zone where the property is located.
      2.   Complying with required building setbacks.
      3.   Eliminating an existing encroachment.
      4.   Addressing compliance with the Building Code.
      5.   Better conformance with site features and topography
   B.   Lot standards.
      1.   The procedures for a Lot Line Adjustment shall apply to the
adjustment of property boundaries between four (4) or fewer existing legal
adjoining lots recorded with the City Clerk's office in conformance with the
Subdivision Map Act where land taken from one (1) lot is added to an adjacent
lot and where a greater number of lots than originally recorded is not thereby
created. A record of survey may be required pursuant to Cal. Bus. and Prof.
Code § 8762;
      2.   Multiple Lot Line Adjustments submitted concurrently or
sequentially, when five (5) or more parcels exist, and thereby circumventing
the Subdivision Map Act will not be allowed. A Subdivision Map will be required
in these instances;
      3.   The modification between lots does not result in a greater number of
lots than currently legally exists;
      4.   The modified lots do not create inconsistencies with the Zoning
regulations, the Building Code, and the General Plan;
      5.   Individual water and service laterals, sewer connections in
accordance with the LBWS Rules and Regulations, gas, and other utilities are
available to each adjusted lot, or necessary easements are provided to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works; and
      6.   All drainage across the adjusted lot line shall be eliminated or
necessary easements are provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Works.
   C.   Permit process. The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer
will review and have final approval of all non-discretionary Lot Line
Adjustment adjustments without hearing. The following materials shall be
submitted along with a completed and signed application:
      1.   One (1) copy of a preliminary title report providing the legal
description of the properties included in the application dated not more than
three (3) months prior to submittal of the application;
      2.   Signatures of all record owners included in the application; and
      3.   Site plan or map legibly drawn to a scale of sufficient size to show
full detail, including the following information:
         a.   North arrow, scale, legend, adjacent streets, dimensions, and
field established boundaries of the lots or parcels included in the application
before and after adjustment. The monuments relied upon for the establishment of
the boundaries shall be shown on the site plan.
         b.   Distinct line type indicating the property line(s) to be adjusted
and keyed to a legend.
         c.   Location of existing and proposed buildings and distance(s)
between these buildings and proposed property lines, as well as the outline of
all structures outside the adjustment area within ten (10) feet of the boundary
lines. The existing structures must show accurate ties, displayed/labeled to
one hundredth (.01) of a foot, to the existing and proposed boundary lines. The
site plan shall be consistent with the current California Building Code §
107.2.5 stating a site plan shall have an accurate boundary.
         d.   The lot areas of existing parcels, as well as the lot areas of
proposed parcels as adjusted.
         e.   Name and address of qualified California civil engineer or a
California licensed surveyor who prepared the map and the applicable license or
registration number.
         f.   Topographic information with a reference to the source of the
information.
         g.   The locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed
easements for utilities, drainage, and other public purposes, shown by dashed
lines, within and adjacent to the subdivision; all existing and proposed
utilities including size of gas and water lines and the size and grade of sewer
lines, location of manholes, valve lids, fire hydrants, street trees, and
streetlights.
   D.   Expiration. An approved Lot Line Adjustment shall expire thirty-six
(36) months after its approval if it has not been recorded, except when a time
extension has been granted by the Director or City Engineer.
   E.   Recording of a deed to reflect modified lot lines. The Lot Line
Adjustment shall be reflected in a deed, including modified deeds of trusts,
which shall be recorded. The Lot Line Adjustment does not take effect until the
deeds have been recorded. The failure to file the deeds within the designated
approval period shall render the Lot Line Adjustment null and void.
   F.   Fees. The City Council resolution may establish and set by resolution
all fees and charges, consistent with applicable law, as may be necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this section.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
§ 15.10.980 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   A.   Purpose. Certificates of Compliance provide a means for conferring
legal status to parcels of land which were not created by legal or which proof
of legal means cannot be determined and shall be issued in accordance with Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 66499.35 and this section.
   B.   Applicability. This section applies to parcels of land for which there
is no Final Map, Parcel Map, official map, or approved certificate of exception
which establishes legal status for the parcels.
   C.   Processing. The Planning Director, or designee, and City Engineer shall
review and have final approval over a Certificate of Compliance or a
Conditional Certificate of Compliance. The determination shall be based on the
following criteria:
      1.   A Certificate of Compliance shall be issued for any real property
which has been approved for development pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.34.
      2.   The City shall file the completed Conditional Certificate of
Compliance with the Los Angeles County recorder's office.
      3.   A Certificate of Compliance or Conditional Certificate of Compliance
shall contain all information required in Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.35.
   D.   Fees. The City Council resolution may establish and set by resolution
all fees and charges, consistent with applicable law, as may be necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this section.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
§ 15.10.985 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.
   A.   Purpose and applicability.
      1.   The purpose of the standards and requirements contained in this
Section is to control and regulate the conversion of rental dwelling units to
condominiums, for the purpose of assuring the orderly conversion of such units
consistent with City policies regarding public health, safety, and welfare.
      2.   These provisions shall apply to proposals to convert existing rental
dwelling units on any parcel to condominiums, which shall require the approval
of an Administrative Site Plan Review or Site Plan Review by the Commission,
subject to compliance with the Property Development Standards described herein.
   B.   Application requirements.
      1.   Applications for an Administrative Site Plan Review or Site Plan
Review and a Tentative Map to allow a project to convert from rental to
ownership units shall be accompanied by sufficient information to evaluate the
project for compliance with the provisions of this Section.
      2.   Required information shall include the following.
         a.   Plans. A detailed site plan and floor plan, as required by the
Division, that reflect existing conditions and proposed improvements to the
building and/or site.
         b.   General conditions report. A report detailing the condition and
estimating the remaining useful life of each element of the proposed
condominium project including: built-in household appliances, mechanical
systems, electrical systems, plumbing systems, sewer systems, foundations,
framing, roofs, heating and cooling systems, interior and exterior wall
coverings, utility connections, fire sprinkler systems, alarm systems,
standpipe systems, structural elements, trash disposal facilities, parking
facilities, recreational facilities, landscaped areas, and storage areas. This
report shall be prepared by an independent, State-licensed structural engineer,
architect, or general contractor.
         c.   Building history report. A report detailing the major uses of the
development site since construction, and the date and description of all
structural renovations, operating system upgrades, major repairs requiring a
building permit, and construction of structures, fences, walls, landscaping,
and the like.
         d.   Pest report. A pest information report addressing the present
condition of the structure as it may be affected by dry rot, roaches, termites,
or other insects, and recommending work required to render the structure free
of infestation.
         e.   Acoustical report. An inter-unit acoustical report, prepared by a
licensed and certified acoustical professional.
         f.   Site improvements report. A report that lists all proposed site
improvements.
         g.   Tenant list. One (1) typed mailing list and two (2) sets of
mailing labels (formatted for reproduction on City labels), with the names and
addresses of all tenants of the project at the time of the application to the
City. An updated list of tenant names and addresses shall be submitted every
six (6) months following submittal of the application, until such time as final
action has been taken.
         h.   Tenant notification. The subdivider shall submit copies of all
written notices required by the California State Subdivision Map Act and
Subsection E. (Tenants' Rights), with a complete list of all tenants notified.
         i.   Other information. Other information as may be required by the
Director to provide a thorough evaluation of the proposed condominium project.
   C.   Inspections. The following inspections shall be made after the
application has been deemed complete.
      1.   The Building Official or designee shall review the General
Conditions Report, and inspect the property to verify its accuracy, to identify
any health and safety hazards, and to identify any non-permitted construction
on the site.
      2.   The Fire Marshal shall review the General Conditions Report, and
inspect the property to determine the sufficiency of the current fire
protection systems, and to identify any health and safety hazards.
   D.   Property development standards.
      1.   Minimum project size. A minimum of two (2) units per development
shall be required for the conversion of existing multiple-family dwelling units
to condominiums.
      2.   Access ways and exiting. All life and fire safety issues, such as
stairs, corridors, and doors, shall comply with Uniform Building Code
regulations in effect at the time of conversion.
      3.   Adequate light and ventilation. Adequate light and ventilation shall
meet Uniform Building Code regulations in effect at the time of conversion.
      4.   Emergency egress. Emergency egress shall meet Uniform Building Code
regulations in effect at the time of conversion.
      5.   Fire suppression. Smoke detectors meeting current Uniform Building
Code requirements at the time of conversion shall be installed in residential
units and other enclosed common areas (e.g., hallways, recreation rooms, and
utility rooms). Additional fire suppression equipment (e.g., alarm systems,
fire extinguishers, and smoke detectors) shall also be provided as required by
the Fire Department.
      6.   Minimum room dimensions. Minimum room dimensions, including minimum
ceiling heights, floor area, and width, shall meet the Uniform Building Code
regulations in effect at the time of conversion.
      7.   One (1)-hour separation. A minimum one (1)-hour separation shall be
provided between dwelling units and accessory rooms, such as common storage
rooms and laundry rooms.
      8.   Structural condition. Structures shall be in sound condition, pest-
and vermin-free, and watertight, as determined by the General Conditions
Report, and the inspection by the Building Official or designee.
      9.   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided consistent
with zoning standards in effect at the time of conversion.
      10.   Separate utility metering. The consumption of gas and electricity
shall be separately metered for each dwelling unit. A water shut-off valve
shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
      11.   Sound attenuation. Common walls and ceilings of units shall be
constructed or upgraded, using techniques to limit noise transmission, as
specified by the Uniform Building Code for new construction or equivalent in
effect at the time.
      12.   Public works. Missing or damaged off-site improvements, including
the following, shall be repaired or replaced: curb and gutter, drive aprons,
sidewalks, streetlights, and street trees.
      13.   Landscaping. All landscaping shall be in compliance with CCMC Title
17,
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
      14.   Laundry facilities. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with its
own laundry facilities, or alternate group facilities that are convenient to
all dwelling units and approved by the City.
      15.   Minimum unit size. The minimum unit size shall be consistent with
zoning standards in effect at the time of conversion.
      16.   Open space. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with accessible
on-site open space consistent with zoning standards in effect at the time of
conversion.
      17.   Shock mounting of mechanical equipment. All permanent mechanical
equipment, including domestic appliances, shall be shock mounted, isolated from
the floor and ceiling, or otherwise insulated in a manner to lessen the
transmission of vibration and noise.
      18.   Trash enclosures. Required trash enclosures shall be in compliance
with City standards at the time of conversion.
      19.   Additional standards. Additional standards applicable to the site
as determined through the Site Plan Review process.
   E.   Tenants' rights.
      1.   The subdivider shall adhere to all applicable noticing requirements
of the California State Subdivision Map Act.
      2.   The subdivider shall provide tenants with a copy of this Section.
      3.   The subdivider shall not increase tenants' rents for a period of one
(1) year from providing to such tenants notification of intent to convert.
      4.   Upon notice of termination of tenancy, the subdivider shall provide
a relocation allowance equal to two (2) months current rent to all current,
non-purchasing tenant households that received notification of intent to
convert, subsequent to entering into a rental or lease agreement.
      5.   The subdivider shall grant an extension of tenancy at the time of
termination, as necessary to permit each tenant of the proposed condominium
project in attendance at a K-12 school within the City to complete the current
school term.
   F.   Findings. The review authority may approve an Administrative Site Plan
Review or Site Plan Review application for a condominium conversion if it finds
that the proposed conversion project meets the following.
      1.   All the provisions and standards for conversion of a project to
condominiums as set forth in this Section are met.
      2.   A Tentative Map has been approved, or is concurrently being
approved, for the condominium conversion project.
      3.   The overall design and physical condition of the condominium
conversion achieves a high standard of safety, quality, and appearance.
      4.   The subdivider has not engaged in coercive, retaliatory eviction or
action regarding tenants, after the submittal of the first application for City
review through the date of approval.
(Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part))
CHAPTER 15.12:
COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT FINANCING
Section
   
15.12.005      Purpose and intent
   
15.12.010      Special tax proceedings
   
15.12.015      Nonexclusivity
   
15.12.020      Construction
   
15.12.025      Incorporation of the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982
   
15.12.030      Authorized services
   
15.12.035      Special tax levy; election; voter qualifications; ballots
   
15.12.040      Goals and policies
   
15.12.045      Conflict of law
§ 15.12.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to establish a procedure for
financing certain public capital facilities and services through the
establishment of community facilities districts, the levy of special taxes
within such districts and the issuance of bonds secured by such special taxes.
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to be a supplement to existing
state law for the formation of community facilities districts (Mello-Roos
Community Facilities Act of 1982).
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
§ 15.12.010 SPECIAL TAX PROCEEDINGS.
   Proceedings for the formation of a community facilities district or
districts may be conducted pursuant to this Chapter whether or not provided in
any state law.
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
§ 15.12.015 NONEXCLUSIVITY.
   A.   This Chapter is not, in any way, exclusive.
   B.   The procedures provided in this Chapter are alternative to any other
procedure provided in this Code or under state law.
   C.   The resolution of intention in any proceedings under any state law or
other provision of this Code may provide that such provisions are supplemented
by this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
§ 15.12.020 CONSTRUCTION.
   This Chapter is to be liberally construed.
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
§ 15.12.025 INCORPORATION OF THE MELLO-ROOS COMMUNITY FACILITIES ACT OF 1982.
   A.   The Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 (Cal. Gov't Code Title
5, Div. 2, Ch. 2.5, commencing with § 53311, as amended from time to time), is
incorporated in and made a part of this Chapter.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, the mode and manner for
making improvements, for levying and collecting special taxes and for issuing
bonds shall be as prescribed in the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of
1982.
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
§ 15.12.030 AUTHORIZED SERVICES; PUBLIC PARKING FACILITIES.
   A.   A community facilities district special tax, whether approved by vote
of the landowners or the registered voters of the district, may finance the
operation, maintenance and servicing related to provision of transportation
services, in addition to the services specified in the Mello-Roos Community
Facilities Act of 1982, notwithstanding the fact that any such services
supplant services which were already available within the territory when the
district was created.
   B.   A community facilities district special tax, whether approved by vote
of the landowners or the registered voters of the district, may finance the
purchase, construction, expansion, improvement, or rehabilitation of any public
parking facility with an estimated useful life of five (5) years or longer, and
the operation and maintenance of such parking facility, in addition to the
financing powers specified in the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982.
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
§ 15.12.035 SPECIAL TAX LEVY; ELECTION; VOTER QUALIFICATIONS; BALLOTS.
   A. Notwithstanding Cal. Gov't Code § 53326(a), the City Council shall submit
the levy of any special taxes to the qualified electors of the proposed
community facilities district or to the qualified electors of the territory to
be annexed by the community facilities district in the next general election or
in a special election to be held, notwithstanding any other requirement,
including any requirement that elections be held on specified dates, contained
in the Elections Code, at least forty-five (45) days, but not more than one-
hundred eighty (180) days, following the adoption of the resolution of
formation. This Subsection
15.12.035.A shall apply only if the election is to be by the landowners of the
proposed community facilities district, as described in Cal. Gov't Code § 53326
(b), and the proposed community facilities district is funding authorized
services with no debt to be issued.
   B.   Notwithstanding Cal. Gov't Code § 53326(b), if the vote is to be by the
landowners of the proposed community facilities district, as described in Cal.
Gov't Code § 53326(b), the City Council may provide for an alternative to the
method of voting of each landowner having one (1) vote for each acre or portion
of an acre of land that a landowner owns within the proposed community
facilities district. The alternative method of voting authorized by this
Subsection
15.12.035.B, provides that each landowner shall have one (1) vote for each
dollar or portion of a dollar of special tax that may be levied on such
landowner's land to be included in the proposed community facilities district,
based upon the proposed rate and method of apportionment and manner of
collection of special tax for the proposed community facilities district, and
the special taxes thereby to be levied in the first full fiscal year following
formation of the proposed district. This Subsection 15.12.35.B shall apply only
if the City Council finds that such alternative method of voting is more
reflective of the burden of the special tax to be levied on the landowners in
the proposed community facilities district.
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
§ 15.12.040 GOALS AND POLICIES.
   Notwithstanding Cal. Gov't Code § 53312.7(a), the local goals and policies
required in connection with any proceedings taken, special tax levied or bonds
issued pursuant to this Chapter, may be adopted at any time prior to or during
the proceedings to establish a community facilities district.
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
§ 15.12.045 CONFLICT OF LAW.
   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the
provisions of the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, this Chapter
shall govern.
(Ord. No. 2012-004A § 1 (part))
CHAPTER 15.13:
MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENCE PROTECTION
Section
   
15.13.005   Purpose and applicability
   
15.13.010   Definitions
   
15.13.015   Mobile home park change of use or closure
   
15.13.020   Application filing for relocation impact report
   
15.13.025   Required notification
   
15.13.030   Informational meetings
   
15.13.035   Relocation impact report
   
15.13.040   Findings and conditions of approval
   
15.13.045   Relocation assistance benefits
   
15.13.050   Exemption from relocation assistance benefits
   
15.13.055   Fees and costs
§ 15.13.005 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   A.   Purpose. It is the intent of this Chapter to carry out and supplement
the requirements of state law for the purpose of mitigating adverse impacts of
the closure or change of use of a mobile home park to other uses or the
discontinuance of use of mobile home parks on eligible, displaced mobile home
owners and residents by requiring mobile home park owners to provide adequate
relocation assistance benefits. The provisions of this Chapter shall not
preclude an applicant's obligation to comply with state law requirements that
are not addressed in this Chapter.
   B.   Applicability.
      1.   Except as otherwise provided, this Chapter shall apply to all
existing and/or future mobile home parks.
      2.   This Chapter shall not apply to:
         a.   A resident-owned mobile home park; or
         b.   The discontinuance of the use of property as a mobile home park
which is the result of an adjudication of bankruptcy of the mobile home park by
a court of competent jurisdiction. The applicant shall have the burden to
produce substantial evidence that a court of competent jurisdiction has
determined in connection with a proceeding in bankruptcy that the
discontinuance of use of the affected mobile home park is necessary. The
documentation shall include the title, case number, and court in which the
bankruptcy proceedings were held, and certified copies of all pertinent
judgments, orders and decrees of the court.
         c.   A mobile home park where the applicant has entered into a written
agreement with one hundred percent (100%) of the eligible occupants providing
for mutually satisfactory relocation assistance benefits. The written agreement
shall comply with the requirements of §§ 15.13.050.C.1.a and 15.13.050.C.1.b.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.010 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained elsewhere in this Code, the
following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, be defined
as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning
in intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with any other
provision of this Code, these definitions shall prevail.
   APPLICANT. The person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity
having leasehold interest in  or fee ownership of a mobile home park. If the
holder of the majority interest in the fee ownership of the mobile home park is
not the APPLICANT, then the APPLICANT must provide evidence of the majority
interest owner's consent to the filing of the application for consideration of
a relocation impact report. If the APPLICANT is the holder of a leasehold
interest in the mobile home park, the owner(s) of the fee interest in the
mobile home park shall consent to the application for consideration of a
relocation impact report.
   CHANGE OF USE OF A MOBILE HOME PARK. Use of a mobile home park for a purpose
other than the rental or the holding out for rent of two or more mobile home
spaces to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. CHANGE OF USE
shall not mean the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a mobile home park rule or
regulation. CHANGE OF USE may affect an entire mobile home park or any portion
thereof. A CHANGE OF USE shall not include a change to a resident-owned mobile
home park.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Culver City.
   CLOSURE OF A MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME PARK CLOSURE. The
discontinuance of the use of property as a mobile home park.
   DIRECTOR. The City of Culver City Community Development Director or his or
her designee.
   ELIGIBLE OCCUPANT. A mobile home owner residing in the mobile home on a full
time basis and his or her “immediate family,” as that term is defined in Cal.
Civil Code § 798.35, who resides in the mobile home at the time of filing of
the relocation impact report application with the City. ELIGIBLE OCCUPANT shall
include a mobile home owner who is subleasing his or her mobile home, pursuant
to the provisions of Cal. Civil Code § 798.23.5, due to a medical emergency or
medical treatment that requires the mobile home owner's temporary absence from
his
or her home. ELIGIBLE OCCUPANT shall not include a non-owner resident.
   HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD). The United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
   HOUSING DIVISION. The Housing Division of the City of Culver City.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure designed for human habitation and for being moved
on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code § 35790.
MOBILE HOME does not include a recreation vehicle, as defined in Cal. Civil
Code § 799.29, except as modified by Cal. Civil Code § 798.3 (b), or a
commercial coach, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18218.
   MOBILE HOME OWNER. The registered owner(s) of a mobile home, or person(s)
purchasing a mobile home pursuant to a written contract.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land where two (2) or more mobile home spaces,
are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes used for human
habitation. MOBILE HOME PARK shall not include a resident-owned mobile home
park.
   NON-OWNER RESIDENT. A resident of a mobile home who does not have any
ownership interest in the mobile home in which he or she resides.
   PARK-OWNED MOBILE HOME. Any mobile home which is owned by the mobile home
park owner or any person or entity which has an ownership interest in the
mobile home park.
   RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BENEFITS. Monetary benefits (e.g. cost of moving a
mobile home and personal belongings, rent differential, the purchase of an
eligible occupant's mobile home) or non-monetary benefits (e.g. services of a
relocation specialist, transportation to view alternative housing sites,
packing and unpacking assistance) provided to mitigate the impact of the change
of use or closure of the mobile home park on an eligible occupant.
   RELOCATION IMPACT REPORT. A report on the impact of a closure or change of
use of a mobile home park upon the displaced residents of such mobile home
park, as required by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65863.7 and 66427.4 and containing the
information set forth in § 15.13.035 of this Chapter.
   RESIDENT-OWNED MOBILE HOME PARK. A mobile home park that is owned by its
residents, including, but not limited to, a condominium, stock cooperative or
planned unit development of a mobile home park.
   SPACE. Any area, tract of land, site, lot, pad or portion of a mobile home
park designated or used for the occupancy of one (1) mobile home.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.015 MOBILE HOME PARK CHANGE OF USE OR CLOSURE.
   A.   No mobile home park closure, resulting in a change of the mobile home
park status to a vacant use, shall be permitted unless the applicant has
submitted to the Housing Division a relocation impact report approved by the
City Council; and the applicant has filed a written statement with the
Director, signed under penalty of perjury, that relocation assistance benefits
required pursuant to the approved relocation impact report have been provided,
that the applicant has complied with all relocation impact report conditions of
approval, and the notice period provided by the notice of termination of
tenancy, as set forth in § 15.13.025.C, has expired.
   B.   No application for a general plan amendment, zoning designation
amendment or any other land use permit that would result in a change of use or
closure of a mobile home park shall be deemed complete unless the applicant has
submitted a relocation impact report approved by the City Council in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   No relocation impact report shall be accepted by the City, which was
approved by the City Council more than six (6) months prior to the date of the
filing of an application for a general plan amendment, zoning designation
amendment or any other land use permit that would result in a change of use or
closure of a mobile home park.
   D.   No building permit shall be issued pertaining to a project that results
in a change of use or closure of a mobile home park unless and until the
applicant files a written statement with the Director, signed under penalty of
perjury, that relocation assistance benefits required pursuant to the approved
relocation impact report have been provided, that the applicant has complied
with all relocation impact report conditions of approval, and the notice period
provided by the notice of termination of tenancy, as set forth in §
15.13.025.C, has expired.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.020 APPLICATION FILING FOR RELOCATION IMPACT REPORT.
   A.   A relocation impact report application shall be completed, filed with
the Housing Division and processed in compliance with this Chapter. The
application package shall include all information specified in the application,
any applicable Housing Division handout, any additional information required by
the Director in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed application,
and all applicable fees.
   B.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in
support of the finding required by § 15.13.040.A.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.025 REQUIRED NOTIFICATION.
   The following notification requirements are in addition to any state law
notification requirements relating to the change of use or closure of a mobile
home park. Where the requirements of state law and this Chapter conflict, the
applicant shall, comply with the more stringent requirement.
   A.   Upon the filing of a relocation impact report application, the
applicant shall provide written notification to each prospective new resident
of the mobile home park that such application has been filed with the City and
that any new resident entering the mobile home park after the filing of the
relocation impact report shall not be eligible to receive relocation assistance
benefits. Such written notification shall be given to the prospective resident
prior to the purchase of a mobile home and/or execution of a rental agreement
or commencement of the resident's occupancy, whichever occurs first. Proof of
service, signed under penalty of perjury, that each prospective resident
received by mail or personal delivery the notification required by this
Subsection
15.13.025.A shall be filed with the Director.
   B.   Not later than forty- five (45) days prior to the public hearing to
consider the relocation impact report, the applicant shall provide written
notification to each mobile home owner and resident in the mobile home park of
the dates, times, and locations of the public hearing and the informational
meetings required to be held pursuant to §
15.13.030. Such written notification shall include a copy of the proposed
relocation impact report and a copy of this Chapter. The copies shall be
provided free of charge. Proof of service, signed under penalty of perjury,
that each mobile home owner and resident of the mobile home park has received
by mail or personal delivery the notification and copies required by this
Subsection 15.1.3.025.B, must be filed with the Director at least fourteen (14)
days prior to the public hearing.
   C.   Not later than twelve (12) months prior to the date the mobile home
owners and residents of the mobile home park are required to vacate the mobile
home park, applicant shall provide written notification of termination of
tenancy, by certified mail, to all mobile home owners and residents of the
mobile home park. This notice shall not be given to mobile home owners and
residents prior to approval of the relocation impact report.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.030 INFORMATIONAL MEETINGS.
   A.   Not later than twenty-one (21) days prior to the public hearing to
consider the relocation impact report, the applicant shall conduct at least one
informational meeting for the mobile home owners and residents of the mobile
home park regarding the status of the relocation impact report to be
considered, the timing of the proposed relocation of eligible occupants, and
the details of the relocation assistance benefits proposed in the relocation
impact report.
   B.   All informational meetings shall be scheduled and held to maximize the
number of mobile home owners and residents of the mobile home park that are
able to attend these meetings. The informational meeting or meetings shall be
conducted on the premises of the mobile home park or other appropriate location
as approved by the Director. The applicant's retained relocation specialist(s)
designated in the relocation impact report shall be present at all
informational meetings.
   C.   Not later than fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing to
consider the relocation impact report, the applicant shall file with the
Director a statement made under penalty of perjury that the applicant has
complied with the requirements of this §
15.13.030. Such statement shall include the date, time, and place where such
informational meeting or meetings were conducted and the names and addresses of
all attendees.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.035 RELOCATION IMPACT REPORT.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of the relocation impact report is to address the
impact on residents of a mobile home park, who qualify as eligible occupants,
who will be displaced as a result of the change of use or closure of the mobile
home park.
   B.   Process.
      1.   The applicant shall select a consultant and relocation specialist
(hereinafter, collectively, “Relocation Specialist”), subject to the Director's
approval, to prepare a relocation impact report relating to the change of use
or closure of a mobile home park.
      2.   Upon the filing of a relocation impact report application, the City
shall notify the mobile home park residents that such application has been
filed and a relocation impact report will be prepared.
   C.   Required Content of Report. The relocation impact report shall contain,
but need not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   A legal description of the mobile home park property.
      2.   A map and detailed description of the condition of the mobile home
park, including the nature and location of structures, landscaping, easements,
utilities and other onsite features and amenities.
      3.   The names and addresses of all mobile home owners within the mobile
home park as shown on each respective title documentation for the mobile homes
located in spaces within the mobile home park, and the names and addresses of
all residents within the mobile home park as of the date of the relocation
impact report application.
      4.   The number of spaces within the mobile home park, length of
occupancy by the current residents of each space, and the current lease or
rental rate for each space, including a full description of all utilities
separately billed by the mobile home park to the residents and any utilities
that may be included in the lease or rental rate for the space.
      5.   For each mobile home within the mobile home park, the age, date of
manufacture, type, width, size, and space number, and a copy of a title search
conducted through the California Department of Housing and Community
Development.
      6.   The total number of residents in each mobile home, each resident's
space number, resident status (eligible occupant or non-owner resident),
whether any residents are the “immediate family,” as that term is defined in
Cal. Civil Code § 798.35, of the eligible occupant, residents' names and
whether the mobile home is a principal residence or second home. All residents
shall be classified as eligible occupants or non-owner residents.
      7.   A description of the project proposed for the property that is the
subject of the mobile home park change of use or closure, if applicable.
      8.   The proposed schedule for the mobile home park change of use or
closure.
      9.   The location of all reasonably comparable mobile home parks within a
twenty (20) mile radius of the mobile home park that is the subject of the
change of use or closure, including the reasonably comparable mobile home park
name, number of spaces, number of vacancies, lease rates and terms, policies,
age or other restrictions imposed upon the residents of a mobile home,
restrictions on the type of mobile homes and residents accepted in the mobile
home park, amenities offered, and proximity to services (bus stops, grocery
stores, hospitals, etc.).
      10.   A determination of the total number of mobile homes eligible to be
relocated to a reasonably comparable mobile home park, and the basis on which
such determination is made.
      11.   The estimated cost of relocating the eligible mobile homes
identified in Subsection 10. above to available spaces in reasonably comparable
mobile home parks within the area identified in the relocation impact report.
The cost of relocating shall include the costs of physically moving to a new
site the eligible mobile home and movable improvements, such as patios,
carports and porches. Such costs may include the dismantling, packing, moving,
unpacking, reassembling, and rebuilding of the mobile home and movable
improvements (including skirting and tie-downs)/ and the packing, moving and
unpacking of all personal property.
      12.   An estimate of the cost of purchasing each mobile home, and all
associated fixed property, that cannot be relocated to a reasonably comparable
mobile home park within twenty (20) miles of its existing location, at its in-
place value as determined by a qualified appraiser. In determining the in-place
value, the appraiser shall consider:
         a.   Each mobile home in its current location assuming the
continuation of the mobile home park in a safe, sanitary, and well-maintained
condition with competitive lease rates; and
         b.   The value of the mobile home attributable to the mobile home park
location and amenities. The appraiser shall not consider the effect of the
change of use or closure of the mobile home park on the value of the mobile
home and the value of the land on which the mobile home sits.
      13.   The basis for a conclusion that a mobile home and all associated
fixed property cannot be relocated to a reasonably comparable mobile home park
and the basis for determining the in-place value of such mobile home.
      14.   The availability and cost of rental housing of reasonably
comparable size and quality within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the mobile
home park.
      15.   A relocation plan which shall include a schedule for physically
relocating each mobile home, and/or payment of relocation assistance.
      16.   Proposed measures to adequately mitigate the adverse impacts of the
change of use or closure of the mobile home park upon each eligible occupant
based on the information provided in the relocation impact report.
      17.   A list of mobile home movers and housing specialists with proven
expertise in the fields of housing and relocation of persons displaced from
housing. This list shall include the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
persons who are qualified as mobile home movers, and an explanation of the
services that each housing specialist provides.
      18.   Any additional information required by the Director in order to
conduct a thorough review of the impacts to eligible occupants and the proposed
relocation impact report.
      19.   Applicant's retained relocation specialist shall determine what
constitutes a “reasonably comparable” mobile home park or other rental housing,
as referenced in this Subsection
15.13.035.C.
   D.   Confidential Household and Income Data. Applicant's retained relocation
specialist shall provide the Housing Division with the income information for
each household within the mobile home park, as well as the. Ages and number of
residents who are physically disabled in each household. Such confidential
information shall not be discloseable under the Public Records Act, and shall
not be included in the relocation impact report, but provided separately on a
Housing Division-approved form.
   E.   Notification and Availability of Report. The relocation impact report
approved by the City Council shall remain on file with the Director for review
by any interested person. Within ten (10) days of the City Council's approval
of the relocation impact report, the City shall notify each of the mobile home
park owners, mobile home owners and mobile home park residents of the approval
and availability of the relocation impact report.
   F.   Expiration and Extension of Report.
      1.   The relocation impact report shall expire one year from the date of
its approval unless fifty-five percent (55%) or more of the eligible occupants
receive relocation assistance benefits in accordance with the approved
relocation impact report, or the applicant requests an extension setting forth
justification for not having proceeded within the one-year period. No more than
two (2) extensions may be granted by the City Council. A request for an
extension must be filed with the Director not less than forty-five (45) days
prior to the expiration of the relocation impact report. A public hearing
before the City Council shall be held on the request of the applicant. If such
extension occurs, all required deadlines set forth in the relocation impact
report will also be extended for the same time period granted by the Extension
of the relocation impact report.
      2.   If relocation assistance benefits have not been provided to all
eligible occupants within one year of approval of the relocation impact report,
on the anniversary date each year after the approval of the relocation impact
report, the relocation assistance benefits shall be increased by an amount
equivalent to the cost-of-living index for the Los Angeles/Riverside/Orange
County area published by the U.S. Department of Labor. The increase shall be
determined by taking the average CPI for the quarterly period closest to the
anniversary date of the approval of the relocation impact report.
      3.   If relocation assistance benefits have not been provided to all
eligible occupants in accordance with the approved relocation impact report
within three (3) years of the original date of approval, a new relocation
impact report shall be prepared in accordance with §
15.13.035.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.040 FINDINGS AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   A.   Required Finding. Following a public hearing, the City Council shall,
by resolution, record its decision of whether to approve, conditionally approve
or reject the relocation impact report. The relocation impact report may be
approved, with or without conditions, only after first adopting a written
finding that the mitigation measures set forth in the relocation impact report
will adequately mitigate-the adverse impacts of the change of use or closure of
the mobile home park on eligible occupants. The criteria considered when making
such a finding shall include, but not be limited to, one or more of the
following:
      1.   All requirements of applicable state law and this Chapter have been
satisfied.
      2.   Whether there will exist, at the time of change of use or closure of
the mobile home park available spaces within a reasonably comparable mobile
home park located within a twenty (20) mile radius of the City to accommodate
the displaced eligible mobile homes.
      3.   Whether the age, type, condition, and style of mobile homes within
the mobile home park proposed for change of use or closure are such that the
mobile homes are able to be moved and accepted into reasonably comparable parks
located within a twenty (20) mile radius of the City.
      4.   Whether the eligible occupant cannot relocate to a reasonably
comparable mobile home park located within a twenty (20) mile radius of the
City and the justification for that conclusion.
      5.   Whether there is evidence that the applicant has attempted, at any
time, to evict or otherwise cause the removal of eligible occupants for the
purpose of avoiding or reducing payment of relocation assistance benefits.
      6.   Whether reports and notices required by applicable state law and
this chapter have been properly prepared and properly served.
      7.   If the change of use or closure of the mobile home park is to
another residential use, whether the residents of the mobile home park will
have an opportunity to rent or purchase, if for sale, the new units, and
whether the construction schedule will result in unreasonable long-term
displacements.
      8.   Whether the relocation assistance benefits to be provided adequately
mitigate any adverse impacts of the change of use or closure of the mobile home
park on the eligible occupants.
      9.   Based upon the mitigation measures proposed, whether the proposed
change of use or closure of the mobile home park is consistent with the goals,
policies, and objectives of the city's general plan, any applicable specific
plans, and provisions of the zoning code.
      10.   Based upon the mitigation measures proposed, whether the proposed
change of use or closure of the mobile home park will be detrimental to the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   Conditions of Approval. In approving a relocation impact report, the
City Council may impose conditions to adequately mitigate any adverse impacts
on eligible occupants that are associated with the change of use or closure of
the mobile home park. Conditions of approval may include, but are not limited
to, the following:
      1.   Consistent with Cal. Gov't Code § 65863.7(e), payment of the
reasonable cost of relocation to each eligible occupant who resided in the
mobile home park at the time of the filing of the relocation impact report
application and who will actually be displaced as a result of the change of use
or closure of the mobile home park. Reasonable cost of relocation may include,
but shall not be limited to:
         a.   Payment of the cost of relocating the eligible mobile homes
identified in the relocation impact report to available spaces in reasonably
comparable mobile home parks within the study area referenced in the relocation
impact report. The cost of relocating the eligible mobile homes shall include
the costs of physically moving to a new site the eligible mobile home and
movable improvements, such as patios, carports and porches. Such costs may
include the dismantling, packing, moving, unpacking, reassembling, and
rebuilding of the mobile home and movable improvements (including skirting and
tie-downs), and the packing, moving and unpacking of all personal property.
         b.   For eligible occupants who are unable to reasonably relocate
their mobile home, payment of the cost of purchasing their mobile home based on
information contained in the approved relocation impact report as set forth in
§
15.13.035.C.12, and reasonable expenses incurred in relocating to a new
residence within the study area referenced in the relocation impact report.
         c.   Payment to eligible occupants of a lump sum to compensate for
payment of the first and last months rent at a reasonably comparable mobile
home park or other rental housing, as determined by the relocation specialist.
         d.   Based on a showing of financial hardship, the payment to eligible
occupants of a security deposit at a new mobile home park or other rental
housing may be considered.
      2.   If the mobile home park is to be developed into another residential
use, a requirement to set aside a certain number of affordable units for the
low income residents of the mobile home park, either on-site or off-site within
the City limits, pursuant to the provisions of the state affordable housing
law.
      3.   If the mobile home park is to be converted to another residential
use, a requirement to offer residential units for rental or purchase first to
eligible occupants of the existing mobile home park.
      4.   The applicant shall execute and record against the mobile home park
property a covenant and agreement to comply with the conditions of approval of
the resolution approving the relocation impact report in a form approved by the
City Attorney.
   C.   Reasonably Comparable Determination. Applicant's retained relocation
specialist shall determine what constitutes a “reasonably comparable” mobile
home park or other rental housing, as referenced in this §
15.13.040.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.045 RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BENEFITS.
   A.   Not later than three (30) days from the approval of the relocation
impact report, the applicant's retained relocation specialist(s), shall make
personal contact with each eligible occupant of the mobile home park and
commence consultations to discuss the applicable relocation assistance benefits
to be provided. The relocation specialist(s) shall give each eligible occupant
written notice of his or her relocation assistance benefits.
   B.   In the case where an eligible occupant is entitled to make selections
between alternative relocation assistance benefits, applicant shall provide
written notice to each such eligible occupant that he or she has ninety (90)
days to select his or her relocation assistance benefits. Not later than ninety
(90) days from the date of notification to the eligible occupants of their
respective alternative relocation assistance benefits, eligible occupants shall
submit to the applicant their selection of relocation assistance benefits in
writing on a form provided by the relocation specialist(s). If an eligible
occupant does not submit his or her selection of relocation assistance benefits
to the applicant within the ninety (90)-day period, the applicant may select
the relocation assistance benefits on behalf of the eligible occupant.
   C.   Cash or monetary relocation assistance benefits shall be paid to the
eligible occupant at least forty-five (45) days prior to the date the eligible
occupant is required to vacate the mobile home park.
   D.   A request for modification of the time limits set forth in Subsections
A., B. and C. shall be considered by the City Council at the public hearing for
the relocation impact report.
   E.   No change of use or closure of a mobile home park shall be permitted
until all relocation assistance benefits required by the approved relocation
impact report have been provided to all eligible occupants. An exception may be
made if the applicant and an eligible occupant have agreed to an alternate
arrangement by written agreement, which must be approved by the director. The
written agreement shall comply with the requirements of §§
15.13.050.C.1.a. and
15.13.050.C.1.b.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.050 EXEMPTION FROM RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BENEFITS.
   A.   Any person who files a relocation impact report application may,
together with such application, file a written request for a total or partial
exemption from the obligation to provide relocation assistance benefits,
accompanied by a completed relocation impact report. A request for exemption
shall be considered by the City Council at the public hearing for the
relocation impact report.
   B.   If a request for an exemption is filed, the applicant shall notify the
mobile home owners and residents of the mobile home park of the request for
exemption, providing them with a copy of the request for exemption and a
description of the project proposed for the property that is the subject of the
change of use or closure of the mobile home park.
   C.   A request for exemption from the obligation to provide relocation
assistance benefits shall include a statement specifying at least one of the
following bases for the exemption:
      1.   The applicant has entered into a written agreement with specified
eligible occupants providing for mutually satisfactory relocation assistance
benefits. A request for exemption under this Subsection shall apply to only
those specified eligible occupants that have reached an agreement with the
applicant and shall comply with the following:
         a.   The written agreement shall be in at least 12-point type and
shall include, but is not limited to, the following terms and conditions:
            i.   The eligible occupant is aware of the provisions of this
Chapter and a copy of this Chapter is attached to the agreement.
            ii.   The eligible occupant's right to seek advice of an attorney
prior to signing the agreement.
            iii.   A reasonable time table for the provision of relocation
assistance and a clause that such agreement shall become void if such
relocation assistance has not been provided within the agreed upon time table.
            iv.   Any eligible occupant signing such an agreement may rescind
it in writing within ten (10) days of signing the agreement.
            v.   No eligible occupant signing a relocation assistance agreement
may contest the adequacy of the relocation impact report.
         b.   The agreement shall be recorded against the mobile home park
property on the records of the County of Los Angeles in sufficient form and
detail to advise a potential purchaser of the fee interest in the mobile home
park property of the existence of and content of the agreement.
         c.   A prospective purchaser of an eligible occupant's mobile home in
the mobile home park shall be advised as to the existence of any such
agreements between the applicant and the eligible occupant before purchasing a
mobile home and provided with a copy of the recorded agreements.
      2.   The provision of relocation assistance would eliminate substantially
all reasonable use and economic value of the property, and continued use of the
property as a mobile home park would eliminate substantially all reasonable use
and economic value of the property for reasons not caused or contributed to by
the mobile home park owner. A request for exemption under this Subsection shall
be accompanied by a qualified appraisal and shall include the following:
         a.   Statements of profit and loss from the operations of the mobile
home park for the five-year period prior to the date of the relocation impact
report application. Such statements must be certified by a certified public
accountant. All such statements shall remain confidential to the extent
permitted by law.
         b.   If the applicant contends that continued use of the property as a
mobile home park is economically infeasible due to the costs of necessary
repairs, improvements or both, that are not the result of the mobile home park
owner's negligent failure to properly maintain the mobile home park, then the
following items must accompany the request for exemption:
            i.   A statement made under penalty of perjury by a State licensed
general contractor, experienced in the design, construction and maintenance of
a California mobile home park, which shall include the following:
               (a)    Contractor has thoroughly inspected the entire mobile
home park, has determined that repairs and improvements must be made to the
mobile home park to maintain it in a decent, safe and sanitary condition, and
that those repairs are Not the result of the mobile home park owner's or
applicant's negligent failure to properly maintain the property.
               (b)   An itemized statement of improvements and repairs and the
estimated costs of those improvements and repairs due to deferred maintenance.
               (c)   The minimum period of time in which such improvements or
repairs must be made.
            ii.   If the Director requires an analysis of the information
submitted by the general contractor, the Director may procure services of
another licensed general contractor, at the applicant's sole cost and expense,
to provide such written analysis, before consideration of the request for
exemption of the applicant's obligation to provide relocation assistance
benefits.
            iii.   A statement verified by a certified public accountant as to
the necessary increase in rental rates of mobile home. Spaces within the mobile
home park within the next five (5) years necessary to pay for such improvements
and repairs that are not the result of the mobile home park owner's or
applicant's negligent failure to properly maintain the mobile home park
property.
            iv.   An estimate, provided by a qualified real estate appraiser of
the value of the mobile home park property if the change of use of the mobile
home park was approved for development consistent with the relocation impact
report application and the value of the property if the use was continued as a
mobile home park.
            v.   Such other information which the applicant believes to be
pertinent or which may be required by the Director.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
§ 15.13.055 FEES AND COSTS.
   The applicant shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the City in
connection with the submittal, review and processing of the relocation impact
report application, including all costs relating to the retention of
consultants to review and verify the information contained in the relocation
impact report. Applicant shall also be responsible for all costs in
implementing, monitoring and enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. Such
fees and costs shall be set forth in a fee schedule established by resolution
of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2011-010 § 1 (part))
TITLE 17: ZONING CODE
   
ARTICLE 1   ZONING CODE APPLICABILITY
   
ARTICLE 2     ZONING DISTRICTS, ALLOWABLE LAND USES AND ZONE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS
   
ARTICLE 3   SITE PLANNING AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   
ARTICLE 4   STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
   
ARTICLE 5   LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES
   
ARTICLE 6   ZONING CODE ADMINISTRATION
   
ARTICLE 7   DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 1: ZONING CODE APPLICABILITY
      Chapter
         
17.100   PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF ZONING CODE
         
17.110   LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
         
17.120   INTERPRETATION OF ZONING CODE PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 17.100: PURPOSE AND EFFECT
OF ZONING CODE
Section
   
17.100.005   Title
   
17.100.010   Purpose
   
17.100.015   Authority, Relationship to General Plan
   
17.100.020   Applicability of the Zoning Code
   
17.100.025   Responsibility for Administration
   
17.100.030   Partial Invalidation of Zoning Code
   
17.100.035   Procedural Requirements
§ 17.100.005 TITLE.
This Title is and shall be cited as the Culver City Zoning Code, Title 17 of
the Culver City Municipal Code, hereafter referred to as "this Title."
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.100.010 PURPOSE.
This Title carries out the policies of the Culver City General Plan by
classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within the City.
This Title is adopted to protect and promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of residents and businesses in the City. More specifically, it
is the purpose of this Title to:
A.   Provide standards that will guide the orderly growth and development of
the City;
B.   Preserve and protect the integrity and character of the City's residential
neighborhoods;
C.   Maintain vital areas for business activities that serve the community and
protect the quality of life;
D.   Require thoughtful planning and design that enhances the visual character
of the City and avoids conflicts between land uses;
E.   Respect the City's physical setting and constraints, and protect and
preserve its natural resources;
F.   Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses for which public
services and infrastructure can be efficiently and adequately planned; and
G.   Ensure that property within the City is well maintained by requiring each
owner, occupant, or other person in charge of any property to keep it in good
repair and in compliance with the provisions of this Title.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.100.015 AUTHORITY, RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN.
A.   Authority. This Title is enacted based on the authority vested in the City
of Culver City (hereafter referred to as the "City") by the City Charter and
the Culver City Municipal Code (hereafter referred to as "CCMC"); and by the
State of California, including but not limited to: the State Constitution; the
State Planning and Zoning Law (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65800 et seq.); the
California Environmental Quality Act (Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.);
the California Health and Safety Code; and other applicable statutory
provisions.
B.   General Plan Consistency. The City's General Plan is the document that
establishes the broad goals and policies for all future development. This Title
is the primary tool used to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of
the General Plan. The City Council intends that this Title be consistent with
the General Plan, and that any land use or development approved in compliance
with this Title will also be consistent with the General Plan.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
 § 17.100.020 APPLICABILITY OF THE ZONING CODE.
This Title applies to all land uses, structures, subdivisions, and development
within the City, as follows:
A.   New Land Uses or Structures. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this
Title, for any person to establish or construct any land use or structure,
except in compliance with the requirements of this Title.
B.   Existing Land Uses or Structures. The requirements of this Title are not
retroactive in their effect on land uses or structures lawfully established
before the effective date of this Title or any applicable amendment. Existing
land uses or structures are lawful and not in violation of the CCMC only when
operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Title. Any alteration, expansion, or modification of existing land uses or
structures shall comply with all provisions of this Title.
C.   Issuance of Building or Grading Permits. The City may issue building,
grading, or other construction permits only when:
   1.   The proposed land use and/or structure satisfies the requirements of
Subsection A. (New Land Uses or Structures) above, and all other applicable
statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations; and
   2.   The site was subdivided in compliance with all applicable requirements
of Chapter 15.10 (Subdivisions) of the CCMC.
D.   Subdivision of Land. Any subdivision of land proposed within the City
after the effective date of this Title shall be consistent with this Title and
Chapter 15.10 (Subdivisions) of the CCMC.
E.   Effect of Zoning Code Amendments on Projects in Progress. All land use
permit applications that have been determined by the Division to be complete
before the effective date of this Title, or any amendment to this Title, will
be processed in compliance with the requirements in effect when the application
was accepted as complete.
F.   Other Permits and Requirements. Nothing in this Title eliminates the need
for obtaining any other permits required by the City, or any permit or approval
required by other provisions of the CCMC or the laws, rules or regulations of
any City department, or any County, regional, State, or Federal agency.
G.   Conflicting Permits and Licenses. All permits shall be issued by the City
in compliance with the provisions of this Title after the effective date of
this Title or any amendment to this Title. Any permit, excluding business tax
certificates, issued in conflict with this Title shall be void.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.100.025 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
This Title shall be administered by the City Council (hereafter referred to as
the "Council"), Planning Commission (hereafter referred to as the
"Commission"), Board of Zoning Adjustments (hereafter referred to as the
"Board"), Planning and Development Director or his/her designee (hereafter
referred to as the "Director"), and Current Planning Division (hereafter
referred to as the "Division") as provided in
Chapter 17.600 (Administrative Responsibility).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.100.030 PARTIAL INVALIDATION OF ZONING CODE.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause,
phrase or portion of this Title is for any reason held to be invalid,
unconstitutional, or unenforceable, these decisions shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Title. This Title, and each portion
thereof, would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that one or more
portions of this Title may be declared invalid, unconstitutional, or
unenforceable.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.100.035 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.
Failure to follow the procedural requirements contained within this Title shall
not invalidate City actions taken in the absence of a clear showing of intent.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.110: LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
17.110.005   Requirements for Land Uses and Development
   
17.110.010   Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements
   
17.110.015   Temporary Uses
   
17.110.020   Additional Permits or Approvals
   
17.110.025   Conflicting Approvals
§ 17.110.005 REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND USES AND DEVELOPMENT.
No land use or structure shall be established, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, allowed, or replaced unless that land use or structure complies with
the following requirements.
A.   Allowable Use. The land use shall be identified by
Chapters 17.210 (Residential Zoning Districts),
17.220 (Mixed Use Zoning Districts),
17.240 (Planned Development Zoning Districts),
17.250 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) and
17.260 (Overlay Zones) as being allowable in the zoning district applied to the
subject site.
B.   Permit Requirements. Any land use permit required by this Title shall be
obtained before the proposed use is constructed or otherwise established or put
into operation, unless the proposed use is listed in §
17.110.010 (Exemptions from Land Uses and Development Approval Requirements).
The land use permit requirements of this Title are established by
Chapters 17.210 (Residential Zoning Districts),
17.220 (Mixed Use Zoning Districts),
17.240 (Planned Development Zoning Districts),
17.250 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) and
17.260 (Overlay Zones).
C.   Development Standards. Every land use and structure shall comply with all
applicable requirements of this Title, including the development standards of
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses, and Zone-Specific Standards),
and the provisions of Article 3 (Site Planning and General Development
Standards) and Article 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses). In addition, every
land use and structure shall comply with all applicable requirements of any
adopted Development Agreement, Comprehensive Plan, and Specific Plan.
D.   Conditions of Approval. Every land use and structure shall comply with all
applicable conditions imposed by the City as part of an approved land use
permit.
E.   Development Agreement Provisions. Every land use and structure shall
comply with any applicable agreement related to the site which has been
approved by the City or Redevelopment Agency, including but not limited to, an
Owner-Participation Agreement, a Disposition and Development Agreement, or a
Development Agreement.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.110.010 EXEMPTIONS FROM LAND USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
The land use permit requirements of this Title do not apply to any activity,
land use, or structure identified by this Section.
A.   Exempt Activities, Land Uses and Structures. The following activities,
land uses, and structures are exempt from the land use permit requirements of
this Title when in compliance with all applicable development standards of
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone Specific Standards),
Article 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards), and Article 4
(Standards for Specific Land Uses):
   1.   Decks, paths and driveways. Any deck, platform, and on-site path not
required by the CCMC to have a building permit or grading permit, not more than
24 inches above natural grade, and not above any basement or story below.
   2.   State or Federal governmental facilities. Any facility and operation
regulated by the State or Federal government on land owned or leased by a
governmental agency, to the extent that exemption is required by State or
Federal law.
   3.   Culver City governmental facilities. Any land or facility owned or
operated by Culver City.
   4.   Interior remodeling. Any interior alteration that does not increase the
number of rooms, bedrooms, or the gross floor area within a structure, or
change or intensify the permitted use of that structure.
   5.   Portable spas, hot tubs, and fish ponds. Any portable spa, hot tub,
fish pond, or similar installation as determined by the Director, that does not
exceed: 120 square feet in total area, including related equipment; 2,000
gallons of water; and three feet in depth. These facilities shall comply with
the setback requirements established by Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable
Land Uses, and Zone-Specific Standards) for the applicable zoning district, or
Article 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses).
   6.   Repair and maintenance. Repair and maintenance to other than a
designated historic structure, if the work does not result in any change in the
approved land use of the site or structure, or the addition to, enlargement or
expansion of the structure, and if any exterior repair employs the same
materials and design as the original.
   7.   Small portable residential accessory structure. Any portable storage
shed, play equipment or other small structure in any residential zoning
district, up to 120 square feet in total area, that is exempt from building
permit requirements in compliance with the CCMC and Uniform Building Code.
These structures shall comply with the setback requirements established by
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses, and Zone-Specific Standards)
for the applicable zoning district, or Article 4 (Standards for Specific Land
Uses).
   8.   Solar collectors. The addition of solar collection systems to the roof
or sides of an existing structure, provided the collectors comply with the
applicable height limit requirement.
   9.   Utilities. The construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public
utility or public agency of any underground or overhead utilities. These
include water, gas, electric, or telecommunication (excluding wireless
communications facilities), supply or disposal system; including wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
utility boxes, traffic signals, and hydrants, but not including any structures,
shall be permitted in any zoning district.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.110.015 TEMPORARY USES.
Requirements for establishing a temporary use (seasonal sales lot, construction
yards, special events, and temporary structures and the like) are set forth in
Chapter 17.520 (Temporary Use and Special Event Permits).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.110.020 ADDITIONAL PERMITS OR APPROVALS.
An allowed land use that is exempt from a land use permit, or has been granted
a land use permit, may still be required to obtain other permits before the use
is constructed, or otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in
this Chapter shall eliminate the need to obtain any permit or approval required
by:
A.   Any other provision of the CCMC, including: subdivision approval, building
permits, grading permits, other construction permits, encroachment permits, a
business tax certificate or permit to operate, all as may be appropriate.
B.   Any special district, or any regional, State, or Federal agency.
All necessary permits shall be obtained before starting work or expanding or
establishing a land use.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.110.025 CONFLICTING APPROVALS.
All Departments, officials, or public employees vested with the authority or
duty to issue licenses, zoning approvals, or permits where required by law
shall conform to the provisions of this Title. A license or zoning approval for
uses, structures, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this Title
shall not be issued. Any license, zoning approval, or permit issued in conflict
with the provisions of this Title shall be deemed void.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.120: INTERPRETATION OF ZONING CODE PROVISIONS
Section
   
17.120.005   Purpose
   
17.120.010   Rules of Interpretation
   
17.120.015   Procedures for Interpretations
§ 17.120.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or
applicability of any requirement of this Title. The rules provided in this
Chapter are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of
the provisions of this Title.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
 § 17.120.010 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
A.   Authority. The Director shall have the responsibility and authority to
interpret the requirements of this Title.
B.   Language.
   1.   Terminology. When used in this Title, the words "shall," "must,"
"will," "is to," and "are to" are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory
but is strongly recommended; and "may" is permissive. The present tense
includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present.
The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular,
unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words
"includes" and "including" shall mean "including but not limited to . . . ."
The words "buildings and structures" are referred to as "structures."
   2.   Common words use. If not specifically defined herein, or the context
otherwise requires, then words of common use shall be defined as found in
standard dictionaries.
   3.   Number of days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this Title,
or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided
in this Title, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days, unless
otherwise specified. Time limits will extend to the following working day where
the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend, a City-recognized
holiday, or a day the City is not open for business.
   4.   Minimum requirements. When any regulation of this Title is being
interpreted and applied, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum
requirements, unless stated otherwise (such as height limits and site coverage
requirements for structures, and the numbers and size of signs allowed are
maximums, not minimums).
   5.   State law requirements. Where this Title references provisions of State
law (e.g., The California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public
Resources Code, and the like), the reference shall be construed to be the
current State law provisions, as they may be amended from time to time.
   6.   Residential Zones. Whenever this Title refers to "residential zones,"
it shall mean properties in the R1, R2, RLD, RMD, RHD, and Residential PD
zones.
C.   Calculations - Rounding. Wherever this Title requires calculations to
determine applicable requirements, any fractional results of the calculations
shall be rounded to the next higher whole number when the fraction is one-half
or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than
one-half. In the case of the number of dwelling units, numerical quantities
that are fraction of whole numbers shall be rounded to the next higher whole
number.
D.   Zoning Map Boundaries. If there is uncertainty about the location of any
zoning district boundary shown on the official Zoning Map, the following rules
are to be used in resolving the uncertainty:
   1.   Where district boundaries approximately follow lot, alley, or street
lines, the lot lines and street and alley centerlines shall be construed as the
district boundaries;
   2.   If a district boundary divides a parcel, and the boundary line location
is not specified by distances printed on the zoning map, the location of the
boundary will be determined by the scale on the zoning map; and
   3.   Where a public street or alley, railroad, or utility right-of-way is
officially vacated or abandoned, the property that was formerly in the right-
of-way will be included within the zoning district of the adjoining property on
either side of the centerline of the vacated or abandoned right-of-way or
easement.
E.   Allowable Uses of Land. If a proposed use of land is not specifically
listed in
Chapters 17.210 (Residential Zoning Districts),
17.220 (Mixed Use Zoning Districts),
17.240 (Planned Development Zoning Districts),
17.250 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) and
17.260 (Overlay Zones), the use shall not be allowed, except as follows.
   1.   Similar uses allowed. The Director may determine that a proposed use
not listed in Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-
Specific Standards) is allowable if all of the following findings are made:
      a.   The proposed use will be consistent with the goals, objectives and
policies of the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan;
      b.   The characteristics of, and activities associated with, the proposed
use are equivalent to those of one or more of the uses listed in the zoning
district as allowable, and are not more destructive, detrimental or intensive
than the uses listed in the district; and
      c.   The proposed use will meet the purpose and intent of the zoning
district that is applied to the site.
   2.   Applicable standards and permit requirements. When the Director
determines that a proposed use not listed in Article 2 (Zoning Districts,
Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards) is equivalent to a listed use,
the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in
determining where it is allowed, what permits are required, and what other
standards and requirements of this Title apply.
   3.   Board of Zoning Adjustment determination. The Director may forward
questions about equivalent uses directly to the Board for a determination in
compliance with §
3.03.405 (Board of Zoning Adjustment) of the CCMC.
F.   Conflicting Requirements:
   1.   Municipal Code provisions. If conflicts occur between the requirements
of this Title and other regulations of the City, then the most restrictive
shall control.
   2.   Zoning Code provisions.  If conflicts occur between the provisions
within this Title, the most restrictive requirement shall control; except in
the case of any conflict between the regulations in Article 2 (Zoning
Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards) and Article 3 (Site
Planning and General Development Standards), Article 3 shall control.
   3.   Development Agreements or Specific Plans. When conflicts occur between
the requirements of this Title and standards adopted as part of any Development
Agreement or Specific Plan, the requirements of the Development Agreement or
Specific Plan shall control.
   4.   Private Agreements. This Title applies to all land uses and
development, regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction
on the development or use of structures or land than a private agreement or
restriction, without affecting the applicability of any agreement or
restriction. The City shall not enforce any covenant or agreement unless the
City is a party to the covenant or agreement.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.120.015 PROCEDURES FOR INTERPRETATIONS.
At the written request of any interested person, or at the Director's
discretion, the Director may determine the meaning or applicability of any
requirement of this Title and may issue an official interpretation.
A.   Request for Interpretation. A request shall be written that specifically
states the provision(s) in question and provides any information to assist in
the review.
B.   Record of Interpretations. Official interpretations shall be:
   1.   In writing, and shall quote the provisions of this Title being
interpreted, and explain their meaning or applicability in the particular or
general circumstances that caused the need for interpretation; and
   2.   Distributed to the Council, Commission, City Attorney, City Clerk, and
all pertinent staff.
   Any provision of this Title determined by the Director to need refinement or
revision should be corrected by amending this Title as soon as is practical.
Until amendments can occur, the Director will maintain a complete record of all
official interpretations, available for public review, and indexed by the
number of the Section being interpreted.
C.   Appeals and Referral. Any interpretation of this Title by the Director may
be appealed to the Board as provided by § 3.03.235 (Board of Zoning Adjustment)
of the CCMC. The Director may also refer any interpretation to the Board for a
determination.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
ARTICLE 2: ZONING DISTRICTS, ALLOWABLE LAND USES AND ZONE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS
      Chapter
         
17.200   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS, ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP   
         
17.210   RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
         
17.220   MIXED USE ZONING DISTRICTS
         
17.230   [RESERVED]
         
17.240   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) ZONING DISTRICTS
         
17.250   SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS
         
17.260   OVERLAY ZONES
CHAPTER 17.200: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS, ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP
Section
   
17.200.005   Purpose
   
17.200.010   Zoning Districts Established
   
17.200.015   Zoning Map adopted
   
17.200.020   Zoning District Regulations
§ 17.200.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter establishes the zoning districts applied to property within the
City, determines how the zoning districts are applied on the Zoning Map, and
provides general permit requirements for development and land uses.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.200.010 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
Culver City shall be divided into zoning districts which implement the General
Plan. The zoning districts described in Table 2-1 (Zoning Districts) are hereby
established and shall be shown on the official Zoning Map adopted (§
17.200.015).
   Table 2-1
   Zoning Districts
                                       General Plan Land Use
Zoning Map Symbol Zoning District Name Classification        Chapter
                                       Implemented by Zoning
                                       District
Residential Zoning Districts                                 Chapter 17.210
                                         General Plan Land Use
Zoning Map Symbol Zoning District Name   Classification          Chapter
                                         Implemented by Zoning
                                         District
Residential Zoning Districts                                     Chapter 17.210
R1                Single-Family          Single Family
                  Residential
R2                Two-Family Residential Two Family
RLD               Low Density Multiple-  Low Density Multifamily
                  Family Residential
                  Medium Density         Medium Density
RMD               Multiple-Family        Multifamily
                  Residential
RHD               High Density Multiple- High Density
                  Family Residential     Multifamily
Mixed Use Zoning Districts                                       Chapter 17.220
MU-N              Mixed Use Neighborhood Mixed Use Corridor 1
MU-1              Mixed Use Corridor 1   Mixed Use Corridor 1
MU-2              Mixed Use Corridor 2   Mixed Use Corridor 2
MU-DT             Mixed Use Downtown     Mixed Use Medium
MU-MD             Mixed Use Medium       Mixed Use Medium
MU-HD             Mixed Use High         Mixed Use High
MU-I              Mixed Use Industrial   Mixed Use Industrial
Special Purpose Zoning Districts                                 Chapter 17.250
S                 Studio                 Studio
E                 Cemetery               Cemetery
I                 Institutional          Institutional
OS                Open Space             Open Space
T                 Transportation         Transportation
PD                Planned Development    Various
Overlay Zones                                                    Chapter 17.260
-RZ               Residential Zero
                  Setback Overlay
-RP               Redevelopment Project
                  Area Overlay
-CV               Civic Center Overlay
-RH               Residential Hillsides
                  Overlay
 
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-001, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No.
2024-006)
§ 17.200.015 ZONING MAP ADOPTED.
The official Culver City Zoning Map (hereafter referred to as the "Zoning Map")
has been adopted by the Council and is on file with the Division.
A.   Inclusion by Reference. The Zoning Map, together with all legends,
symbols, notations, references, zoning district boundaries, and other
information on the maps has been adopted by the Council in compliance with Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 65800 et seq., and is hereby incorporated into this Title by
reference as though it were fully included here.
B.   Zoning District Boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning districts
established by §
17.200.010 (Zoning Districts Established) shall be shown upon the Zoning Map.
C.   Relationship to General Plan. The Zoning Map shall implement the General
Plan.
D.   Map Amendments. Amendments to the Zoning Map shall follow the process
established in
Chapter 17.620 (General Plan, Zoning Map and Zoning Code Amendments).
E.   Zoning Map Interpretation. The Zoning Map shall be interpreted in
compliance with §
17.120.010.D. (Zoning Map Boundaries).
F.   Zoning upon Annexation. All property not pre-zoned by the Council prior to
annexation shall be designated in the R1 (Single-Family Residential) Zoning
District upon annexation.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.200.020 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
A.   Purpose. 
Chapters 17.210 (Residential Zoning Districts) through
Chapter 17.260 (Overlay Zones) determine which land uses are allowed in each
zoning district, what steps are required to establish each use, and the basic
development standards that apply.
B.   Determination of Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements.  The land
uses allowed by this Title in each zoning district are identified in Tables 2-
2 and 2-6 of this Chapter as being:
   1.   Permitted subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Title, subject to first obtaining a Zoning Clearance (
Chapter 17.510), and any construction permit or other permit required by the
CCMC. These are shown as "P" uses in the tables;
   2.   Allowed subject to the approval of an Administrative Use Permit (
Chapter 17.530), and shown as "AUP" uses in the tables; and
   3.   Allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit (
Chapter 17.530), and shown as "CUP" uses in the tables.
   Pursuant to §
17.120.010 (Rules of Interpretation), the Director is assigned the
responsibility and authority to interpret the requirements of this Title. Land
uses that are not listed in the tables or are not shown in a particular zoning
district are not allowed, except where otherwise provided by §
17.110.010 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements).
C.   Indoor Uses Only.  All commercial and industrial activities, other than
off-street parking, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure
(s), except as may otherwise be allowed in compliance with this Title.
D.   Site Divided by Zoning District Boundary. Where a site is divided by one
or more district boundaries, each portion of the site in a separate district
shall be developed and used in compliance with the requirements of the
applicable district.
E.   Conflicts between Provisions:
   1.   In the event of any conflict between the zoning district regulations of
this Article and the provisions of Article 3 (Site Planning and General
Development Standards), the provisions of Article 3 shall control; and
   2.   Rules for resolving conflict between the requirements of this Title may
be found in §
17.120.010.F. (Conflicting Requirements).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.210: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
   
17.210.005   Purpose
   
17.210.010   Purpose of Residential Zoning Districts
   
17.210.015   Residential Zoning District Land Uses and Permit Requirements
   
17.210.020   Residential Zoning Districts Development Standards
   
17.210.025   Supplemental Standards for Townhouse Developments
   
17.210.030   Supplemental Standards for Multiple-Family Residential
§ 17.210.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides residential development and use regulations in the
residential zoning districts established by §
17.200.010 (Zoning Districts Established).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.210.010 PURPOSE OF RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
The purpose of the individual residential zoning districts, and the manner in
which they are applied, are as follows.
A.   R1 (Single-Family Residential) District.  The R1 Zoning District
identifies areas characterized by single-family dwellings. The standards of the
R1 District are intended to protect the existing density and maintain the
character of single-family residential neighborhoods. The R1 Zoning District is
consistent with the Single Family land use designation of the General Plan.
B.   R2 (Two-Family Residential) District. The R2 Zoning District identifies
areas characterized by single-family dwellings and duplexes. The R2 standards
are intended to maintain the character of existing neighborhoods, while
allowing the opportunity for two-family residential development. The R2 Zoning
District is consistent with the Two Family land use designation of the General
Plan.
C.   RLD (Low Density Multiple-Family Residential) District. The RLD Zoning
District identifies areas characterized by triplexes, fourplexes, townhouses,
and other low density multiple-family dwellings. The standards of the RLD
District are intended to ensure that new development is compatible with the
character of existing neighborhoods. The RLD Zoning District is consistent with
the Low Density Multifamily land use designation of the General Plan.
D.   RMD (Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential) District. The RMD Zoning
District identifies areas characterized by medium density multiple-family
dwellings. The standards of the RMD District are intended to provide
opportunities for the construction of medium density multiple-family housing.
The RMD Zoning District is consistent with the Medium Density Multifamily land
use designation of the General Plan.
E.   RHD (High Density Multiple-Family Residential) District.  The RHD Zoning
District identifies areas characterized by existing large-scale, multiple-
family residential complexes. The standards of the RHD Zoning District are
intended to ensure that new high density residential projects are compatible
with the character of existing large-scale, multiple-family development. The
RHD Zoning District is consistent with the High Density Multifamily land use
designation of the General Plan.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.210.015 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT LAND USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
A.   General Requirements. Table 2-2 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for
Residential Zoning Districts) identifies the uses of land allowed by this
Zoning Code in each residential zoning district, and the land use permit
required to establish each use, in compliance with §
17.200.020.B. (Determination of Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements).
   Note: Where the last column in the tables (Additional Regulations and
Specific Use Regulations) includes a note or section number, the regulations in
that note and/or the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions
in other sections of this Title may also apply.
TABLE 2-2               P      Permitted Use
Allowed Uses and Permit CUP      Conditional Use Permit Required
Requirements for        AUP      Administrative Use Permit Required
Residential Zoning      -      Use not allowed
Districts
                        PERMIT REQUIREMENT BY DISTRICT Additional Regulations
LAND USE                                               and Specific Use
                        R1 R2 RLD RMD RHD              Regulations :
TABLE 2-2                                                    P      Permitted Use
Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zoning  CUP      Conditional Use Permit Required
Districts                                                    AUP      Administrative Use Permit Required
                                                             -      Use not allowed
LAND USE                                                     PERMIT REQUIREMENT BY DISTRICT        Additional Regulations and Specific Use Regulations :
                                                             R1  R2  RLD RMD RHD
RECREATION, EDUCATION, & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
Arcade                                                       -   -   -   -   -                      
Clubs, lodges, and private meeting halls                     -   -   -   -   -                      
Community garden                                             P   P   P   P   P                      
Indoor commercial recreation                                 -   -   -   -   -                      
Event centers                                                -   -   -   -   -                      
Health/fitness facilities                                    -   -   -   -   -                      
Outdoor commercial recreation                                -   -   -   -   -                      
Public recreational and cultural facilities                  P   P   P   P   P                      
Private residential recreational facilities                  -   -   P   P   P                      
Public Schools - Kindergarten to 12th grade                  P   P   P   P   P                      
Private Schools - Kindergarten to 12th grade                 CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP                   (1) Use only allowed on a site declared surplus by the Culver City Unified
                                                             (1) (1)                               School District.
College/university/trade school                              -   -   -   -   -                      
Religious places of worship                                  CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP                    
Studios - Art, dance, music, photography, and the like       -   -   -   -   -                      
Theatres                                                     -   -   -   -   -                      
RESIDENTIAL
   Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling P   P   P   P   P                     §
units                                                                                              17.400.095 (Residential Uses - Accessory Dwelling units)
   Accessory residential structures and uses              P   P   P   P   P                     §
                                                                                                   17.400.100 (Residential Uses - Accessory Residential Structures)
   Child day care - Large family day care homes           P   P   P   P   P                     Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other residential
                                                                                                   uses of the same type in the same zone.
   Child day care - Small family day care homes           P   P   P   P   P                     Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other residential
                                                                                                   uses of the same type in the same zone.
                                                                                                   Cottage food operations are allowed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety
   Cottage food operation (accessory)                     P   P   P   P   P                     Code § 113758. For guidelines and regulations, go to the LA County Public
                                                                                                   Health Department website.
                                                                                                   (2) Existing two-family dwellings/duplexes as of October 9, 2024, in the
                                                                         -                         RMD and RHD zones shall be considered a conforming use, unless the
   Two-family dwelling/duplex                             -   P   P   (2) - (2)                 structure is fully demolished. See also §
                                                                                                   17.610.010.G. (Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings in RMD and RHD Zoning
                                                                                                   Districts).
   Home occupations                                       P   P   P   P   P                     §
                                                                                                   17.400.055 (Home Occupations)
   Live/work units                                        -   -   -   -   -
   Mixed use projects                                     -   -   -   -   -
   Multiple-family dwelling 4+ units)                     -   -   P   P   P
   Residential care facility, 6 or fewer clients          P   P   P   P   P
   Residential care facility, 7 or more clients           CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
   Senior citizen congregate care housing                 -   -   CUP CUP CUP
                                                                                                   (3) Existing single-family dwellings as of October 9, 2024, in the RMD and
                                                                         -                         RHD zones shall be considered a conforming use, unless the structure is
   Single-family dwellings                                P   P   P   (3) - (3)                 fully demolished. See also §
                                                                                                   17.610.010.G. (Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings in RMD and RHD Zoning
                                                                                                   Districts).
   Single room occupancy units                            -   -   -   -   -
   Supportive housing                                     P   P   P   P   P                     Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other residential
                                                                                                   uses of the same type in the same zone.
   Transitional housing                                   P   P   P   P   P                     Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other residential
                                                                                                   uses of the same type in the same zone.
   Triplex                                                -   -   P   P   P
SERVICE
   Adult day care facilities                              CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
   Animal boarding and kennels                            -   -   -   -   -
   Automated teller machines (ATMs)                       -   -   -   -   -
   Banks and financial services                           -   -   -   -   -
   Business and consumer support services                 -   -   -   -   -
   Check-cashing businesses                               -   -   -   -   -
   Child day care centers                                 -   -   CUP CUP CUP
   Commercial kitchens                                    -   -   -   -   -
   Construction contractors, no outdoor storage           -   -   -   -   -
   Contractor's storage yard                              -   -   -   -   -
   Drive-thru facilities or services                      -   -   -   -   -
   Emergency shelters                                     -   -   -   -   -
   Hotels and motels                                      -   -   -   -   -
   Hotels and motels (extended stay)                      -   -   -   -   -
   Medical services -                                     -   -   -   -   -
      Offices/clinics
   Medical services - Labs                                -   -   -   -   -
   Medical services - Hospitals                           -   -   -   -   -
   Mortuaries and funeral homes                           -   -   -   -   -
   Offices                                                -   -   -   -   -
   Personal services                                      -   -   -   -   -
   Pet day care                                           -   -   -   -   -
   Public facilities                                      P   P   P   P   P
   Public utility facilities                              CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
   Storage, Personal storage facility                     -   -   -   -   -
   Storage, outdoor (accessory)                           -   -   -   -   -
   Storage, warehouse                                     -   -   -   -   -
   Vehicle services - Accessories installation            -   -   -   -   -
   Vehicle services - Car washes                          -   -   -   -   -
   Vehicle services - Fueling stations                    -   -   -   -   -
   Vehicle services - EV Charging Stations                -   -   -   -   -
   Vehicle services -                                     -   -   -   -   -
   Fueling/charging, incidental repair
   Vehicle services -                                     -   -   -   -   -
   Impounding/storage    
   Vehicle services -                                     -   -   -   -   -
   Maintenance/repair
   Vehicle services - Paint/body                       -   -   -   -   -
   Vehicle services - Towing, no storage                  -   -   -   -   -
   Veterinary clinics                                     -   -   -   -   -
   Animal hospital                                        -   -   -   -   -
TRANSPORTATION & COMMUNICATIONS
   Broadcast studios                                      -   -   -   -   -
   Heliports                                              -   -   -   -   -
   Parking facilities                                     -   -   -   -   -
                                                                                                   See §
   Telecommunications facilities, cellular                CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP                   17.400.110 (Telecommunication Facilities). Use only allowed on a site
                                                                                                   owned and controlled by the City or other governmental agency.
   Telecommunications facilities, dish/wireless antennas  See §                                 
                                                             17.400.110 for permit requirements   
 
B.   Cultivation. No person or entity may cultivate cannabis at any location in
the city, except as provided for in Chapter 11.17 pertaining to commercial
cultivation, and except that a person may cultivate no more than six living
cannabis plants on the grounds of his or her private residence, inside the
private residence, including inside an accessory structure to his or her
private residence located upon the grounds of that private residence that is
fully enclosed and secured against unauthorized entry, provided that the
following conditions are met:
   1.   The owner of the property provides written consent expressly allowing
the cannabis cultivation to occur;
   2.   The person conducting the cannabis cultivation complies with all
applicable requirements set forth in Title 17 of this Code;
   3.   Cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed 1,200 watts;
   4.   There is no use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas,
etc.) on the property for purposes of cannabis cultivation that occurs inside a
private residence or an accessory structure to a private residence;
   5.   The private residence shall maintain kitchen, bathrooms, and primary
bedrooms for their intended use, and shall not use those areas for cannabis
cultivation;
   6.   Adverse impacts of cannabis cultivation shall be mitigated so that a
public nuisance, as defined by Cal. Civil Code § 3480, does not exist,
including but not limited to adverse impacts of dust, glare, heat, noise,
noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or the use or storage of
hazardous materials, processes, products, or wastes; and
   7.   The cannabis cultivation complies with Cal. Health and Safety Code §
11362.2.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2014-007
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-007 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-019 § 2 (part); Ord.
2018-015 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3
(part); Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.210.020 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A.   General Requirements. Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and
alterations to existing land uses and structures in the R1 and R2 zones shall
conform to the requirements in Table 2-3 (Residential Districts Development
Standards (R1, R2)). Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and
alterations to existing land uses and structures in the RLD, RMD and RHD zones
shall conform to the requirements in Table 2-4 (Residential District
Development Standards (RLD, RMD, RHD)). In addition, the applicable development
standards in Article 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards) apply
to all residential zoning districts. Table 2-5 (Supplemental Standards for
Townhouse Developments) shall apply to townhouse developments in RLD and RMD
zones.
   Table 2-3
   Residential Districts Development Standards (R1, R2)
RESIDENTIAL ZONES (R1, R2)
Standards R1 R2 Additional Regulations
RESIDENTIAL ZONES (R1, R2)
Standards     R1            R2                                    Additional
                                                                  Regulations
Lot and Density Standards
              8.7 units/
Maximum       gross acre,   17.4 units/acre, maximum 2 units per
residential   maximum 1     parcel   
density       unit per
              parcel
                                                                  See §
                                                                  17.400.095
                                                                  for
                                                                  exceptions
                                                                  for Accessory
                                                                  Dwelling
                            1,500 square feet plus 40% of gross   Units.
                            lot area for parcels less than 8,000  In the R2
Maximum       0.45 Floor    square feet;                          Zone, the
dwelling size Area Ratio    60% of gross lot area for parcels     maximum and
                            8,000 square feet or more.            minimum
                                                                  allowed floor
                                                                  area does not
                                                                  include any
                                                                  garage or
                                                                  other non-
                                                                  habitable
                                                                  space.
Minimum       1,000 square  1,000 square feet for a single-family
dwelling size feet on the   unit;
              ground floor  750 square feet/unit in a duplex
                                                                  Condominium,
                                                                  townhouse, or
                                                                  planned
                                                                  development
                                                                  projects may
                                                                  be subdivided
                                                                  with smaller
                                                                  parcel sizes
                                                                  for ownership
                                                                  purposes,
                                                                  with the
                                                                  minimum lot
Minimum lot                                                       area
size (for new 5,000 square feet                                   determined
lots)                                                             through the
                                                                  subdivision
                                                                  review
                                                                  process,
                                                                  provided that
                                                                  the overall
                                                                  development
                                                                  site complies
                                                                  with the
                                                                  minimum lot
                                                                  size
                                                                  requirements
                                                                  of this
                                                                  Chapter.
Minimum lot
width (for    40 feet       40 feet
new lots)
Minimum lot
depth (for    100 feet      100 feet
new lots)
Building Form and Location
                                                                  Sloped roofs
                                                                  equal to or
                                                                  greater than
                                                                  a 3:12
                                                                  sloped; flat
Maximum       Flat roofs -                                        roofs less
height -      27 feet;                                            than 3:12.
primary       Sloped roof - 30 feet                               See §
structure     30 feet                                             17.300.025,
                                                                  for standards
                                                                  for Height
                                                                  Measurement
                                                                  and Height
                                                                  Limit
                                                                  Exceptions.
              See §
Maximum       17.400.095 (Residential Uses - Accessory Dwelling
height -      Units)
accessory     See §
building      17.400.100 (Residential Uses - Accessory
              Residential Structures)
              5 feet between accessory residential structures and
Minimum       accessory dwelling units;
distance      5 feet between primary dwelling units and accessory
between       residential structures and accessory dwelling
structures    units;
              8 feet between detached dwelling units.
Lot Setbacks - Minimums (feet)
              Single story
              structures -
              20 feet
              Two story
              structures -
              20 feet; 25
              feet for
              second story,
              as defined by
Front         this Title,   15 feet
              or any roof
              or portion of
              a roof,
              parapet wall,
              or front
              yard-facing
              facade that
              exceeds a
              height of 18
              feet
              5 feet single
              story
              structures
              5 feet - two
              story
              structures;
              plus minimum
              5 feet
Street Side   stepback for  4 feet
(corner lots) second floor
              10 feet - two
              story
              structures
              without
              minimum 5
              feet second
              floor
              stepback
Lot Setbacks - Minimums (feet)
              5 feet
              minimum
              No structure
              shall
              encroach upon 4 feet minimum
              a 1:1 upward- No structure shall encroach upon a 1:
Interior Side and inward-   1 upward- and inward-inclining
              inclining     setback plane starting from 20 feet
              setback plane above any interior side lot line
              starting from
              18 feet above
              any interior
              side lot line
Rear          15 feet       10 feet
Open Space
                                                                  A permanent,
                                                                  built-in
                                                                  landscape
                                                                  planter with
                                                                  vegetation
                                                                  shall be
              Rooftop decks shall be set back 5 feet from the     located
              building edge along an interior side yard and rear  within the
              yard adjacent to a residential zoned property,      required
              except the rear setback from the building edge      setback area
              shall not be required where there is an onsite      to screen
Roof deck     structure of equal or greater height located        views of the
              between the subject roof deck and the adjacent      deck from
              residential zoned property. Rooftop decks shall     neighboring
              meet the setbacks applicable to the primary         properties.
              structure.                                          Rooftop decks
                                                                  which are
                                                                  located in a
                                                                  roof well are
                                                                  not required
                                                                  to include a
                                                                  landscape
                                                                  planter.
              Minimum area of a site to remain uncovered by
Open space    structures, in compliance with §
              17.400.100 (Residential Uses - Accessory
              Residential Structures)
   Private None required other than setbacks
   Common  None required
Open Space
              No more than 25% of any required setback facing a
              street shall be paved to provide access to on-site
              parking, unless paving of a larger area is required
              to comply with §
              17.320.035.C. (Parking Space and Lot Dimensions)
              (e.g., to provide a standard 16-foot, double-wide
              driveway within the 20-foot front setback area,
              leading to a street-facing two-car garage).
              Additional permeable hardscape area may be allowed  See
              but not to exceed a combined total of 20 feet in    Chapter
Maximum front width when no other parking is provided onsite, as  17.310
yard paving   specified in §                                     (Landscaping)
              17.320.035.P.3.                                     for
              In addition to any required driveway paving,        additional
              additional paving may be allowed for a pedestrian   regulations.
              pathway leading to the entrance of the development
              provided the pedestrian path is not more than 4-
              feet in width. If the pedestrian path is not
              connected to the driveway, it shall be separated
              from the driveway by a minimum width of 3 feet and
              landscaped. If the pedestrian pathway is connected
              to the driveway, the maximum width of the
              connection to the driveway shall not exceed 4 feet.
Other         See CCMC Article 3
Standards
 
   Table 2-4
   Residential District Development Standards (RLD, RMD, RHD)
RESIDENTIAL ZONES (RLD, RMD, RHD)
STANDARDS RLD RMD RHD Additional Regulations
RESIDENTIAL ZONES (RLD, RMD, RHD)
STANDARDS   RLD         RMD        RHD                       Additional Regulations
Lot and Density Standards
Maximum
residential 35 units/   50 units/
density     acre        acre       70 units/acre
(units/
gross acre)
Minimum     N/A         20 units/  30 units/acre             For lots smaller than 5,000 square feet, minimum number of units shall be
density                 acre                                 three.
                                                             Condominium, townhouse, or planned development projects may be subdivided
                                                             with smaller parcel sizes for ownership purposes, with the minimum lot
Minimum lot 5,000       5,000                                area as provided in the Supplemental Standards for Townhouse Developments
area        square feet square     20,000 square feet        in §
                        feet                                 17.210.025 or as determined through the subdivision review process,
                                                             provided that the overall development site complies with the minimum lot
                                                             size requirements of this Chapter.
Minimum lot 50 feet     50 feet    100 feet
width
Minimum lot 100 feet    100 feet   100 feet
depth
Building Form and Location
Maximum
height -    32 feet     43 feet    53 feet                   For standards for Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions, see §
primary                                                      17.300.025.
building
Maximum     See §
height -    17.400.095 Residential Uses - Accessory Dwelling
accessory   Units
residential See §
structures  17.400.100 Residential Uses - Accessory
            Residential Structures
                        When a
                        building
                        has a rear
                        and/or
                        interior
                        side
                        property
                        line       When a building has a
                        directly   rear and/or interior side
                        abutting   property line directly
Height                  an R1 or   abutting an R1 or R2
Stepbacks               R2 parcel, parcel, starting above 30
adjacent to N/A         starting   feet or two stories       See
R1 and R2               above 30   (whichever is less), the  Figure 2-3 (Neighborhood Transitions)
zones                   feet or    next two floors shall be
                        two        stepped back 15 feet and
                        stories    any floor(s) above that
                        (whichever shall be stepped back an
                        is less),  additional 5 feet
                        the
                        subsequent
                        floor(s)
                        shall be
                        stepped
                        back 15
                        feet
            5 feet
            between
            accessory
            residential
            structures,
            and
            accessory
            dwelling
            units;
            5 feet      5 feet between accessory residential
            between     structures, and accessory dwelling
Minimum     primary     units; 5 feet between primary
distance    dwelling    structures and accessory residential
between     units and   structures and accessory dwelling
structures  accessory   units;10 feet between primary
            residential structures.
            structures
            and
            accessory
            dwelling
            units;
            5 feet
            between
            detached
            dwelling
            units.
Setbacks
Front -     10 feet     10 feet    10 feet
minimum
Street side 10 feet     5 feet     10 feet
- minimum
                        5 feet; 10
                        feet
                        abutting
Interior                R1 and R2
side -      5 feet      zoned      10 feet
minimum                 property
                        if over 30
                        feet in
                        height
Rear -                  15 feet, 20 feet abutting R1 and R2  One-half the width of an alley may be credited toward the setback
minimum     10 feet     zoned property if over 30 feet in    requirement for properties adjacent to R1 and R2 zones.
                        height
Garage/Parking Frontage
Maximum                                                      Applies to new development. No more than 30% of the primary street
parking                                                      frontage shall be devoted to parking garages and openings, carports, and
along       NA          30%        30%                       open/surface parking. This limitation does not apply to frontages along
primary                                                      alleys. See
frontage                                                     Figure 2-4 (Maximum Parking Frontage).
Open Space Standards
            Rooftop decks shall be set back 5 feet from the
            building edge along an interior side yard and
            rear yard adjacent to a residential zoned
            property, except the rear setback from the       A permanent, built-in landscape planter with vegetation shall be located
Roof decks  building edge shall not be required where there  within the required setback area to screen views of the deck from
            is an onsite structure of equal or greater       neighboring properties. Rooftop decks which are located in a roof well
            height located between the subject roof deck and are not required to include a landscape planter.
            the adjacent residential zoned property. Rooftop
            decks shall meet the setbacks applicable to the
            primary structure.
                        150 square
                        feet total
            150 square  per unit;
            feet total  a minimum  100 square feet total per See additional regulations in §
Minimum     per unit,   of 50% of  unit; a minimum of 50% of 17.210.030 (Supplemental Standards for Multiple-Family Residential)
usable open of which 60 the units  the units must have 60    (A) Up to 40% of required common open space may be an indoor common space
space       square feet must have  square feet of private    such as a community room as long as it is adjacent to an outdoor common
            must be     60 square  open space (A)            space.
            private     feet of
                        private
                        open space
                        (A)
            No more than 45% of the total area of the front
Maximum     yard setback shall be paved for walkways,
front yard  driveways, and other hardcover pavement          See
paving      (Townhouses are excluded - see Supplemental      Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping) for additional regulations.
            Standards for Townhouse Developments in §
            17.210.025)
Other       See CCMC Article 3
Standards
 
   Figure 2-1 Maximum Envelope - Zoning
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4885.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4887.jpg]
 
   Figure 2-2 R1 Development Standards (Flat Roof and Sloping Roof)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4889.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4891.jpg]
 
   Figure 2-3 Neighborhood Transitions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4893.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4895.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4897.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4899.jpg]
 
   Figure 2-4 Maximum Parking Frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4901.jpg]
 
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2016-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2020-003
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3 (part); Ord.
No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-001, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No.
2025-003, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.210.025 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENTS.
This section provides development standards specific to townhouse developments
which are permitted in RLD, RMD, and all mixed use zoning districts. Townhouses
shall conform to the requirements in
Table 2-5. These standards are in addition to and supersede the base standards
for the RLD, RMD, and all mixed use zoning districts, except where there is a
conflict, in which case the standards in
Table 2-5 supersede those in
Table 2-4,
Table 2-7, and
Table 2-8.
   Table 2-5 Supplemental Standards for Townhouse Developments
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 STANDARD Additional Regulations
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                          STANDARD                  Additional Regulations
Lot and Density Standards
Minimum net lot size per
dwelling unit (for new    900 square feet
lots)
                                                    Attached Single-Family
                                                    Homes/Townhouses: A minimum
                                                    lot width of 30 to 40 feet
                                                    may be necessary for
                                                    townhouses with double
Minimum lot width per     20 feet; 30 feet for      loaded attached garages in
dwelling unit (for new    corner and reverse corner front, and to comply with
lots)                     lots                      parking location and design
                                                    requirements. Minimum lot
                                                    width may be reduced to 20
                                                    feet if garages are single-
                                                    car wide, detached and/or
                                                    accessed from an alley.
Lot Setbacks - Minimum (feet)
Front                     5 feet
Street side (corner lots) 5 feet
Interior side when
abutting a townhouse      0 feet
within the same townhouse
development
Interior side when        5 feet
containing an end unit
Rear                      10 feet
Alley (when present)      5 feet
Garage/Surface Parking Frontage
Maximum parking frontage
on a public street (for   NA
new residential
development)
Open Space
                                                    Any area that is not a
Maximum front yard paving NA                        driveway or walkway shall
                                                    be landscaped.
Minimum required          Refer to
landscaping               Chapter 17.310
                          (Landscaping)
 
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.210.030 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
This Section provides additional development and operation standards for
multiple-family residential projects, addressing the requirements for private
and common open space, laundry facilities, and other required project features.
A.   Open Space Requirements for Multiple-Family Residential. All multiple-
family residential projects shall provide permanently-maintained outdoor open
space for each dwelling unit (private space), and for all residents (common
space) as required in §
17.210.020 (Residential Zoning District Development Standards),
Tables 2-3 and
2-4.
   1.   Configuration of open space.
      a.   Location on site. Required open space areas:
         i.   Shall be easily accessible.
         ii.   Shall be provided as continuous, usable site elements, which may
include setback areas at ground level.
         iii.   Private open space shall be directly accessible from the unit.
      b.   Rooftop open space. The common open space, may be located on a
rooftop, provided that the space:
         i.   Includes active or passive recreational facilities and/or
landscaping, as required by §
17.210.030.A.6. (Landscaping).
         ii.   Is located and designed to not impair privacy or cause other
nuisance problems for residents on the same site or on adjacent parcels and is
stepped back at least five feet from any building edge adjacent to a side yard
such that direct views into neighboring private open spaces are obscured.
         iii.   Comply with the limitations in §
17.210.030.A.1.c. (Dimensions) below.
      c.   Dimensions. All open space areas shall be of sufficient size to be
usable by residents, as follows:
         i.   Private open space areas shall have a minimum dimension of five
feet in any direction.
         ii.   Common open space areas shall have a minimum dimension of 20
feet in any direction, which may include a combination of open space and
adjacent setback area.
         iii.   Courtyards enclosed on three sides shall have a minimum
dimension of 30 feet in all directions. Courtyards enclosed on four sides shall
have a minimum dimension of 40 feet and have a minimum courtyard width to
building height ratio of 1.25:1.
      d.   Uncovered areas required. Private open space may be covered but
cannot be fully enclosed (i.e., at least one side must be open to air).
Reference to this requirement shall be included in the covenants, conditions,
and restrictions of any common interest development.
   2.   Allowed uses. Common open space:
      a.   Shall be available for passive and active outdoor recreational
purposes, for the enjoyment of all residents of each multiple-family project.
      b.   Shall not include driveways, public or private streets, parking
spaces, or utility easements where the ground surface cannot be used
appropriately for open space or other areas primarily designed for other
operational functions.
   3.   Maintenance and control of common open space. The required common open
space shall be controlled and permanently maintained by the owner of the
property or by a homeowners' association. Provisions for control and
maintenance shall be included in any property covenants of common interest
developments.
   4.   Surfacing. Open space areas shall be surfaced with any practical
combination of landscaping, paving, decking, concrete, or other serviceable
material.
   5.   Shading. A maximum of 50% of the outdoor common open space square
footage may be covered by a shading device, projection, or roof structure.
   6.   Landscaping. A minimum of 20% of the common open space area shall be
planted with trees, ground cover, and/or shrubs, or provided via planters. A
minimum of one tree shall be planted per 600 square feet of the common outdoor
space area (aggregated across all common outdoor space areas). Landscape
design, installation, and maintenance shall comply with
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
   7.   Slope. Required open space areas shall not exceed a slope of 5%.
B.   Facility and Design Requirements for Multiple-Family Residential.
   1.   Laundry facilities. All residential developments with four or more
dwelling units shall provide common laundry facilities, except developments
with facilities provided within each unit.
      a.   Keyed access. Laundry facilities shall be provided with keyed access
for tenants only.
      b.   Location. The facilities shall be evenly dispersed throughout the
multiple-family development either in every building and/or every other floor,
and easily accessible to all tenants.
   2.   Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be installed and maintained
along all vehicular access ways and major walkways, in compliance with §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting). The lighting shall be directed onto the
driveways and walkways within the development and away from adjacent
properties. Lighting shall also be installed and maintained within all covered
and enclosed parking areas and shall be screened to minimize glare onto public
sidewalks and adjacent properties. All proposed lighting shall be shown on the
required landscape plan.
   3.   Refuse and recycling. Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be designed
and located per the standards in §
17.300.035.C.4. (Refuse and Recycling).
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.220: MIXED USE ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
   
17.220.005   Purpose
   
17.220.010   Purpose of Mixed Use Zoning Districts
   
17.220.015   Mixed Use District Land Uses and Permit Requirements
   
17.220.020   Mixed Use Zoning District Development Standards
   
17.220.025   Performance Standards for Mixed Use Zones
   
17.220.030   Supplemental Standards for Mixed Use Development
   
17.220.035   Mixed Use Downtown (MU-DT) District Requirements
§ 17.220.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides development and land use regulations in the mixed use
zoning districts established by §
17.200.010 (Zoning Districts Established).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.220.010 PURPOSE OF MIXED USE ZONING DISTRICTS.
The purpose of the individual mixed use zoning districts, and the manner in
which they are applied, are as follows.
A.   MU-N (Mixed Use Neighborhood) District. The MU-N Zoning District
identifies areas along major corridors appropriate for lower-scale mixed use,
residential, and neighborhood serving commercial uses that will primarily serve
the daily needs of nearby residents. The development standards and permit
requirements of the MU-N District are intended to create a pedestrian-oriented
environment. The MU-N Zoning District is consistent with the Mixed Use Corridor
1 land use designation of the General Plan.
B.   MU-1 (Mixed Use Corridor 1) District. The MU-1 Zoning District identifies
areas along major corridors appropriate for lower-scale mixed use, residential,
general and neighborhood serving commercial uses. The MU-1 Zoning District is
consistent with the Mixed Use Corridor 1 land use designation of the General
Plan.
C.   MU-2 (Mixed Use Corridor 2) District. The MU-2 Zoning District identifies
areas appropriate for moderate-scale mixed use, residential, general and
neighborhood serving commercial uses. The MU-2 Zoning District is consistent
with the Mixed Use Corridor 2 land use designation of the General Plan.
D.   MU-DT (Mixed Use Downtown) District. The MU-DT Zoning District applies to
the Downtown area of Culver City. The standards of this district are intended
to encourage moderate-scaled mixed-use, residential, office, and commercial
uses, with an emphasis on retail, entertainment, restaurant, and cultural uses.
The development standards of the MU-DT District are intended to provide a
pedestrian-friendly environment with high visual quality. The MU-DT Zoning
District is consistent with the Mixed Use Medium land use designation of the
General Plan.
E.   MU-MD (Mixed Use Medium) District.  The MU-MD Zoning District identifies
areas appropriate for a broad range of mixed use, residential, office, and
commercial uses, including anchor tenants, entertainment, and restaurant uses
that may share parking, and serve a regional market area. The MU-MD Zoning
District is consistent with the Mixed Use Medium land use designation of the
General Plan.
F.   MU-HD (Mixed Use High) District. The MU-HD Zoning District identifies
areas appropriate for large-scale residential, office, and commercial uses
emphasizing a variety of retail uses, including anchor tenants, entertainment,
and restaurant uses that may share parking and serve a regional market area.
The MU-HD Zoning District is consistent with the Mixed Use High land use
designation of the General Plan.
G.   MU-I (Mixed Use Industrial) District. The MU-I Zoning District identifies
areas appropriate for a broad range of mixed use, residential, office,
commercial, and specific light industrial uses. The MU-I Zoning District is
consistent with the Mixed Use Industrial land use designation of the General
Plan.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.220.015 MIXED USE DISTRICT LAND USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
A.   
Table 2-6 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Mixed Use Zoning Districts)
identifies the uses of land allowed by this Title in the mixed use zoning
districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use in compliance
with §
17.200.020.B. (Determination of Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements).
Note:  Where the last column in the tables (Additional Regulations and Specific
Use Regulations) includes a note or section number, the regulations in that
note and/or the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in
other sections of this Title may also apply.
   Table 2-6 Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Mixed Use Zoning
Districts
Table 2-6           P      Permitted Use
Allowed Uses and    CUP      Conditional Use Permit Required
Permit Requirements AUP      Administrative Use Permit Required
for Mixed Use       -      Use not allowed
Zoning Districts
                                                                Additional
                    PERMIT REQUIREMENT BY DISTRICT              Regulations and
LAND USES                                                       Specific Use
                                                                Regulations
                    MU- N MU- 1 MU- 2 MU- DT MU- MD MU- HD MU-I
Table 2-6          P      Permitted Use
Allowed Uses and   CUP      Conditional Use Permit
Permit             Required
Requirements for   AUP      Administrative Use Permit
Mixed Use Zoning   Required
Districts          -      Use not allowed
                   PERMIT REQUIREMENT BY DISTRICT     Additional Regulations and Specific Use Regulations
LAND USES          MU- MU- MU- MU- MU- MU- MU-I
                   N   1   2   DT  MD  HD
INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING
Chemical product   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
manufacturing
Concrete, gypsum,
and plaster        -   -   -   -   -   -   -
products
Cosmetic product   -           -   -   -   -
manufacturing
Electronics and
equipment          -   -   -   -   -   -   AUP
manufacturing
Fabric products    -   -   -   -   -   -   AUP
manufacturing
Food and beverage                                     For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
manufacturing      -   -   -   -   -   -   AUP        see §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales).
Furniture/
fixtures           -   P   P      -   -   P
manufacturing
Glass, metal and
plastics product   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
manufacturing
Handcraft          -   P   P   -   -   -   P
industries
Hazardous
materials/
wholesale fuel     -   -   -   -   -   -   -
storage and
distribution
Laundries and dry- -   -   -   -   -   -   -
cleaning plants
Lumber and wood
product            -   -   -   -   -   -   -
manufacturing
Machinery          -   -   -   -   -   -   -
manufacturing
Media production -
Backlots/outdoor   -   -   -   -   -   -   AUP
facilities
Media production -
Indoor support     -   P   P   -   -   -   P
facilities
Media production - -   -   -   -   -   -   P
Soundstages
Metal products
fabrication,       -   -   -   -   -   -   -
machine/weldin g
shops
Mining/resource    -   -   -   -   -   -   -
extraction
Motor vehicle/
transportation     -   -   -   -   -   -   -
equipment
manufacturing
Paper product      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
manufacturing
Paving and roofing
material           -   -   -   -   -   -   -
manufacturing
Printing and       -   P   P   -   -   -   P
publishing
Recycling facility -   -   -   -   -   -   -
- processing
Recycling facility -   -   -   -   -   -   -
- Large collection
Recycling facility                                    See §
- Incidental small P   P   P   -   P   P   P          17.400.090 (Recycling Facilities)
collection
Recycling facility -   AUP AUP -   -   -   P          See §
- Small collection                                    17.400.090 (Recycling Facilities)
Research and       -   P   P   -   P   P   P
development (R&D)
Salvage and        -   -   -   -   -   -   -
wrecking
Small-scale
product            -   P   P   -   -   -   P
manufacturing
Stone and cut
stone product      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
manufacturing
Clay and pottery
product            -   -   -   -   -   -   CUP
manufacturing
Warehousing and
distribution       -   -   -   -   -   -   AUP        10,000 square feet maximum floor area
facilities
Wholesaling and
distribution       -   -   -   -   -   -   AUP
facilities
RECREATION, EDUCATION & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
                               P                      (1) Up to 10 amusement devices allowed in conjunction with a
Arcade             P   P   P   (1) P   P   P          multiplex movie theater subject to §
                                                      17.220.035 (Mixed Use Downtown (MU-DT) District Requirements).
                                                      (2) Subject to ground floor restrictions per §
Clubs, lodges, and             P                      17.220.035 (Mixed Use Downtown (MU-DT) District Requirements).
private meeting    -   P   P   (2) P   P   P          For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
halls                                                 see §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales)
Community garden   P   P   P   -   P   P   P
Indoor commercial                                     For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
recreation         -   P   P   P   P   P   P          see §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales)
                                                      See §
                                                      17.520.035 (Development and Operating Standards)
Event centers      -   AUP AUP P   AUP AUP AUP        For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
                                                      see §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales)
Health/fitness     P   P   P   P   P   P   P
facilities                     (3)
Outdoor commercial -   CUP CUP -   -   -   CUP
recreation
Public
recreational and   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
cultural
facilities
Private
residential        P   P   P   P   P   P   P
recreational
facilities
Public Schools -
Kindergarten to    P   P   P   P   P   P   P
12th grade
Private schools -  AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP            AUP required for schools up to 1,500 square feet in area.
Kindergarten to    /   /   /   /   /   /   - (4)      (4) See §
12th grade         CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP            17.610.010 (Nonconforming Uses) for nonconforming school uses.
College/           AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP            AUP required for schools up to 1,500 square feet in area.
university/trade   /   /   /   /   /   /   AUP /CUP   (2) Subject to ground floor restrictions per §
school             CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP            17.220.035 (Mixed Use Downtown (MU-DT) District Requirements).
                               (2)
Religious places   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
of worship
Studios - Art,
dance, music,      P   P   P   P   P   P   P
photography, etc.
                                                      For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
Theatres           P   P   P   P   P   P   P          see §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales)
RESIDENTIAL
Accessory dwelling P   P   P   P   P   P   P          See §
units                                                 17.400.095 (Residential Uses - Accessory Dwelling Units)
Accessory uses and P   P   P   P   P   P   P          See §
structures                                            17.400.100 (Residential Uses - Accessory Residential Structures)
Child day care -                                      Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other
Large family day   P   P   P   P   P   P   P          residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
care homes
Child day care -                                      Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other
Small family day   P   P   P   P   P   P   P          residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
care homes
Cottage food                                          Cottage Food Operations are allowed pursuant to Cal. Health and
operation          P   P   P   P   P   P   P          Safety Code § 113758. For guidelines and regulations, go to the LA
(accessory)                                           County Public Health Department website.
Two-family         -   -   -   -   -   -   -
dwelling/duplex
Home occupations   P   P   P   P   P   P   P          See §
                                                      17.400.055 (Home Occupations)
Live/work units    P   P   P   P   P   P   P          See §
                                                      17.400.060 (Live/Work Development Standards)
Mixed use projects P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Multiple-family    P   P   P   P   P   P   P
dwelling, 4 Units
Residential care
facilities, 6 or   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
fewer clients
Residential care
facilities, 7 or   CUP CUP CUP -   CUP CUP CUP
more clients
Senior citizen
congregate care    CUP CUP CUP -   CUP CUP CUP
housing
Single-family      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
dwellings
                                                      See §
Single room        P   P   P   P   P   P   P          17.400.106 (Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units)
occupancy units                                       Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other
                                                      residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
Supportive housing P   P   P   P   P   P   P          Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other
                                                      residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
Transitional       P   P   P   P   P   P   P          Use is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other
housing                                               residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
Triplex            -   -   -   -   -   -   -
RETAIL TRADE
Accessory food     P   P   P   P   P   P   P
service
Accessory retail   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
uses
                                                      Use only allowed subject to the approval of an Adult Use Development
Adult businesses   -   P   P   -   -   -   P (5)      Permit (see CCMC
                                                      Chapter 11.13).
                                                      (5) 10,000 square feet maximum floor area.
Artisan shops      P   P   P   P   P   P   P
                                                      For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
Bars, night clubs  -   CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP        see §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales)
Building material  -   P   P   -   -   -   P
stores
Construction       -   -   -   -   -   -   P
equipment sales
                                                      For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
Convenience stores P   P   P   -   P   P   P          see §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales)
                                                      See CCMC
Firearms sales     -   CUP CUP -   -   -   -          Chapter 11.19 (Firearms And Ammunition Retail Establishments) and §
                                                      17.400.050 (Firearms Sales) of this Title.
Food retail        P   P   P   P   P   P   P
                                                      Where alcohol is sold, an AUP or CUP may be required pursuant to §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales).
                                                      Commercial Cannabis Businesses only allowed with a CUP on pre-
                                                      screened sites. See CCMC
General retail     P   P   P   P   P   P   P          Chapter 11.17 (Commercial Cannabis Businesses).
stores                 (6) (6)                        For used merchandise, see §
                                                      17.400.105 (Secondhand Stores)
                                                      (6) Incidental Light Manufacturing. Light manufacturing incidental to
                                                      the retail sale of goods from the premises only in the MU-1 and MU-
                                                      2 zoning districts, upon the following provisions.
                                                      1. That not more than 25% of the ground floor area of any building
                                                      may be used for such purpose;
                                                      2. That any such portion of any building or premises used for such
                                                      incidental manufacturing shall not be nearer than 50 feet to any
General retail     P   P   P   P   P   P   P          residential zone;
stores (continued)     (6) (6)                        3. That such incidental manufacturing is not objectionable due to
                                                      noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration, or other similar causes;
                                                      4. That the area required for the storage of materials to be
                                                      manufactured shall be included within the maximum 25% allowable floor
                                                      area.
Internet café     P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Outdoor retail     AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP        See §
sales and display                                     17.400.075 (Outdoor Retail Sales and Display)
Pawnshops          -   CUP CUP -   -   -   -          See §
                                                      17.400.085 (Pawnshops)
Pet shops/         P   P   P   P   P   P   P
grooming
Plant nurseries    P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Restaurants, table                                    For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
service or take    P   P   P   P   P   P   P          see §
out                                                   17.400.015.
                                                      See §
Restaurants,                                          17.400.070 (Outdoor Dining)
outdoor dining     AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP        For permit requirements related to the sale of alcoholic beverages,
(accessory)                                           see §
                                                      17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales)
Shopping center    P   P   P   -   P   P   P
                                                      Auto sales establishments selling used vehicles exclusively are
Vehicle sales -        P/  P/      CUP P/             subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit. (see
Auto and vehicle   -   CUP CUP -   /   CUP CUP /CUP   Chapter 17.530).
sales/rental                       CUP (7)            (7) In the MU-HD zone, this use is permitted only within the boundary
                                                      of an existing dealership.
Vehicle sales -
Auto parts sales,  P   P   P   -   P   P   P
retail
Warehouse retail   -   -   CUP -   -   -   -
stores
SERVICE
Adult day care     CUP CUP CUP -   CUP CUP CUP
facilities
Animal boarding                                       See §
and kennels        -   -   -   -   -   -   CUP        17.400.020 (Animal Boarding, Pet Day Care, Veterinary Clinics and
                                                      Animal Hospital)
Automated teller   P   P   P   P   P   P   P          See §
machines (ATMs)                                       17.400.025 (Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs))
Banks and          P   P   P   P   P   P   P
financial services
Business and                   P                      (2) Subject to ground floor restrictions per §
consumer support   P   P   P   (2) P   P   P          17.220.035 (Mixed Use Downtown (MU-DT) District Requirements).
services
Commercial         -   P   P   -   -   -   P
kitchens
Check-cashing      -   CUP CUP -   -   -   -          See §
businesses                                            17.400.030 (Check-Cashing Businesses)
Child day care     CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
centers
Construction
contractors, no    -   P   P   -   -   -   P
outdoor storage
Contractor's       -   -   -   -   -   -   -
storage yard
Drive-thru                                            See §
facilities or      CUP CUP CUP -   CUP CUP CUP        17.400.045 (Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities)
services
Emergency shelters -   CUP P   -   CUP -   -          See §
                                                      17.400.046 (Emergency Shelters)
                                                      Subject to requirements of CCMC §§
Hotels and motels  P   P   P   P   P   P   P          11.02.100, et seq.
                               (2)                    (2) Subject to ground floor restrictions per §
                                                      17.220.035 (Mixed Use Downtown (MU-DT) District Requirements).
                                                      Subject to requirements of CCMC §§
                                                      11.02.100, et seq.
Hotels and motels  CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP        Guest rooms or suites rented for long term lodging purposes are not
- Extended stay    (8)                                subject to requirements of CCMC §§
                                                      11.02.100, et seq., but are subject to the Transient Occupancy Tax
                                                      Ordinance.
Low barrier        P   P   P   P   P   P   P          See §
navigation centers                                    17.400.065 (Low Barrier Navigation Centers)
Medical services - P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Offices/clinics
Medical services - P   -   -   P   P   P   P          (2) Subject to ground floor restrictions per §
Labs                           (2)                    17.220.035 (Mixed Use Downtown (MU-DT) District Requirements).
Medical services - -   -   -   CUP CUP CUP CUP
Hospitals
Mortuaries and     -   P   P   -   -   -   -
funeral homes
Offices            P   P   P   P   P   P   P          (2) Subject to ground floor restrictions per §
                               (2)                    17.220.035 (Mixed Use Downtown (MU-DT) District Requirements).
Personal services  P   P   P   P   P   P   P
                                                      See §
Pet day care       -   AUP AUP -   -   -   AUP        17.400.020 (Animal Boarding, Pet Day Care, Veterinary Clinics and
                                                      Animal Hospital)
Public facilities  P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Public utility     CUP CUP CUP -   CUP CUP CUP
facilities
Storage, Personal  -   -   -   -   -   -   -
storage facility
Storage, outdoor   AUP AUP AUP -   AUP AUP AUP        See §
(accessory)                                           17.400.080 (Outdoor Storage)
Storage, warehouse -   -   -   -   -   -   P
Vehicle services -                                    See §
Accessories        -   P   P   -   -   -   P          17.400.125 (Vehicle Repair Shops)
installation
Vehicle services - -   CUP CUP -   -   -   -
Car washes
Vehicle services - CUP P   P   -   -   -   P          See §
Fueling stations                                      17.400.120 (Vehicle Fueling Stations)
Vehicle services -                                    See §
Electric vehicle   P   P   P   -   P   P   P          17.400.120 (Vehicle Fueling Stations)
charging stations
Vehicle services -
Fueling/chargin g, CUP CUP CUP -   -   -   CUP
incidental repair
Vehicle services -
Impounding/        -   -   -   -   -   -   -
storage
Vehicle services -                                    See §
Maintenance/       -   CUP CUP -   -   -   CUP        17.400.125 (Vehicle Repair Shops)
repair
Vehicle services - -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Paint/body
Vehicle services - -   P   P   -   -   -   P          See §
Towing, no storage                                    17.400.125 (Vehicle Repair Shops)
Veterinary clinics -   P   P   -   P   P   P
Animal hospital    -   AUP AUP -   -   -   AUP
TRANSPORTATION & COMMUNICATIONS
Broadcast studios  -   P   P   P   P   P   P
Heliports          -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Parking facilities P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Telecommunications                                    See §
facilities,        AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP AUP        17.400.110 (Telecommunications Facilities)
cellular
Telecommunications See §
facilities, dish/  17.400.110 for permit requirements
wireless antenna
 
B.   Cannabis Dispensary, retail-store front. Concurrent with obtaining a
Commercial Cannabis Business Permit required by CCMC
Chapter 11.17, all cannabis dispensary, retail store front facilities shall be
required to obtain a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to
Chapter 17.530, which shall be subject to renewal every five years.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-004 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008
§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2014-007 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-019 § 2 (part); Ord.
No. 2018-011 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-003 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2
(part); Ord. No. 2021-003 (part); Ord. No. 2022-003 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-
006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.220.020 MIXED USE ZONING DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A.   General Requirements. Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and
alterations to existing land uses and structures in the MU-N, MU-1, MU-2, and
MU-DT zoning districts, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in
compliance with the requirements in
Table 2-7 (Mixed Use l District Development Standards (MU-N, MU-1, MU-2, MU-
DT)). Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing
land uses and structures in the MU-MD, MU-HD, and MU-I zoning districts shall
be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the
requirements in Table 2-8 (Mixed Use District Development Standards (MU-MD, MU-
HD, MU-I)). In addition, the applicable development standards (e.g.,
landscaping, parking and loading, and the like) in Article 3 (Site Planning and
General Development Standards) shall apply to all mixed use zoning districts.
   Table 2-7. Mixed Use District Development Standards (MU-N, MU-1, MU-2, MU-
DT)
MIXED-USE ZONES (MU-N, MU-1, MU-2, MU-DT)
Standards MU-N MU-1 MU-2 MU-DT Additional Regulations
MIXED-USE ZONES (MU-N, MU-1, MU-2, MU-DT)
Standards   MU-N       MU-1   MU-2   MU-DT   Additional Regulations
Lot (See Note 1) and Density Standards
Maximum
non-
residential 2.0        2.0    3.0    3.0
floor area
ratio
Maximum
residential 35 units/  35     50     65
density     acre       units/ units/ units/
(units/                acre   acre   acre
gross acre)
Minimum
residential                   20     30
density     NA         NA     units/ units/  Only applies if project includes residential component.
(units/                       acre   acre
gross acre)
                                             Condominium, townhouse, or planned development projects may be subdivided
Minimum lot 10,000     10,000 10,000 10,000  with smaller parcel sizes for ownership purposes, with the minimum lot
area (for   square     square square square  area as provided in the Townhouse Development Standards in §
new lots)   feet       feet   feet   feet    17.210.025 or as determined through the subdivision review process,
                                             provided that the overall development site complies with the minimum lot
                                             size requirements of this Chapter.
Minimum lot
site width  80 feet    80     80     100
(for new               feet   feet   feet
lots)
Minimum lot
site depth  100 feet   100    100    100
(for new               feet   feet   feet
lots)
Building Form and Location
Maximum                56     56
height -    43 feet    feet   feet   56 feet See §
Primary                (2)    (2)    (2)     17.300.025 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions).
structure
            See §
Maximum     17.400.095 Residential Uses -
height -    Accessory Dwelling Units
Accessory   See §
structures  17.400.100 Residential Uses-
            Accessory Residential Structures
            When a
            building
            has a rear
            and/or
            interior
            side
            property   When a building has a
            line       rear and/or interior
            abutting   side property line
            an R1 or   abutting an R1 or R2
            R2 parcel  parcel (directly or
            (directly  with an alley
Height      or with an between), starting
stepbacks   alley      above 30 feet or two  See
adjacent to between),  stories (whichever is Figure 2-3 (Neighborhood Transitions).
R1 and R2   starting   less), the next two
zones       above 30   floors shall be
            feet or    stepped back 15 feet
            two        and any floors above
            stories    that shall be stepped
            (whichever back an additional 5
            is less),  feet.
            the
            subsequent
            floors
            shall be
            stepped
            back 15
            feet.
Minimum
ground
floor       15 feet    15     15     15 feet Measurement is from finished floor to finished floor.
height -               feet   feet
Non-
residential
            5 feet between accessory
Distance    residential structures, and
between     accessory dwelling units; 5 feet
residential between primary residential
structures  structures and accessory
on the same residential structures and
lot         accessory dwelling units;
            10 feet between primary
            residential structures
Development Site Setbacks (Note 1)
Front and Street Side Setback (Residential Ground Floor)
Minimum     5 feet     5 feet 5 feet NA      See
                                             Figure 2-5 (Setbacks).
Maximum (3) 10 feet    10     10     NA      >
                       feet   feet
Front and Street Side Setback (Non-Residential Ground Floor)
Minimum     0 feet     0 feet 0 feet 0 feet  See
                                             Figure 2-5 (Setbacks).
Maximum (3) 5 feet     5 feet 5 feet 5 feet
Interior
side        0 feet; 10 feet abutting R1 and
setback -   R2 zoned property
minimum
Rear Setback
            10 feet;
            When adjacent to alley: 2 feet
Minimum     for portions of structure 20
            feet or less in height and 10
            feet for portions of building
            more than 20 feet in height
Minimum
Abutting    15 feet; 20 feet if over 30 feet One-half the width of an alley may be credited toward the setback
R1, R2, and in height                        requirement
RLD
Parking Frontage
Maximum
parking
along       Not permitted                    Applies to new development.
primary
frontage
Open Space Standards
            Rooftop decks shall be set back
            5 feet from the building edge
            along an interior side yard and
            rear yard adjacent to a
            residential zoned property,
            except the rear setback from the A permanent, built-in landscape planter with vegetation shall be located
            building edge shall not be       within the required setback area to screen views of the deck from
Roof decks  required where there is an       neighboring properties. Rooftop decks which are located in a roof well
            onsite structure of equal or     are not required to include a landscape planter.
            greater height located between
            the subject roof deck and the
            adjacent residential zoned
            property. Rooftop decks shall
            meet the setbacks applicable to
            the primary structure.
                                     100
                                     square
                                     feet
                                     total
                                     per
                                     unit; a See additional regulations in §
Minimum     150 square feet total    minimum 17.210.030 (Supplemental Standards for Multiple-Family Residential)
usable open per unit; a minimum of   of 50%  (A) Up to 40% of required common open space may be an indoor common space
space - For 50% of the units must    of the  such as a community room as long as it is adjacent to an outdoor common
residential have 60 square feet of   units   space.
component   private open space (A)   must    (B) See §
                                     have 60 17.400.060 for open space requirements for Live/Work units.
                                     square
                                     feet of
                                     private
                                     open
                                     space
                                     (A) (B)
Minimum
usable open                                  Common open space may be utilized for employees or publicly-accessible
space - For                                  open space e.g., courtyard, rooftop deck). If the open space is over
non-        Not Required                     1,000 square feet and provided as publicly-accessible, up to 50 percent
residential                                  may count toward the required residential common open space (if
component                                    applicable). Spaces shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet in any
over 15,000                                  direction.
square feet
Maximum     No more than 70% of the total
front yard  area of the front yard setback
paving for  shall be paved for walkways,     See
ground      driveways, and other hardcover   Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping) for additional regulations.
floor       pavement
residential
Other       See additional standards in CCMC Article 3
Standards
 
Notes:
(1)   Applies to lots or development sites consisting of multiple adjoining
lots.
(2)   This provision is as approved by Initiative Ordinance No. 90-013½,
adopted April 17, 1990, or as may be amended.
(3)   If a development provides a covered arcade, publicly-accessible plazas or
forecourts, public art, fountains, or outdoor dining, and there is clear
visibility between the sidewalk and building entrance, the maximum setback on
the ground floor is waived with Director approval.
   Table 2-8. Mixed Use District Development Standards (MU-MD, MU-HD, MU-I)
Mixed-Use Zones
Standards MU-MD MU-HD MU-I Additional Regulations
Mixed-Use Zones
Standards   MU-MD      MU-HD      MU-I     Additional Regulations
Lot (See Note 1) and Density Standards
Maximum
non-
residential 3.0        4.0        3.0       
floor area
ratio
Maximum
residential            100 du/    65 du/
density     65 du/acre acre       acre      
(units/
acre)
Minimum
residential                       20 du/
density     30 du/acre 30 du/acre acre     Only applies if project includes residential component.
(units/
acre)
                                           Condominium, townhouse, or planned development projects may be subdivided
            20,000     20,000     20,000   with smaller parcel sizes for ownership purposes, with the minimum lot
Minimum lot square     square     square   area as provided in the Townhouse Development Standards in §
area        feet       feet       feet     17.210.025 or as determined through the subdivision review process,
                                           provided that the overall development site complies with the minimum lot
                                           size requirements of this Chapter.
Minimum lot 100 feet   100 feet   100 feet  
width
Minimum lot 100 feet   100 feet   100 feet  
depth
Building Form and Location
Maximum
height -                                   See §
Primary     56 feet    56 feet    56 feet  17.300.025 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions).
structure
(2)
            See §
Maximum     17.400.095 Residential Uses -
height -    Accessory Dwelling Units
Accessory   See §                          
structures  17.400.100 Residential Uses-
            Accessory Residential
            Structures
            When a building has a rear
            and/or interior side property
            line abutting an R1 or R2
Height      parcel (directly or with an
stepbacks   alley between), starting above See
adjacent to 30 feet or two stories         Figure 2-3 (Neighborhood Transitions)
R1 and R2   (whichever is less), the next
zones       two floors shall be stepped
            back 15 feet and any floors
            above that shall be stepped
            back an additional 5 feet
Minimum
ground
floor       15 feet    15 feet    15 feet  Measured from finished floor to finished floor.
height -
Non-
residential
            5 feet between accessory
            residential structures, and
Distance    accessory dwelling units; 5
between     feet between primary
residential residential structures and      
structures  accessory residential
on the same structures and accessory
lot         dwelling units; 10 feet
            between primary residential
            structures
Development Site Setbacks (feet) (Note 1)
Front and Street Side Setback (Residential Ground Floor)
Minimum     10 feet    10 feet    10 feet  See
                                           Figure 2-5 (Setbacks).
Maximum (3) 15 feet    15 feet    15 feet   
Front and Street Side Setback (Non-Residential Ground Floor)
Minimum     0 feet     0 feet     5 feet   See
                                           Figure 2-5 (Setbacks).
Maximum (3) 5 feet     5 feet     None      
                                  Required
Interior Side Setback
Minimum     0 feet                          
Minimum
Abutting R1 10 feet                         
and R2
Rear Setback
            10 feet;
            When adjacent to alley: 5 feet
Minimum     for portions of structure 20    
            feet or less in height and 10
            feet for portions of building
            more than 20 feet in height
Minimum
Abutting    15 feet; 20 feet if over 30    One-half the width of an alley may be credited toward the setback
R1, R2, and feet in height                 requirement
RLD
Parking Frontage
Maximum                                    Applies to new development.
parking                                    No more than 30% of the primary street frontage shall be devoted to
along       30%        30%        30%      parking garages and openings, carports, and open/surface parking. This
primary                                    limitation does not apply to frontages along alleys. See
frontage                                   Figure 2-4 (Maximum Parking Frontage).
Open Space Standards
            Rooftop decks shall be set
            back 5 feet from the building
            edge along an interior side
            yard and rear yard adjacent to
            a residential zoned property,
            except the rear setback from   A permanent, built-in landscape planter with vegetation shall be located
            the building edge shall not be within the required setback area to screen views of the deck from
Roof decks  required where there is an     neighboring properties. Rooftop decks which are located in a roof well
            onsite structure of equal or   are not required to include a landscape planter.
            greater height located between
            the subject roof deck and the
            adjacent residential zoned
            property. Rooftop decks shall
            meet the setbacks applicable
            to the primary structure.
                       100 square 100
                       feet total square
                       per unit;  feet
            100 square a minimum  total
            feet total of 25% of  per
            per unit;  the units  unit; a  See additional regulations in §
Minimum     a minimum  must have  minimum  17.210.030 (Supplemental Standards for Multiple-Family Residential)
usable open of 50% of  60 square  of 50%   (A) Up to 40% of required common open space may be an indoor common space
space - For the units  feet of    of the   such as a community room as long as it is adjacent to an outdoor common
residential must have  private    units    space.
component   60 square  open space must     (B) See §
            feet of    (A)(B);    have 60  17.400.060 for open space requirements for Live/Work units.
            private    10% of     square
            open space total open feet of
            (A) (B)    space must private
                       be         open
                       publicly   space
                       accessible (A)(B)
Minimum
usable open                                Common open space may be utilized for employees or publicly-accessible
space - For                                open space (e.g., courtyard, rooftop deck). If the open space is over
non-        2% of gross floor area         1,000 square feet and provided as publicly-accessible, up to 50 percent
residential                                may count toward the required residential common open space (if
component                                  applicable). Spaces shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet in any
over 15,000                                direction.
square feet
            No more
            than 70%
            of the
            total area
Maximum     of the
front yard  front yard
paving for  setback    See
ground      shall be   Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping) for additional regulations.
floor       paved for
residential walkways,
            driveways,
            and other
            hardcover
            pavement
Other       See additional standards in CCMC Article 3
Standards
 
Notes:
(1)   Applies to lots or development sites consisting of multiple adjoining
lots.
(2)   This provision is as approved by Initiative Ordinance No. 90-013½,
adopted April 17, 1990, or as may be amended.
(3)   If a development provides a covered arcade, publicly-accessible plazas or
forecourts, public art, fountains, or outdoor dining, and there is clear
visibility between the sidewalk and building entrance, the maximum setback on
the ground floor shall be 10 feet, or a greater setback may be allowed with
Director approval.
Figure 2-5 Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4903.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4905.jpg]
 
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008;
Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.220.025 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR MIXED USE ZONES.
A.   General Performance Standards. Land and buildings shall not be used or
occupied in a manner creating any dangerous, injurious, noxious, fire,
explosive, or other potentially objectionable condition, hazard, or public
nuisance that would adversely affect the surrounding area per the standards
below. Public nuisances may be enjoined or otherwise abated by the City in the
manner described in CCMC
Chapter 9.04: Nuisances and any other applicable provision of State or local
law.
   1.   Dust control and soil erosion. Any ground or soil disturbance due to
excavation, grading, building construction, removal of vegetation, or other
similar acts shall adequately and effectively control dust and limit soil
erosion. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from sources
such as storage areas, yards, roads, conveying equipment, and the like on the
lot, must be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, screening,
sheltering, paving, fencing, wetting, collecting, or other acceptable means.
   2.   Air contaminants. Uses, activities, and processes shall not operate in
a manner that emits excessive dust, odor, fumes, smoke, or particulate matter,
unless authorized under Federal, State, or local law. Sources of air emissions
shall comply with all rules established by the Environmental Protection Agency
(Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40), the California Air Resources Board,
and the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). The City shall
consult, when appropriate, with SCAQMD to determine which uses shall be
equipped with emission-control devices or measures to preclude fugitive dust
and particulate emissions from the site. Such devices or measures shall be
approved by SCAQMD prior to issuance of a building permit or other approval
authorizing construction activities. All devices shall be maintained by the
owner.
   3.   Heat, light, and glare. Any existing or proposed use or portion thereof
that creates heat, light, or glare that constitutes or may be considered a
nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property, such as use of arc welders or
furnaces, security lighting or spot lights, or reflecting building materials or
water features, or similar equipment, shall shield or control all sources of
heat, light, or glare in such manner as will prevent the issuance, continuance,
or recurrence of the disturbing emissions. Heat emitted by a use shall not
cause a temperature increase of more than five degrees Fahrenheit on an
adjacent property.
   4.   Electromagnetic disturbances and radiation. Any existing or proposed
use or portion thereof that can or may generate any electrical disturbances or
produce any electromagnetic or radioactive emanations that can or may be
considered a nuisance or hazard shall shield or control the source of the
electrical or radioactive emanations in such manner as will prevent the
issuance, continuance, or recurrence of any hazardous or disturbing emanations.
All uses, activities and processes shall comply with applicable Federal
Communications Commission regulations.
   5.   Odors. No noxious odor or fumes shall be emitted that are perceptible
without instruments by a reasonable person at the property line of the site.
   6.   Noise and vibration.
      a.   Noise. Any existing or proposed use or portion thereof that can or
may generate noise that constitutes or may be considered a nuisance or hazard
on any adjacent property, shall control the source of the noise in such manner
as will prevent the issuance, continuance, or recurrence of any hazardous or
disturbing emanations. All existing or proposed uses and activities shall
conform to the Noise Element of the General Plan and CCMC
Chapter 9.07: Noise Regulations. All construction activity shall conform to
CCMC §
9.07.035 (Construction).
   7.   Vibration. No vibration shall be produced that is transmitted through
the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments by a reasonable
person at the lot lines of the site. Vibrations from temporary construction,
demolition, and vehicles that enter and leave the subject parcel (e.g.,
construction equipment, trains, trucks, etc.) are exempt from this standard.
Where vibration dampeners are proposed, project applications shall include an
engineered study establishing the effectiveness of the dampeners based on
actual conditions.
   8.   Waste.
      a.   Discharge. Waste and hazardous liquids and solids of any kind shall
not be discharged, either directly or indirectly, into a public or private body
of water, sewage system, watercourse, or into the ground, except in compliance
with all Federal, State, and local regulations.
      b.   Containment. Waste shall be handled and stored to prevent nuisances,
health, safety, and fire hazards, and to facilitate recycling. Material,
including but not limited to paper products, plastic, dirt, sand, lime, seed,
bran, chaff, wood refuse, and other readily transportable compounds, shall be
contained in a way that cannot be tracked or carried by wind off-site.
   9.   Hazardous waste and materials. Uses, activities, and processes
involving the use, storage, or disposal of hazardous and extremely hazardous
materials shall be regulated and monitored according to standards established
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the California
Department of Health Services (DHS), the California Department of Toxic
Substances Control (DTSC), the LA County Department of Public Health, and the
City of Culver City Fire and Building Codes. See also CCMC
Chapter 9.03: Health, Sanitation, and Hazardous Materials.
   10.   Fire and explosive hazards. Materials that present potential fire or
explosion hazards must be transported, stored, and used only in conformance
with all applicable Federal, State, and local regulations. Uses, activities,
and processes involving the use of, or storage of, flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices, adequate firefighting
and fire suppression equipment, and devices standard in the industry, except as
otherwise provided by applicable fire codes. No use shall store or process
flammable or explosive materials more than the quantities exempted by the
Building Code, unless a permit has been granted by the Fire Department. All
incineration is prohibited with the exception of substances such as, but not
limited to, chemicals, insecticides, hospital materials and waste products,
required by law to be disposed of by burning, and those instances wherein the
Fire Department deems it a practical necessity.
   11.   Maintenance of required facilities. All physical facilities required
in this Chapter, such as buildings and structures, paving, fences, walls, and
landscaping, shall be kept and maintained in a neat, clean, orderly, operable,
and usable condition.
B.   Mixed Use Performance Standards. The purpose of this section is to ensure
that residential uses in mixed use projects and buildings are not adversely
impacted by adjacent commercial or industrial uses, including but not limited
to traffic, noise, light, and safety impacts.
   1.   Applicability. The following performance standards shall apply to non-
residential uses in mixed use developments within the city.
   2.   Hours of operation. The hours of operation for non-residential uses in
mixed-use developments shall be no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 10:
00 p.m. daily, unless modified by an administrative or conditional use permit.
   3.   Nuisances and limitations on use.
      a.   No commercial use, activity, or process shall be operated in an
objectionable manner due to fumes, noxious odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or
vibrations that may be detrimental to any other uses and occupants on the same
property.
      b.   Any activity or use as determined by the Director not to be
compatible with residential uses and/or to have the possibility of affecting
the health or safety of residents due to the potential for the use to create
dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or
other impacts, or create a hazard because of materials, processes, products, or
wastes, shall not be permitted within any mixed use development or mixed-use
zoning district. This includes, but is not limited to, storage or shipping of
flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a
residential use and welding, machining, or open flame work.
   4.   Noise and vibration. All residential units shall be designed to
minimize adverse noise impacts from non-residential uses and shall comply with
the maximum levels in the Noise Element of the Culver City General Plan and
CCMC
Chapter 9.07: Noise Regulations. Proper design may include, but shall not be
limited to, building orientation, double glazed windows, wall and ceiling
insulation, and orientation of vents. Residential and live/work units shall be
constructed to minimize the transmission of noise and vibration with a minimum
impact insulation class (IIC) of 60 for all residential and live/work walls,
floors, and ceilings.
   5.   Access and security.
      a.   Shared elevators shall have security code access for residents to
reach residential floors and to use the elevators during late evening and early
morning hours. Security code access is not required for live/work access areas.
Separate commercial and residential elevators are encouraged.
      b.   Residential units shall be designed to ensure the security of
residents through the provision of separate and secured entrances and exits
that are directly accessible to parking areas. Where residential units are in
the same structure as a non-residential/commercial use, access to residential
units shall be from a secured area or entrance located on the ground floor.
Non-residential and residential uses located on the same floor shall not have
common entrance hallways or common balconies. Shared or common residential
entrances shall automatically lock upon closing.
   6.   Air quality and odors. All residential units shall be designed to
minimize adverse impacts from mechanical equipment and operations of non-
residential uses on air pollutant emissions and odors. Odors released from any
operation or activity shall not exceed detectable concentration beyond lot
lines, measured at any location on the lot lines. Non-residential uses with
attached residential units shall provide state-of the-art ventilation systems
to prevent odors from penetrating residential units. This includes the
provision of grease interceptors and venting shafts for cooktops, ovens, and
other food heating equipment for mixed-use buildings with ground-floor
commercial space. Ground floor commercial vents for restaurants or other food
production related businesses may not be located directly below residential
uses. Residential and live/work units shall be designed to allow for cross-
ventilation and have high quality HVAC systems, to the extent feasible.
   7.   Parking access. Parking access and circulation design shall minimize
vehicle circulation through residential neighborhood streets.
   8.   Utilities, equipment, service, and loading areas.
      a.   Utilities, equipment, service, and refuse areas shall be designed
and located per the standards in §
17.300.035.C. (Utilities, Equipment, Service, Loading, and Refuse Areas).
      b.   Commercial loading and outdoor storage.
         i.   Commercial loading areas and outdoor storage areas shall be
designed and located away from residential units and shall be screened from
view at ground level from the residential portion of the project and from
adjacent residential developments. See additional location and screening
standards in §
17.300.035.C. (Utilities, Equipment, Service, Loading, and Refuse Areas) and §
17.400.080 (Outdoor Storage).
         ii.   Loading, unloading, and all service and maintenance activities
shall be conducted within the hours of operation noted in §
17.220.025.B.2. (Hours of operation) to minimize noise and other negative
impacts on residential uses.
   9.   Refuse and recycling.
      a.   Refuse and recycling shall be designed and located per the standards
in §
17.300.035.C.3. (Refuse and recycling).
      b.   Separate refuse areas. The residential units shall maintain a
separate refuse and recycling storage area from that used by the non-
residential uses. It shall be clearly marked for residential use only and use
by non-residential uses is prohibited.
   10.   Lighting. Lighting for non-residential uses shall be appropriately
designed, located, and shielded to ensure that it does not negatively impact
the residential units in the development or any adjacent residential uses and
shall comply with §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting). Adequate lighting shall be provided adjacent to
sidewalks and other public spaces to preserve the amenity and safety of those
spaces for nighttime pedestrian use.
   11.   Covenant.  A City-approved covenant shall be executed by the owner of
each residential unit within a mixed use development for recording in the land
records of Los Angeles County, and shall include statements that the occupant
(s) understand(s) and accept(s) he/she is living in a mixed use development,
and that commercial activities are permitted pursuant to the regulations of the
CCMC. If the project includes rental residential units, the project owner shall
execute such covenant and a copy of the recorded covenant shall be provided to
each new occupant of the rental units.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.220.030 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT.
A.   Purpose.  This Section provides supplemental location, development, and
design standards for mixed use developments.
B.   Applicability.
   1.   The provisions in this Section shall regulate the conversion of
existing buildings to include mixed uses, as defined herein, and new
construction of mixed use projects, where allowed by the applicable zoning
districts.
   2.   The Mixed Use Development Standards do not supersede the provisions of
the Mixed Use Downtown District (MU-DT).
   3.   Where an Owner-Participation Agreement, Disposition and Development
Agreement, Development Agreement, or similar agreement with the City or
Redevelopment Agency applies to a land parcel, and the provisions of such
agreement differ from the Mixed Use Development Standards, the provisions of
the agreement shall prevail.
C.    Site Planning and Design Standards.
Commercial uses and residential uses shall have separate exterior entrances,
elevators, and lobbies. The Director may waive this requirement, based on site
constraints.
   2.   Signage and lighting.  Signs shall be developed pursuant to
Chapter 17.330 (Signs). Exterior lighting shall comply with the requirements of
§
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting).
   3.   Parking and vehicular access.
      a.   Street level parking facilities and lots shall be screened from view
from the adjoining street(s) by ornamental walls or fences, at least four feet
high above street grade.
      b.   Ingress/Egress:
         i.   Two-way vehicular ingress/egress areas on arterial streets shall
only be permitted on development sites with a minimum of 100 feet of street
frontage on the street where the vehicular ingress/egress area is located. The
Director may waive this requirement, based on site constraints.
         ii.   One-way vehicular ingress/egress areas on arterial streets shall
only be permitted on development sites with a minimum of 75 feet of street
frontage on the street where the ingress/egress area is located. The Director
may waive this requirement, based on site constraints.
         iii.   Vehicular ingress/egress areas are prohibited on arterial
streets where the street frontage of the development site adjacent to the
arterial street is less than 75 feet. The Director may waive this requirement,
based on site constraints.
D.   Residential Development Standards.
   1.   Open space. Mixed use developments shall comply with the open space
requirements of §
17.210.030.A. (Open Space Requirements for Multiple-Family Residential).
   2.   Facility and design requirements. Mixed use developments shall comply
with the facility and design requirements of §
17.210.030.B. (Facility and Design Requirements for Multiple-Family
Residential).
E.   Live/Work Development Standards. In addition to the standards detailed in
this Section, live/work units within a mixed use development shall meet all
applicable standards contained in § 17.400.060 (Live/Work Development
Standards).
F.   Parking Standards.  Mixed use developments shall comply with all
requirements contained in
Chapter 17.320 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. 2025-003, Exhibit A
(part))
§ 17.220.035 MIXED USE DOWNTOWN (MU-DT) DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
Land uses allowed within the MU-DT Zoning District by
Table 2-5 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Mixed Use Zoning Districts)
shall comply with the following provisions, in addition to the development
standards in Table 2-6 (Mixed Use Zoning District Development Standards (MU-N,
MU-1, MU-2, MU-DT)) and all applicable provisions of Article 3 (Site Planning
and General Development Standards).
A.   Ground Floor Restriction.  Land uses shown in
Table 2-5 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Mixed Use Zoning Districts)
as being subject to ground floor restrictions shall not be located on the
ground floor of any building, in the following locations:
   1.   Both sides of Main Street;
   2.   The north side of Culver Boulevard, from Canfield Avenue to Duquesne
Avenue;
   3.   Both sides of Washington Boulevard, between Watseka Avenue and Hughes
Avenue; and
   4.   The Culver Boulevard and Washington Boulevard frontages of the Town
Plaza and Town Park areas, except where other uses are allowed by the Culver
City Redevelopment Agency in an Owner-Participation Agreement or a Disposition
and Development Agreement.
   5.   Exemptions from ground floor use restrictions may be granted for:
      a.   Designated historic structures when it can be demonstrated, by
substantial evidence, that such restrictions would substantially compromise the
economic viability or architectural integrity of the building;
      b.   Hotels and motels with ground floor uses that generate pedestrian
activity such as lobbies, retail, and restaurants; and
      c.   Office uses that include direct customer or client service
components and that generate pedestrian activity or require patronage daily,
such as, but not limited to, insurance offices; tax preparer; real estate
offices; advertising agencies; architectural, engineering, and planning
services; graphic design, fashion, photography, and commercial art studio
services; and accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services, and similar office
uses as determined by the Director.
B.   Multiplex Theater Amusement Devices. Amusement devices are permitted in
conjunction with a multiplex movie theater complex of at least ten screens,
subject to all the following criteria:
   1.   No more than ten amusement devices shall be permitted in a complex.
   2.   Amusement devices shall be located within the theater complex and used
only by theater customers who have purchased tickets.
   3.   An amusement area shall not occupy more than 500 square feet of floor
area.
   4.   An amusement area shall be screened so as not to be generally visible
from the exterior of the theater complex.
   5.   An amusement area shall be accessible only by means of the main
customer entrance for the theater complex.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2009-001 § 2; Ord. No. 2022-003 § 2
(part); Ord. No. 2022-008 ; Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.230: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 17.240: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
   
17.240.005   Purpose
   
17.240.010   Purpose of Planned Development (PD) Zoning Districts
   
17.240.015   Planned Development (PD) District Requirements
   
17.240.020   Established Planned Development (PD) Districts
§ 17.240.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides use and development regulations in the Planned
Development (PD) Zoning Districts established by §
17.200.010 (Zoning Districts Established).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.240.010 PURPOSE OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) ZONING DISTRICTS.
The intent of the Planned Development (PD) Zoning District, and the manner in
which it is applied, is as follows:
A.   PD (Planned Development) District. The PD Zoning District is applied to
areas of existing large-scale, multiple-family residential and commercial
complexes developed as a planned district, and sites suitable for similar
large-scale development. The PD Zoning District can also be applied to sites
suitable for combined commercial, residential and/or live/work uses within a
physically integrated and contiguous area.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.240.015 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
A.   Requirements for the Planned Development (PD) District.  Development
standards, allowable land uses and permit requirements for the PD Zoning
District shall be established by a Comprehensive Plan (
Chapter 17.560).
B.   Minimum Site Area for Rezoning.  The PD Zoning District may only be
applied to sites of one acre or larger.
C.   Permit Requirements. All development proposed within a PD Zoning District
shall require approval of a Comprehensive Plan in compliance with
Chapter 17.560 (Comprehensive Plans). Land use permit requirements for changes
in land use after the initial Comprehensive Plan approval may be established by
the Council through the rezoning of the site to apply the PD Zoning District,
and/or through the approval of the Comprehensive Plan.
D.   Allowable Land Uses and Development Standards. Except as otherwise
provided by this Section, allowable land uses, and site planning and
development standards for the PD Zoning District shall be determined by the
Council through the rezoning of the site to apply the PD District, and/or
through the approval of a Comprehensive Plan in compliance with §
17.240.015.C. (Permit Requirements) above. In establishing allowable land uses
and development standards, the Council shall consider the standards of the
zoning districts most similar in nature and function to the uses proposed
within the PD District.
E.   Height. No building or structure in the PD Zone may exceed 56 feet in
height, unless a height exception is granted pursuant to §
17.300.025 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions).
F.   Undergrounding of Utilities. All utilities, including telephone, cable
television, and electric systems, required within the limits of all PD Zones
shall be located underground.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.240.020 ESTABLISHED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICTS.
A.   Established Planned Districts. Specific areas identified as planned
districts are listed in Table 2-9.
   Table 2-9 Planned Districts
Project Name PD Number Address/Cross Uses Date Adopted Resolution/ Ordinance
                       Streets                         Number
                         Address/Cross                              Resolution/
Project Name   PD Number Streets        Uses           Date Adopted Ordinance
                                                                    Number
Lenawee Ave              Lenawee/La
Multi-Family   1         Cienega        Housing
Housing
MGM Lot #3               Jefferson/
(Raintree,     2         Overland (SE   Housing        07/14/1971   1971-702
Tara Hills,              corner)
Lakeside)
Windsor        3         Overland/      Housing        02/27/1978   CS-7627
Fountain                 Ballona Creek
Raintree Plaza           Jefferson/
Shopping       4         Overland (SW   Commercial/    01/10/1972   1972-730
Center (MGM              corner)        Retail
lot #5)
Rotary Plaza   5         Overland/      Senior Housing 03/12/1973   1973-767
(MGM Lot #6)             Virginia
                         Overland btwn
Studio Royale  6         Washington &   Senior Housing 11/25/1985   1985-020
                         Culver
                         Overland btwn
Palm Court     7         Washington &   Senior Housing 11/25/1985   1985-020
                         Culver
The Classics
at Heritage    8         Jefferson/     Housing        03/23/1998   1998-003
Park (Studio             Machado
Drive-In)
Liberty Plaza  9         Sepulveda/     Senior Housing 05/10/1989   1989-P024
Senior Housing           Ballona Creek
                         8810-8850      Commercial/
Platform       10        Washington     Retail         12/10/2012   2012-007
                         Blvd
Ivy Station    11        8824 National  Housing/       03/28/2016   2016-006
                         Blvd           Commerci al
Access Culver            8770           Housing/
City           12        Washington     Commerci al    02/11/2013   2013-002
                         Blvd
8777                     8777
Washington     13        Washington     Office/Retail  06/26/2017   2017-010
Blvd (Apple)             Blvd
Lenawee        14        3814 Lenawee   Housing        08/08/2016   2016-007
Housing                  Ave
Culver Public  15        12403          Commercial/    02/12/2018   2018-004
Market                   Washington     Retail
11111          16        11111          Housing/       10/11/2021   2021-015
Jefferson                Jefferson Blvd Commerci al
Crossings      17        8825 National  Office         12/12/2022   2022-011
Campus (Apple)           Blvd
 
B.   Standards for Established Planned Development (PD) Zoning Districts. The
allowed uses and development standards for planned districts are developed as
part of the project approval process. The allowed uses and development
standards for the above established planned districts are on file at the
Division.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.250: SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
   
17.250.005   Purpose
   
17.250.010   Purposes of Special Purpose Zoning Districts
   
17.250.015   Studio (S) District Requirements
   
17.250.020   Cemetery (E) District Requirements
   
17.250.025   Transportation (T) District Requirements
   
17.250.030   Open Space (OS) District Requirements
   
17.250.035   Institutional (I) District Requirements
§ 17.250.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides special purpose development and use regulations in the
special purpose zoning districts established by §
17.200.010 (Zoning Districts Established).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.250.010 PURPOSES OF SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS.
The purposes of the individual special purpose zoning districts, and the manner
in which they are applied, are as follows.
A.   S (Studio) District. The S Zoning District is applied to areas appropriate
for motion picture and television studio facilities, and related media support
facilities, and is intended to support the continuation of those businesses,
while ensuring that future expansion will minimize potential impacts on
adjacent residential uses. The S Zoning District is consistent with the Studio
land use designation of the General Plan.
B.   E (Cemetery) District. The E Zoning District is applied to cemeteries. The
E District is intended to protect existing cemeteries and provide for expansion
within their existing boundaries. The E Zoning District is consistent with the
Cemetery land use designation of the General Plan.
C.   T (Transportation) District. The T Zoning District is applied to the
existing METRO right-of-way located on National Boulevard.
D.   OS (Open Space) District. The OS Zoning District is applied to open space
resources. The Open Space (OS) Zone is intended to regulate, protect, and
preserve publicly accessible land that is well suited for active recreation,
amusement, relaxation, and/or scenic viewing. The OS Zoning District is
consistent with the Open Space land use designation of the General Plan.
E.   I (Institutional) District. The I Zoning District is applied to government
offices, community facilities, hospitals, schools, and other educational
facilities.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.250.015 STUDIO (S) DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
Land uses allowed within the S Zoning District shall comply with the following
provisions, in addition to all applicable provisions of Article 3 (Site
Planning and General Development Standards).
A.   Uses Permitted. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected, constructed or established except for uses customary or incidental to
the production or distribution of motion pictures and other forms of
audiovisual products, including but not limited to, education and entertainment
films, tapes and other reproduction media. Restaurants, support and related
retail and sales of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to an "on sale" license
issued by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, are permitted if
not accessible to the general public. Telecommunication facilities may be
permitted with an Administrative Use Permit or a Conditional Use Permit, as
provided for in §
17.400.110 (Telecommunication Facilities).
B.   Comprehensive Plan to Establish Standards. All development standards for
sites within the S Zoning District, except the height limits established by §
17.250.015.D. (Height Limit) below, shall be established by a Comprehensive
Plan in compliance with
Chapter 17.560 (Comprehensive Plans).
C.   Temporary Structures.  Temporary structures constructed as part of a
production set shall not be subject to the requirements of this Title; provided
that the structures comply with applicable building, fire, and other applicable
life safety regulations, and do not interfere with required site improvements,
including parking spaces and aisles, and setbacks.
D.   Height Limit. No structure within the S Zoning District shall exceed a
height of 56 feet. (This provision is as approved by Initiative Ordinance No.
90-013½, adopted April 17, 1990, or as may be amended.)
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.250.020 CEMETERY (E) DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
Land uses allowed within the E Zoning District shall comply with the following
provisions, in addition to all applicable provisions of Article 3 (Site
Planning and General Development Standards).
A.   Purpose. It is intended within the E Zone to permit establishment of a
cemetery.
B.   Uses Permitted. A cemetery use, subject to a Site Plan Review, which shall
be required prior to the issuance of any building permit for any cemetery-type
structure, or prior to the interment of any deceased person. Telecommunication
facilities may be permitted with an Administrative Use Permit or a Conditional
Use Permit, as provided for in §
17.400.110 (Telecommunication Facilities).
C.   Filing Requirements.  Maps and drawings in sufficient number, as
determined by the Division (together with an application fee in the amount
established by Resolution of the Council for a Site Plan Review), shall be
submitted to indicate:
   1.   The position of all proposed and existing structures on subject
property (plot plan);
   2.   Location of pedestrian and vehicular streets and access ways; and
   3.   Location and specifications of all walls, fences and screening.
D.   Standards Governing Approval.  The Commission shall review all plans
submitted and give its approval or disapproval, based upon the following
standards formulated to insure the development of a cemetery in a manner
compatible with the public welfare. The standards governing the Commission's
determination are as follows:
   1.   Access: Emergency Equipment. All buildings and structures shall be so
arranged as to permit convenient access for the City's emergency and service
equipment. Fire hydrants, standpipes, other fire protection devices, and also
devices providing illumination, may be required to be installed and maintained
at the applicant's expense.
   2.   Streets and Access Ways.  Vehicular and pedestrian streets and access
ways shall be required to be dedicated and improved, as determined by the
Commission, as necessary to permit convenient access to all portions of the
herein classified property.
   3.   Landscaping, Walls and Fences, and Screening.  Walls, fences, or
screen-type landscaping shall be provided, maintained and located as determined
by the Commission.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.250.025 TRANSPORTATION (T) DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
A.   Uses Permitted. The following uses are permitted in the T Zone:
   1.   The operation and maintenance of any transportation business, including
private rights-of-way, easements, railroads, railways, pipe lines, pole lines,
conduits, bus lines, or airports. Such area shall be used exclusively for such
transportation business and appurtenant facilities, including passenger
stations, electrical substations, and the beautification and protection of such
rights-of-way.
   2.   Automobile parking areas when developed in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
   3.   Telecommunication facilities may be permitted with an Administrative
Use Permit or a Conditional Use Permit, as provided for in §
17.400.110 (Telecommunication Facilities).
   4.   Open space.
B.   Prohibited Uses. Construction of any advertising sign or structure, and
any residential, commercial, industrial or freight storage structure, including
above ground parking structures.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.250.030 OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
Land uses allowed within the OS Zoning District shall comply with the following
provisions, in addition to all applicable provisions of Article 3 (Site
Planning and General Development Standards).
A.   Uses Permitted.  The following uses are permitted in the OS Zone:
   1.   Parks and playgrounds, public facilities, libraries, museums, community
centers, and recreational facilities. Telecommunication facilities may be
permitted with an Administrative Use Permit or a Conditional Use Permit, as
provided for in §
17.400.110 (Telecommunication Facilities).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 22 (part); Ord. No. 2008-008
§ 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.250.035 INSTITUTIONAL (I) DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
Land uses allowed within the I Zoning District shall comply with the following
provisions, in addition to all applicable provisions of Article 3 (Site
Planning and General Development Standards).
A.   Uses Permitted. The following uses are permitted in the I Zone:
   1.   Government services, libraries, museums, community centers,
recreational facilities, schools, colleges, universities, day care centers,
educational and medical research facilities, hospitals, social service
agencies, and religious facilities.
   2.   Accessory buildings and uses such as bookstores, pharmacies,
restaurants or cafes, gift shops, and medical and educational supply stores
provided in conjunction with a permitted use, primarily as a convenience to its
occupants, customers, patients, or employees.
(Ord. No. 2013-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.260: OVERLAY ZONES
Section
   
17.260.005   Purpose
   
17.260.010   Applicability of Overlay Zones
   
17.260.015   Residential Zero Setback Overlay (-RZ)
   
17.260.020   [Reserved]
   
17.260.025   Redevelopment Project Area Overlay (-RP)
   
17.260.030   Civic Center Overlay (-CV)
   
17.260.035   [Reserved]
   
17.260.040   Residential Hillsides Overlay (-RH)
§ 17.260.005 PURPOSE.
The overlay zones established by this Chapter provide guidance for development
and new land uses in addition to the standards and regulations of the primary
zoning districts, where important site, neighborhood, or compatibility issues
require particular attention in project planning.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.260.010 APPLICABILITY OF OVERLAY ZONES.
A.   Designation of Property. The applicability of any overlay zone to a
specific site is shown by the overlay Zoning Map symbol, established by §
17.200.010 (Zoning Districts Established), being appended as a suffix to the
symbol for the primary zoning district on the Zoning Map (for example, CG-EW
which represents the Commercial General (CG) Zoning District and the East
Washington Boulevard Overlay (-EW)).
B.   Applicability of Overlay District Requirements. The provisions of this
Chapter apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other
applicable requirements of this Title. In the event of any perceived conflict
between the provisions of this Chapter and any other provision of this Title,
this Chapter shall control.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.260.015 RESIDENTIAL ZERO SETBACK OVERLAY (-RZ).
A.   Uses Permitted.
   1.   One dwelling unit per lot.
   2.   Accessory buildings and structures, provided no such building or
structure shall be designed or used for dwelling purposes.
   3.   Public uses and buildings, including libraries, museums, parks,
playgrounds, schools and community buildings owned and controlled by the City
or school district, if their location is first approved by the Council.
   4.   The renting of rooms or the providing of table board to not more than
two persons is permitted, provided said rooms shall be within the dwelling
structure and not within an accessory building.
B.   Lot Dimensions.
   1.   Area.  Each lot shall have an area of not less than 5,000 square feet.
   2.   Frontage.  The minimum frontage of a lot shall be 35 feet. A non-
rectangular lot on a cul-de-sac turn around, knuckle, or on the outside radius
of a street curve, with a radius of not more than 50 feet, shall have a street
frontage of not less than 25 feet.
   3.   Width and depth.  Every lot recorded after September 10, 1984, shall
have a lot depth approximately twice its width, or vice versa (a 2:1 or 1:
2 ratio), except lots that, in the opinion of the Commission or Council, are
constrained by unusual configuration limitations resulting from steep
topography, remote access, cul-de-sac turn around, or other extraordinary
physical characteristics shall not be strictly held to this requirement.
   4.   Dwelling floor area.  Each dwelling shall have a ground floor area of
not less than 900 square feet and a total floor area of not less than 1,700
square feet. Said area requirements shall be determined as measured from
exterior walls, and shall be exclusive of the garage and any porches, patios,
balconies or similar architectural features not providing living space internal
to the dwelling.
C.   Dwelling Height. No dwelling structure shall exceed two stories or 30 feet
in height, provided that roof-mounted antennae may extend a maximum of 15 feet
above the highest roofline of the building upon which it is attached.
D.   Yard Building Setbacks. Each lot shall have one side and a rear yard of
not less than ten feet, and a front yard of not less than 13 feet, except that:
   1.   Garages shall be located to allow a paved on-lot driveway of not less
than 23 feet in length and 16 feet in width.
   2.   Street-abutting side yards shall be not less than eight feet, and side
yards abutting property not in the Residential Zero Setback Overlay (-RZ) shall
not be less than five feet.
   3.   An average front building setback for both first and second dwelling
stories of not less than 18 feet shall be provided.
   4.   An average one side or rear building setback for both first and second
dwelling stories of not less than 15 feet shall be provided.
   5.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, wholly or partially
contiguous, residentially zoned lots or portions of lots, which have been
improved or are proposed to be improved as a single and unified multiple-lot
residential development, may be considered as a single parcel for the purpose
of applying the setback requirements as provided in this Section. The Director
or Commission may waive non-street-facing setback requirements for common
interior lot lines within the parcel, provided all the following conditions are
met:
      a.   Setback requirements established by this Section are applied to the
perimeter lot lines;
      b.   The property owner executes and records a covenant, in a form
approved by the City, to hold all lots or portion as one parcel; and
      c.   The property owner dedicates a portion of the parcel, pays a fee or
does both, for the purpose of providing park and recreational facilities to
serve future residents of the multiple lot residential development, in
accordance with CCMC §
15.10.765.
E.   Separation Between Dwellings on Adjacent Lots. There shall be an open
space area on each lot of not less than 600 square feet, with no dimension less
than 20 feet, except non-rectangular lots located on a cul-de-sac turn around
or knuckle shall have no dimension less than 15 feet. This open space area
shall be exclusive of required front and street abutting side yards and
vehicular driveways, and further, shall be subject to the following:
   1.   The required open space may include side or rear yards.
   2.   Pools and paved recreational areas may be developed in the required
open space.
   3.   The gradient or slope of any required open space shall not exceed 10%.
The open space may be provided on a deck.
   4.   Such open space shall be fully open to the sky, except that
architectural projections are permitted as set forth in §
17.300.020 (Setback Regulations and Exceptions).
   5.   An accessory building may not occupy any part of the required open
space.
   6.   When adjacent to the required front yard, the required open space shall
be screened from the street with a fence or wall, the design of which has been
approved by the Director.
   7.   Pavement in a required front or street-abutting side yard shall not
exceed 60% of the required area, except that in non-rectangular lots on a cul-
de-sac turn around, knuckle, or on the outside radius of a street curb for the
radius of not more than 50 feet, shall not exceed 75% of the required area.
F.   Off-Street Parking.  When provided, parking shall comply with the
standards and requirements set forth in
Chapter 17.320 of this Title.
G.   Accessory Structures.  Notwithstanding §
17.400.100 (Residential Uses - Accessory Residential Structures), accessory
structures shall be subject to the following requirements:
   1.   No such structure shall be located within a required front or street-
abutting side yard.
   2.   No such building or structure shall be located within five feet of a
dwelling or another structure not within two feet of any interior property
line.
   3.   No such structure shall exceed ten feet in height without a Conditional
Use Permit.
H.   Special Conditions.
   1.   Building walls within four feet of and facing an interior property line
shall have no openings, and shall be waterproofed as required by the Building
Safety Division, except that walls within two feet of an interior property line
shall be fully waterproofed.
   2.   All exterior ground-mounted or roof-mounted appurtenant equipment, such
as but not necessarily limited to, water heaters, air conditioners, ducting,
and swimming pool pumps, shall be screened from view from adjoining properties
and rights-of-way in a manner consistent with City standards as determined by
the Director. Said equipment shall also be sheltered, insulated or otherwise
baffled as necessary to conform to the noise regulations and standards of the
CCMC.
   3.   The minimum site area of an -RZ overlay shall be five acres.
I.   Supplementary Regulations for 4,000 square foot Residential Zero Setback
Overlay (-RZ) Subdivisions. The regulations of this section shall apply to
Residential Zero Setback (-RZ) lots of less than 5,000 feet. The regulations of
§§
17.260.015 A. through G., shall apply also, except that this Subsection shall
supersede in event of conflict.
   1.   Lot dimensions.
      a.   Area. Each lot shall have an area of not less than 4,000 square
feet.
      b.   Width and depth. Every lot recorded after September 10, 1984, shall
have a lot depth approximately twice its width, or vice versa (a 2:1 or 1:
2 ratio), except that lots that, in the opinion of the Commission or Council,
are constrained by unusual configuration limitations resulting from steep
topography, remote access. cul-de-sac turn around, or other extraordinary
physical characteristics shall not be strictly held to this requirement.
      c.   Dwelling floor area.  Each dwelling shall have a total floor area of
not less than 1,400 square feet.
   2.   Yard building setbacks.
      a.   Garages shall be located to provide a paved driveway of not less
than 20 feet in length, as measured from the inside edge of the public sidewalk
to the garage door.
      b.   Subsection
17.260.015.D.4. (Yard Building Setbacks), requiring an average 15 foot side or
rear yard, shall not apply.
   3.   Open space.
      a.   No dimension of the required open space shall be less than ten feet.
      b.   Roof Decks.
         i.   Rooftop decks shall be set back five feet from the building edge
along an interior side yard adjacent to a residential zoned property.
         ii.   A permanent, built-in landscape planter with vegetation shall be
located within the required setback area to screen views of the deck from
neighboring properties. Rooftop decks which are located in a roof well are not
required to include a landscape planter.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.260.020 [RESERVED].
§ 17.260.025 REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA OVERLAY (-RP).
A.   Purpose.  The purpose of establishing a Redevelopment Project Area Overlay
(-RP) is to facilitate the consideration of redevelopment projects and
activities of the Culver City Redevelopment Agency that are consistent with,
and implement the Culver City Redevelopment Plan.
B.   Applicability and Procedures.  This Redevelopment Project Area Overlay (-
RP) applies to all current and future Redevelopment Project Component Areas
within the City.
   The land use and development requirements of the underlying zone shall
apply, unless a Comprehensive Plan is approved according to the procedures
established in
Chapter 17.240 (Planned Development (PD) Zoning Districts), except the minimum
acreage requirement or any other requirements the Council determines are
unnecessary for a specific proposed project or activity.
C.   Procedures.  The application filing and review procedures established in
this Title shall apply, except that a party other than the property owner(s) or
their designated representative(s) may file an application for the City's
consideration of the Comprehensive Plan and/or all other required entitlements
without the consent of the property owner(s) or their representative(s), if
that party has entered into an Exclusive Negotiation Agreement, Owner
Participation Agreement, Disposition and Development Agreement, or a similar
agreement with the Culver City Redevelopment Agency.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.260.030 CIVIC CENTER OVERLAY (-CV).
A.   Purpose. The purpose of the Supplemental Civic Center Overlay is to
provide a scheme for the harmonious relationship between the proposed and
existing Civic Center buildings of the City and any new buildings to be
constructed within the area covered by the Civic Center Overlay (-CV).
B.   Uses Permitted.  The uses permitted within the Civic Center Overlay (-CV)
shall not be construed to reduce or limit the uses permitted in any zone
underlying it.
C.   Preliminary Plan Review. It shall be required, within the area designated
on the Zoning Map as the Civic Center Overlay (-CV), that preliminary plans and
elevations of all proposed buildings and structures shall be submitted to the
Director for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit.
D.   Review Standards.  The Director shall be governed by the following
standards in granting approval of plans submitted pursuant to the regulations
of this Section. The Director shall reasonably determine that the general
exterior appearance, design, color, texture of surface materials, height and
exterior construction of all proposed buildings and structures within the Civic
Center Overlay (-CV) will generally conform in a harmonious manner to the
existing and proposed Civic Center buildings.
E.   Appeal. The Director shall either approve or disapprove of the preliminary
plans when submitted, and notify the applicant, in writing, of the decision. In
the event an applicant desires to appeal the decision of the Director, it may
be done so in a manner provided for appeals in
Chapter 17.640 (Appeals).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.260.035 [RESERVED].
§ 17.260.040 RESIDENTIAL HILLSIDES OVERLAY (-RH).
A.   Purpose. The purpose of establishing the Residential Hillsides Overlay (-
RH) is to provide area-specific zoning regulations necessary for the
incremental improvement and sustainable development of hillside neighborhoods
in Culver City.
B.   Allowable land uses and permit requirements. Allowable land uses and
required permits shall be established by the applicable underlying zone.
C.   Definitions. The following definitions will relate to residential zoned
property in the -RH Overlay:
   1.   Floor Area, Residential. Residential floor area shall include
mezzanines, covered porches, covered patios, and accessory buildings in
addition to any floor area, confined from exterior wall to exterior wall,
within the main dwelling unit. Garages shall be included in the floor area with
the exception that up to 200 square feet of attached and front-facing garages
shall be exempted from floor area. Interior areas with ceiling heights greater
than 14 feet shall be counted twice towards the floor area.
D.   Development requirements. Development requirements shall be regulated by
Table 2-10 (Residential Hillsides Overlay Development Standards). Wherever the
-RH Overlay zone is silent on a matter, the corresponding regulation of the
underlying zone shall apply.
Table 2-10 Residential Hillsides Overlay Development Standards (-RH)
Development Feature Requirement by -RH Overlay
Development Feature              Requirement by -RH Overlay
Maximum Number of Dwelling Units 1 Unit
Allowed per Parcel (1)
Dwelling Size (2)
                                 Slope (3)   FAR
                                 <15%        0.45
Maximum Area                     15% to 30%  0.40
                                 >30% to 45% 0.35
                                 >45% to 60% 0.30
                                 >60%        0.25
                                 Minimum setbacks required. See §
Setbacks (4)                     17.300.020 (Setback Regulations and
                                 Exceptions)
   Front                      20 feet - Single Story Structure
                                 30 feet - Second Story of Two Story Structure
   Side (5)                   First Floor: 10% of lot width, but not <5 feet
                                 and not >10 feet
                                 Second Floor (Narrow Setback): 16% of lot
                                 width, but not <8 feet and not >16 feet
                                 Second Floor (Wide or Street-Facing Setback):
                                 24% of lot width, but not <12 feet and not >24
                                 feet
Rear                             15 Feet
                                 Slope       Height
                                             Flat Roof - 2 stories and 27 feet
Height Limit (6)                 <50%        Sloped Roof - 2 stories and 30
                                             feet
                                 50% to 100% 1 Story and 14 feet
(1)   For standards for Accessory Dwelling Units, see §
17.400.095.
(2)   Minimum by-right floor area in the hillside area, regardless of lot size,
is 2,500 square feet.
(3)   Existing slope is to be established with topographic survey and slope
analysis of existing conditions prior to issuance of Building Permit.
(4)   For exceptions to setback standards, see §
17.260.040.E.
(5)   Building may exceed minimum required setback but cannot reduce minimum
required setback. Applicant may choose which of the two side setbacks is narrow
and which is wide, but wide setback will automatically apply to a street facing
side yard.
(6)   Any parapet is included as part of the flat roof height standard.
 
E.   Setback and stepback exceptions findings. Exceptions to setback standards
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
consider and record the decision in writing with the findings on which the
decision is based. The exception may be approved, with or without conditions,
only after making all of the following findings:
   1.   There are special circumstances applicable to the property (e.g.
location, shape, size, depth, surroundings, and/or topography), or to the
intended use of the property, so that the strict application of this Title
denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the
vicinity and under identical zoning districts.
   2.   Approval of the exception would not be detrimental to the public
health, interest, safety, or general welfare and would not be detrimental or
injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and in the same zoning
district.
F.   Parking. Uncovered, half covered, and fully covered parking shall be
permitted in the Residential Hillsides Overlay Zone. Any uncovered parking
shall be placed within 15 feet of a maximum of one interior side yard property
line and/or shall be fully screened from view of the public right-of-way by the
primary structure. Front yard-facing parking not located within 15 feet of a
side yard property line shall be fully covered and enclosed. See Figure 3-12
(Allowable R1 and R2 Uncovered Parking Placement) provided in §
17.320.035.P.3. (Allowable R1 uncovered parking placement.
G.   Roof Decks.
   1.   Rooftop decks shall be set back five feet from the building edge along
an interior side yard adjacent to a residential zoned property.
   2.   A permanent, built-in landscape planter with vegetation shall be
located within the required setback area to screen views of the deck from
neighboring properties. Rooftop decks which are located in a roof well are not
required to include a landscape planter.
(Ord. No. 2019-006 § 2; Ord. No. 2024-001, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
ARTICLE 3: SITE PLANNING AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
      Chapter
         
17.300   GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS   
         
17.310   LANDSCAPING
         
17.320   OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
         
17.330   SIGNS
CHAPTER 17.300: GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS
Section
   
17.300.005   Purpose
   
17.300.010   Applicability
   
17.300.015   Access
   
17.300.020   Setback Regulations and Exceptions
   
17.300.025   Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions
   
17.300.030   Fences, Hedges, and Walls
   
17.300.035   Screening
   
17.300.040   Outdoor Lighting
§ 17.300.005 PURPOSE.
The provisions of this Chapter address details of site planning, project
design, and operation and are intended to ensure that all development produces
an environment of stable and desirable character that is harmonious with
existing and future development, protects the use and enjoyment of neighboring
properties, and is consistent with the General Plan.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.300.010 APPLICABILITY.
A.   Standards. The standards of this Chapter shall be considered in
combination with the standards for each zoning district in Article 2 (Zoning
Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development Standards).
Residential and mixed use structures shall also comply with the Citywide
Residential and Mixed Use Objective Design Standards. Where there may be a
conflict, the standards specific to the zoning district shall override these
general standards.
B.   Compliance. All structures, additions to structures, and uses shall comply
with the standards of this Chapter, as determined applicable by the Director,
except as specified in
Chapter 17.610 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-003, Exhibit A
(part))
§ 17.300.015 ACCESS.
A.   Access to Streets.
   1.   Every structure shall be constructed upon, or moved to, a legally
recorded parcel with a permanent means of access to a public street, in
compliance with City standards.
   2.   All structures shall be properly located to ensure safe and convenient
access for servicing, fire protection, and parking.
   3.   Parcels located on a private street, which were legally established
before the effective date of this Title, are exempt from the required
compliance with the latest adopted City standards for private streets.
B.   Pedestrian Access. All multiple-family residential, non-residential, or
mixed use developments shall provide a minimum of one pedestrian walkway of no
less than four feet in width, from each adjoining street frontage connecting
said street with either the main building entrance or common pedestrian
corridor.
C.   Access to Accessory Structures. Accessory structures and other on-site
architectural features shall be properly located to ensure that they do not
obstruct access to main structures or accessory living quarters. Also refer to
§
17.400.100 (Residential Uses - Accessory Residential Structures).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.300.020 SETBACK REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
This Section establishes standards to ensure the provision of open areas for
access to and around structures, access to natural light and ventilation,
landscaping, recreation, separation of incompatible land uses, and space for
privacy, traffic safety, and visibility.
A.   Setback Requirements.
   1.   All structures shall conform to the setback requirements identified for
each zoning district by
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards)
and with any special setbacks established for specific uses by this Title.
   2.   All setbacks shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward,
except for trees and other plant materials, and except as provided in this
Section.
B.   Exemptions from Setback Requirements.  The minimum setback requirements of
this Title shall apply to all uses/structures, except for the following:
   1.   Fences or walls constructed within the height limitations of this
Title.
C.   Limitations on Use of Setbacks. Required setback areas shall only be used
as follows:
   1.   Structures. Required setback area shall not be occupied by structures
other than:
      a.   Structures that are exempt from setback requirements by §
17.300.020.B. (Exemptions from Setback Requirements) above;
      b.   Residential accessory structures located within setback areas in
compliance with §
17.400.100 (Residential Uses - Accessory Residential Structures).
   2.   Parking.  Residential parking may be allowed within a required setback
only in compliance with §
17.320.035 (Parking Design and Layout Guidelines) and §
17.320.040 (Driveway and Site Access Standards).
   3.   Storage.  Front or street side setbacks shall not be used for the
storage of inoperable vehicles, scrap, junk, or similar materials.
D.   Measurement of Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as follows, see
Figure 3-1 (Location and Measurements of Setbacks) below:
   Figure 3-1 Location and Measurement of Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4907.jpg]
 
   1.   Front and street side setback. The front and street side setback shall
be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front or street side
property line or street line (if applicable) to the nearest wall of the
structure, except as follows:
      a.   Corner parcels. The setback measurement of corner parcels shall be
taken from the nearest point on the structure to the nearest point of the
property line or street line (if applicable) adjoining the street that is
opposite the rear yard.
      b.   Flag lots. The setback measurement of flag lots shall be taken from
the nearest point on the wall of the structure facing the street to the point
where the access strip ("flag pole") meets the bulk of the parcel, establishing
a building line parallel to the lot line nearest to the public street or right-
of-way. See Figure 3-2 (Flag Lot) below.
   Figure 3-2 Flag Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-26.png]
 
   2.   Interior side setback. The interior side setback shall be measured at
right angles from the nearest point on the interior side property line to the
nearest wall of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the
interior side property line that extends between the front and rear property
lines.
   3.   Rear setback. The rear setback shall be measured at right angles from
the nearest point on the rear property line to the nearest wall of the
structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line that
extends between the side property lines.
E.   Allowed Projections into Setbacks.  Projections such as eaves, cornices,
awnings, louvers, porches, stairs, and chimneys may encroach into required
setbacks, as well as required open space, in compliance with
Table 3-1 (Allowed Projections into Setbacks) below, subject to all applicable
requirements of the Building and Fire Code. Where any provision of this Chapter
conflicts with applicable building codes, the more restrictive provision shall
apply. The "Limitations/Additional Regulations" column states any dimensional,
area, or other limitations that apply to such projections. Any deviation from
the standards in
Table 3-1 shall require a variance or administrative modification per
Chapter 17.550 (Variances and Administrative Modifications).
   Table 3-1 Allowed Projections into Setbacks
           Maximum Projection into Setback                      Limitations/
Projection Front/Street Side                                    Additional
           Setback           Interior Side Setback Rear Setback Regulations
                                                                             Maximum Projection into
                                                                             Setback                       Limitations/
Projection                                                                   Front/  Interior              Additional
                                                                             Street  Side       Rear       Regulations
                                                                             Side    Setback    Setback
                                                                             Setback
                                                                             Unless otherwise specified, no projection
All projections                                                              may extend closer than three feet to an
                                                                             interior lot line.
                                                                                                           In no
                                                                                                           circumstances
                                                                                                           shall they
                                                                                                           project
                                                                                                           closer than 3
                                                                                                           feet to any
                                                                                                           property
                                                                                                           line.
                                                                                                           Aggregate
                                                                                                           width of
                                                                                                           oriel or bay
                                                                                                           windows shall
                                                                                                           not exceed
                                                                                                           50% of the
                                                                                                           length of the
                                                                                                           wall in which
                                                                                                           they are
                                                                                                           located and
                                                                                                           the width of
                                                                                                           any
                                                                                                           individual
Architectural Features (eaves, cornices, overhangs, bay windows, chimneys)   3 feet  3 feet     3 feet     oriel or bay
                                                                                                           window shall
                                                                                                           not exceed 10
                                                                                                           feet. Any one
                                                                                                           oriel or bay
                                                                                                           window shall
                                                                                                           not project
                                                                                                           more than 3
                                                                                                           feet beyond
                                                                                                           the exterior
                                                                                                           finish of the
                                                                                                           exterior wall
                                                                                                           of a
                                                                                                           structure.
                                                                                                           Upper-floor
                                                                                                           architectural
                                                                                                           projections
                                                                                                           shall have a
                                                                                                           minimum
                                                                                                           vertical
                                                                                                           clearance of
                                                                                                           8 feet above
                                                                                                           grade.
                                                                                                           Weather
                                                                                                           protection
                                                                                                           shall have a
                                                                                                           minimum
                                                                                                           vertical
                                                                                                           clearance of
                                                                                                           8 feet above
Weather protection and screening devices (awnings, canopies, louvers,                No closer than 3 feet grade.
vertical sunshades)                                                          5 feet  to the rear and side  Along the
                                                                                     property lines.       front/street
                                                                                                           side, may
                                                                                                           project
                                                                                                           beyond
                                                                                                           property line
                                                                                                           with an
                                                                                                           encroachment
                                                                                                           permit.
                                                                                     3 feet or  3 feet or
                                                                                     25% of     25% of     May be
Open, unenclosed fire escapes                                                None    required   required   covered but
                                                                                     setback,   setback,   not enclosed.
                                                                                     whichever  whichever
                                                                                     is greater is greater
                                                                                                           In no
                                                                                                           circumstances
                                                                                                           shall these
                                                                                                           encroach
                                                                                                           closer than 3
                                                                                                           feet to an
Uncovered and unenclosed stairs, landings, decks, and similar features ≤ 3 8 feet  5 feet     8 feet     interior
feet in height                                                                                             property
                                                                                                           line, and no
                                                                                                           closer than 1
                                                                                                           foot to a
                                                                                                           front/street
                                                                                                           side property
                                                                                                           line.
                                                                                                           In no
                                                                                                           circumstances
                                                                                                           shall these
Uncovered and unenclosed stairs, landings, decks, and similar features > 3                                 features
feet in height                                                               5 feet  3 feet     6 feet     encroach
                                                                                                           closer than 3
                                                                                                           feet to the
                                                                                                           property
                                                                                                           line.
                                                                                                           Balconies and
                                                                                                           decks shall
                                                                                                           not be closer
                                                                                                           than 8 feet
                                                                                                           to the rear
                                                                                                           property line
                                                                                                           and 5 feet to
                                                                                                           the interior
Upper-level balconies and decks                                              5 feet  5 feet     10 feet    side property
                                                                                                           line.
                                                                                                           Balconies and
                                                                                                           decks shall
                                                                                                           not project
                                                                                                           beyond the
                                                                                                           front or
                                                                                                           street side
                                                                                                           property
                                                                                                           line.
                                                                                                           In no
                                                                                                           circumstances
                                                                                                           shall these
                                                                                                           features
                                                                                                           encroach
Covered or uncovered stoops, patios, and porches                             5 feet  5 feet     8 feet     closer than 3
                                                                                                           feet to the
                                                                                                           property
                                                                                                           line. May be
                                                                                                           covered but
                                                                                                           not fully
                                                                                                           enclosed.
                                                                                     To within
                                                                                     6 inches
Porte cochere, with no less than 7 feet of vertical clearance above a                of an
driveway, attached to a dwelling unit for a depth of no more than 16 feet,   None    interior   5 feet      
and covered with a solid roof.                                                       side
                                                                                     property
                                                                                     line only
Utility risers, rain gutters, downspouts, and the like                       12      12 inches  12 inches   
                                                                             inches
                                                                                     To within
                                                                                     6 inches
                                                                                     of an
Wing wall not exceeding 12 feet in height                                    None    interior   None        
                                                                                     side
                                                                                     property
                                                                                     line only
Wing wall higher than 12 feet in height                                      None    None       None        
Landscaping and landscape features                                           No      No limit   No limit    
                                                                             limit
                                                                                                           These
                                                                                                           structures
                                                                                                           shall
                                                                                                           maintain a
                                                                                                           clearance of
                                                                                                           5 feet from
                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                           intersection
Freestanding front yard trellis - Residential Zones                          No      Not        Not        of a driveway
No more than 2 per property, and no more than 8 feet in height, 6 feet in    limit   Applicable Applicable or alley with
width, 3 feet in depth, open on all 4 sides                                                                a public
                                                                                                           street right-
                                                                                                           of-way and 15
                                                                                                           feet from the
                                                                                                           intersection
                                                                                                           of two public
                                                                                                           street
                                                                                                           rights-of-
                                                                                                           way.
                                                                                                           Townhouses
                                                                                                           may locate
                                                                                                           equipment in
Equipment - Air conditioners, ground mounted water heaters, fixed barbecues,         To within 3 feet of   the front/
sinks, fixed counters, and similar equipment                                 None    rear and side         street side
                                                                                     property lines.       setback up to
                                                                                                           maximum
                                                                                                           encroachment
                                                                                                           of 3 feet.
                                                                                                           Equipment may
                                                                                                           be located to
                                                                                                           within 12
Equipment - electric, gas meters, mini-split HVACs, and wall mounted water   24                            inches of a
heaters                                                                      inches  24 inches  24 inches  non-
                                                                                                           conforming
                                                                                                           interior side
                                                                                                           or rear
                                                                                                           setback.
                                                                                     To within 3 feet of   Distance is
Pools, spas, hot tubs, and other water elements intended for human occupancy None    rear and side         measured from
                                                                                     property lines.       outside face
                                                                                                           of bond beam.
Equipment - Pool and spa                                                     None    None       No Limit    
Ponds, waterfalls, and other water features not intended for human           No Limit                       
occupancy, 24 inches in height
                                                                                                           See §
                                                                                                           17.300.030
Fences, railings, walls, and landscape planters                              No Limit                      (Fences,
                                                                                                           Hedges, and
                                                                                                           Walls).
 
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2017-014 § 2; Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord.
No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.300.025 HEIGHT MEASUREMENT AND HEIGHT LIMIT EXCEPTIONS.
All structures shall meet the following standards relating to height, except
for fences and walls, which shall comply with §
17.300.030 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls), and the allowable exceptions identified
in §
17.300.025.C. (Exceptions to Height Limits) below.
A.   Maximum Height. The height of structures shall not exceed the standard
established by the applicable zoning district in Article 2 (Zoning Districts,
Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards).
B.   Height Measurement. Height shall be measured from finished grade. See
Figure 3-3 (Height Measurement). For fill areas, height shall be measured from
finished grade, so long as the fill shall not result in a retaining wall
greater than ten feet in height with no one section taller than six feet as per
§
17.300.030.C. (Retaining Walls). If the retaining wall is along the street
frontage, it shall be set back by a minimum three-foot landscaped area from the
back of walk. Finished Grade shall be consistent with parcels in the immediate
vicinity, and shall not be, nor have been, artificially raised to gain
additional building height.
   Figure 3-3 Height Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-28.png]
 
C.   Rooftop Projections and Exceptions to Height Limits. Allowable rooftop
projects and exceptions to the height limits identified in this Title shall
apply in the following manner, except where otherwise required by the Building
Code:
   1.   Roof-mounted structures for the housing of mechanical equipment,
antennas, elevators, stairways, tanks, towers, ventilating fans, or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain the structure, shall be allowed as
follows.
      a.   In multiple-family residential zones, up to a maximum of 13 feet six
inches above the height of the underlying roof surface. Any roof mounted
structure or equipment exceeding the parapet height shall be set back five feet
from the edge of the structure, except stairs shall not be required to be set
back from the edge of the structure.
      b.   In mixed use and special purpose zones, up to a maximum of 13 feet
six inches above the height of a building; except that elevators shall be
allowed up to a maximum of 19 feet six inches above the height of the
underlying roof surface.
      c.   In the R1 and R2 zones, mechanical equipment located on roofs, upper
level terraces, patios and balconies, and structures housing mechanical
equipment shall not exceed the maximum zoning envelope and shall not encroach
upon a 1:1 upward- and inward-inclining plane starting at the base of the roof
or exterior deck surface along front and side yard-facing facades (See Figure
3-4).
   Figure 3-4
   1:1 Allowable Placement for Roof-Mounted and Upper-Story Mechanical
Equipment in the R1 and R2 Zones
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4909.jpg]
 
   2.   Fire or parapet walls may extend up to five feet above the building
height limit of the structure, and as may otherwise be required by the
California Building Code. In the R1 Zone, the height limit shall be inclusive
of fire or parapet walls.
   3.   In RMD, RHD, mixed use, and special purpose zones, architectural
features that are non-habitable design elements, such as spires, turrets, bell
towers, clock towers, cupolas, and similar design elements, shall be allowed up
to a maximum of 13 feet six inches above the height of a building, and are
limited to 10% of the total roof area and up to 200 square feet for each
individual element. Trellises/pergolas shall be allowed up to a maximum of 13
feet six inches above the height of a building, and are limited to 15% of the
total roof area and up to 400 square feet for each individual trellis/pergola.
   4.   Chimneys may project up to four feet above the height of the point
where the chimney passes through the roof, or as required by the Building Code.
   5.   For non-residential uses, trellis and carport-style structures
installed on a parking structure roof deck for the purpose of supporting solar
panels and solar equipment and installations shall be allowed up to a maximum
of 13 feet six inches above the highest elevation of the rooftop parking deck
surface.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2018-012 § 2; Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3
(part); Ord. No. 2024-001, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-
008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.300.030 FENCES, HEDGES, AND WALLS.
A.   Applicability. Fences, hedges and walls shall be installed and maintained
in compliance with this Section. These regulations do not apply to fences
required by the City for reasons of public safety.
B.   General Height Limitations.  Fences, hedges, and walls shall comply with
the height limitations of Table 3-2 (Maximum Height of Fences, Hedges, and
Walls).
   Table 3-2
   Minimum Height of Fences, Hedges, and Walls
Location Maximum Height (1) Additional Requirements
Location                      Maximum Height (1) Additional Requirements
                                                 When within 10 feet of a
                                                 public street right-of-way,
                                                 and 5 feet of the intersection
                                                 of the driveway or alley with
                                                 the public street right-of-
                                                 way, the portion of the fence
Residential Zones - Within    4 feet (2)         or wall above 30 inches in
the required front setback                       height shall be of an openwork
                                                 design (e.g., wrought iron or
                                                 other material allowing
                                                 visibility), to ensure
                                                 adequate visibility for
                                                 pedestrian and vehicular
                                                 traffic.
                                                 The portion of the fence or
                                                 wall above 30 inches in height
                                                 shall be of an openwork design
Residential Zones - Within a                     (e.g., wrought iron or other
15 foot intersection safety   4 feet (2)         material), to ensure adequate
sightline.                                       visibility for pedestrian and
                                                 vehicular traffic.
                                                 See
                                                 Figure 3-5 (Measurement of
                                                 Fence Height), page 3-12.
                                                 The portion of the fence or
                                                 wall above 30 inches in height
                                                 shall be of an openwork design
                                                 (e. g., wrought iron or other
Residential Zones - Within a                     material), to ensure adequate
5 foot side or rear yard      4 feet (2)         visibility for pedestrian and
driveway safety sightline.                       vehicular traffic adjacent to
                                                 a street right-of-way.
                                                 See
                                                 Figure 3-5 (Measurement of
                                                 Fence Height), page 3-12.
                                                 A fence or a wall on a side or
                                                 rear property line that abuts
                                                 a public street right-of-way
                                                 shall have a minimum 1 foot
Residential Zones - Within a                     landscaped setback.
required side or rear         6 feet             An 8-foot-high fence may also
setback.                      (3)(4)             be allowed between two
                                                 abutting rear yards by mutual
                                                 agreement by both property
                                                 owners. This height is not
                                                 eligible for a fence height
                                                 waiver.
Residential Zones - Within a
required side or rear setback                    Alley adjacent rear and side
adjacent to an alley right-   8 feet             yard fences are not eligible
of-way or abutting a non-                        for fence height waivers.
residential zone.
                                                 In Zones with no minimum front
All Other Zones - Within the                     or street abutting setback
required front setback or     4 feet             requirements, no fence taller
street abutting setback area.                    than 4 feet is permitted
                                                 between a building and the
                                                 public right-of-way.
                                                 The Director may approve an
                                                 openwork (e.g., wrought iron)
                                                 security fence not to exceed 8
                                                 feet in height, subject to
All Other Zones - Between a                      conditions of approval deemed
public street right-of-way    4 feet             reasonable and necessary to
and parking area.                                protect the public interest,
                                                 including the design and
                                                 setback of the fence, and
                                                 landscaping adjoining the
                                                 fence.
All Other Zones - Within 10
feet of the intersection of a 4 feet             None
driveway and a public
sidewalk.
All Other Zones - Along an
interior property line that   8 feet             None
abuts a residential zoning
district.
All Other Zones - Along an
interior property line that   9 feet             None
abuts a non-residential use.
 
Notes:
(1)   Ornamental features, including finials, caps or other decorative
elements, may exceed the height limitations by six inches above the top of a
wall or fence a minimum distance of four feet apart.
(2)   A wrought iron or similar decorative openwork fence (minimum 60%
openwork) incorporating solid masonry pilasters that are no more than 16 inches
thick, and not less than 10 feet apart, shall be considered to provide adequate
visibility, and therefore, may meet the four-foot rather than the 30-inch
height restriction.
(3)   The maximum six-foot height is not applicable to hedges or other
landscaping within a required side or rear setback.
(4)   See
Chapter 17.550 (Variances and Administrative Modifications).
   Figure 3-5 Measurement of Fences, Walls, and Landscaping Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-30.png]
 
C.   Retaining Walls. Retaining walls shall not exceed six feet in height for
any one wall, nor 12 feet for any combination of walls (including required
freeboard). Any combination of walls shall be separated by at least three feet
horizontally. Retaining walls are permitted in all yards.
D.   Measurement of Height. For purposes of this Subsection, a wall or fence
that is located within five feet of a public street right-of-way shall be
measured from the grade of the abutting public right-of-way, except in cases
where severe or unusual slope conditions exist, in which case an alternative
basis for measurement may be determined by the Director. The height of a wall
or fence located along an interior property line shall be measured from the
higher natural or established grade of the two abutting properties.
E.   Special Wall and Fencing Requirements.
   1.   Jacuzzi, spa, swimming pools, and similar features. Jacuzzi, spa,
swimming pool, or similar outdoor water features shall be fenced in compliance
with the Uniform Building Code.
   2.   Outdoor equipment, storage, and work areas. Screening of outdoor uses
and equipment shall be provided in compliance with §
17.300.035 (Screening).
   3.   Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing may be approved as deemed
necessary and appropriate by the Director.
   4.   Address numbers. If a fence or wall obstructs the view of a property
address from the street right-of-way, the address numbers shall be located on
the fence so that they are clearly visible from the street right-of-way.
F.   Lighting Fixtures.
   1.   Along street-facing property line. Decorative lighting fixtures may be
placed on top of a fence along a street-facing property line, provided that the
fixtures:
      a.   Are an integral part of the fence design;
      b.   Extend no more than 16 inches above the maximum height allowed; and
      c.   Reflect light down and away from adjoining property so that the
light emitted does not create a public nuisance or offense, in compliance with
other applicable CCMC provisions.
   2.   Along interior property line. Lighting fixtures may be attached to the
side of a fence along an interior property line, provided that they do not
project above the top of the fence.
G.   Security Fencing. Fences shall not incorporate electrical currents, razor
ribbon, barbed wire, and/or pointed, protruding, or sharp objects or elements.
Exception: Wrought iron fences may incorporate decorative arrowhead and curved
point tips.
H.   Administrative Waiver. The Director may administratively approve fences
and walls that exceed the maximum heights identified in this Subsection, if at
least one of the following circumstances exists:
   1.   A City-verified nuisance or criminal activity exists on the property or
within the nearby area;
   2.   The property has exceptional or extraordinary geographical
circumstances;
   3.   A residential front setback is located on a designated primary
arterial. The fence may be of solid or opaque material, but shall not exceed
four feet in height; or
   4.   The fence or wall is located within a street-abutting setback of a
guard-gated residential development, provided that the fence or wall:
      a.   Has a landscaped setback at least equal in depth, on average, to the
height of the fence;
      b.   Is decorative, made of brick, stone, stucco, painted steel/aluminum,
or wrought-iron; and
      c.   Does not exceed eight feet in height.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006;
Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.300.035 SCREENING.
A.   Compliance. This Section establishes standards for the screening and
separation of adjoining residential and non-residential land uses on adjacent
parcels, and standards for equipment, utilities, refuse, service, loading, and
outdoor storage areas.
B.   Screening Between Different Land Uses.
   1.   Except as limited by height per CCMC §
17.300.030.B. Table 3-2, an opaque screen consisting of materials, such as
solid masonry wall, fence, and/or plant material, a minimum of six feet in
height, shall be installed along the parcel boundaries of a commercial or
industrial development that abuts a residential zoning district or stand-alone
residential use in a mixed use zone.
   2.   The maximum height of the walls shall comply with the provisions of §
17.300.030 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).
   3.   The walls shall be architecturally treated on both sides.
   4.   Plant materials shall be installed adjacent to screening walls and
fences in compliance with
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
C.   Utilities, Equipment, Service, Loading, and Refuse Areas.
   1.   Location of above-ground utilities, equipment, loading, and service
areas. Except as stated in CCMC §
17.300.035.C.1.c, in mixed use zones, all above-ground utilities and mechanical
equipment (e.g., electric and gas meters, fire sprinkler valves, irrigation
backflow prevention devices, etc.), loading docks and ramps, and service areas
shall be integrated into building and landscape design and located to minimize
impact on the pedestrian experience and neighboring properties by following the
standards below (except as required by utility providers, building and fire
codes):
      a.   Utilities and equipment, service, and non-passenger loading areas
shall be located inside of buildings or on non-primary street frontages,
alleys, parking areas, and/or at the rear or side of buildings and shall be
screened from view per §
17.300.035.C.2. (Screening of above-ground utilities, equipment, loading, and
service areas) below.
      b.   Utilities and equipment, service, and non-passenger loading areas
shall not be located within the front or street side setback area of the lot or
development site. Additionally, utilities and equipment, service, and non-
passenger loading areas shall not be located along mid-block pedestrian
connections and/or within 50 feet of a street corner. Loading docks shall be
internal to the building envelope, and equipped with closable doors, unless
there are clear and identifiable obstructions or site constraints that preclude
internal location of the loading dock.
      c.   Notwithstanding CCMC §
17.300.035.C.1.a and b, in all residential zones (R1, R2, RLD, RMD, RHD) and in
residential only developments in mixed use zones, equipment projections shall
be allowed pursuant to allowed projections in CCMC §
17.300.020.E. Table 3-1.
   2.   Screening of above-ground utilities, equipment, loading, and service
areas. All utilities, equipment, loading, and service areas not housed inside
buildings shall meet the following screening standards:
      a.   Loading areas. Loading areas shall be screened with a solid masonry
wall, at least six feet in height.
      b.   All other above-ground utilities, equipment, and service areas:
         i.   Screening shall be equal to or higher than the height of the
equipment to be screened, unless specified otherwise.
         ii.   Screening shall be made of a primary exterior finish material
used on other portions of the building(s), architectural grade wood or masonry,
metal, or landscape screening that forms an opaque barrier when planted. Plant
materials shall be installed adjacent to screening walls and fences, in
compliance with
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
         iii.   All vents, flashing, electrical conduits, etc., shall be
painted to match the color of the adjacent surface.
   3.   Rooftop equipment. Rooftop elements, including roof access, mechanical
equipment, and other features needed for the function of the building, shall be
located to minimize visual impact by meeting the following requirements, with
the exception of development in the R1 and R2 zones (See §
17.300.025.C.1.c. for allowable placement for roof-mounted and upper-story
mechanical equipment in the R1 and R2 zones). Mechanical equipment less than
two feet in height, solar panels, wind generators, or green roof features shall
be exempt from these requirements.
      a.   Mechanical equipment shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from
the roof edge or screened through the use of parapet walls, towers, or other
architectural features such that it is not visible from any point at or below
the roof level of the subject building (see §
17.300.035.C.2. (Screening of above-ground utilities, equipment, loading, and
service areas)).
      b.   If equipment is visible from adjacent taller buildings or from
higher grades, it shall be painted to match the rooftop in color and shall be
grouped together as practical.
   4.   Refuse and recycling. Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be
integrated into building and landscape design and located to minimize impact on
the pedestrian experience and neighboring properties by complying with the
following standards:
      a.   Refuse and recycling enclosures are prohibited along primary
frontages.
      b.   Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be located inside of buildings
or inside of covered enclosures located along alleys, in parking areas, or at
the rear and side of buildings.
      c.   Refuse and recycling material containers shared by multiple dwelling
units shall be enclosed and screened per §
17.300.035.C.2. (Screening of above-ground utilities, equipment, loading, and
service areas).
      d.   Sizing of the enclosures shall conform to the requirements of the
Environmental Programs and Operations (EPO) Division of the Culver City Public
Works Department.
      e.   Enclosures shall be adequate in height to fully screen containers
and materials.
      f.   Refuse and recycling enclosures shall incorporate roof structures to
help improve stormwater quality and to screen the enclosure from views from
above.
      g.   Refuse and recycling enclosures shall be opaque and finished using
materials and colors that are from the same color and material palette as the
primary building(s). Enclosure gates shall also be opaque.
      h.   Enclosure doors shall not swing into any public right-of-way,
driveway approaches, or drive aisles. In these cases, sliding doors may be used
with EPO approval.
      i.   Refuse and recycling material containers stored within individual
yards shall be screened from street view.
D.   Outdoor Storage. Uses with outdoor storage of materials shall be screened
per §
17.400.080 (Outdoor Storage).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-001,
Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.300.040 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
A.   General Standards for Outdoor Lighting.  Exterior lighting shall comply
with the following requirements:
   1.   All lighting shall be energy-efficient (e.g., LED, or other lighting
technology) with a rated average bulb life of not less than 10,000 hours.
   2.   All lighting shall be shielded and/or recessed so that direct glare and
reflections are confined to the maximum extent feasible within the boundaries
of the site, and shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties
and public rights-of-way.
   3.   Permanently installed lighting shall not blink, flash, or be of
unusually high intensity or brightness.
   4.   All outdoor lighting for non-residential uses shall be on a time clock
or photo-sensor system and turned off during daylight hours and during hours
when the building(s) is not in use and the lighting is not required for
security.
   5.   All lighting fixtures on the site should be uniform or compatible with
respect to base support, finish material texture, color, and/or style of poles
and luminaires. Landscaping and pedestrian walkway lights shall be less than
four feet in height.
   6.   Maximum Height. Freestanding light poles and luminaires shall not
exceed the following maximum heights:
      a.   Fifteen feet for residential and mixed-use projects.
      b.   Eighteen feet for non-residential projects, or a lesser height
determined by the Director, to mitigate any impacts to adjoining properties.
   7.   Security Lighting.
      a.   Multiple-Family Residential Developments. Aisles, passageways, and
entryways/recesses related to and within the building complex shall be
illuminated with an intensity of at least one-quarter foot-candles at the
ground level during the hours of darkness.
      b.   Non-Residential Developments. All exterior doors, during the hours
of darkness, shall be illuminated with a minimum of one-quarter foot-candles of
light.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.310: LANDSCAPING
Section
   
17.310.005    Purpose
   
17.310.010   Applicability
   
17.310.015    Definitions
   
17.310.020    Landscape Area Requirements
   
17.310.025     Landscape Standards
   
17.310.030     Landscape Plan Application Requirements
§ 17.310.005 PURPOSE.
The purposes of this Chapter are to:
A.   Establish uniform landscape standards for new projects, as well as provide
a mechanism to require the upgrade of existing landscaping in developments when
improvements are proposed.
B.   Enhance the aesthetic appearance of developments throughout the City by
providing standards related to the quality and functional aspects of
landscaping.
C.   Increase compatibility between abutting land uses, and between land uses
and public rights-of-way, by providing landscape screening or buffers.
D.   Provide for the conservation of water resources through the efficient use
of irrigation, appropriate mix of plant materials, recycling water elements,
and regular maintenance of landscaped areas.
E.   Enhance and increase the compatibility of abutting land uses and public
rights-of-way by providing landscape screening and buffers where appropriate.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.310.010 APPLICABILITY.
A.   New Projects. All new proposed development shall provide landscaping in
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter as applicable.
B.   Existing Uses. Improvements to existing use shall provide landscaping in
compliance with the requirements of §
17.610.020, Table 6-1 (Requirements for Major and Minor Improvements). If the
amount of required landscaping cannot be accommodated because of existing
buildings or other physical constraints of a site, the applicant shall provide
landscaping toward meeting the landscape requirements that the Director
determines can be reasonably accommodated.
C.   Exceptions. This Chapter shall not apply to landscaping for single-family
and two-family projects other than for specific setback requirements (§
17.310.020.A.) and maintenance requirements (§
17.310.025.E.).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.310.015 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Hardscape. Constructed landscape elements, including items such as colored
or textured concrete, pavers, wood decks, rockwork, masonry planters, wood box
planters, water features, walls, and fences.
   Hardscape Areas. Areas including patios, decks, walkways and paving.
   Hydrozone. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water
needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule.
   Infiltration Rate.  The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a
depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
   Landscaped Area.  The open space area (entire parcel less the building
footprint, driveway, and parking area) developed with ornamental plant material
and hardscape. Water features are included in the calculation of the landscaped
area.
   Landscaping. Ornamental live plant materials (trees, shrubs, vines, ground
cover or turf), in containers or at grade, and decorative hardscape areas.
   Overspray. Water that is delivered beyond the planted area.
   Plant Materials.  Trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, turf or any other
ornamental live plants.
   Planted Area. Areas, including live ornamental plant materials, installed
within open space landscaped areas.
   Parkway.  Land area between street curb and sidewalk.
   Runoff.  Water that is not absorbed by the planted area to which it is
applied, and flows from the area. For example, runoff may result from water
that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration
rate) or where there is a severe slope.
   Street Trees. Trees planted within a public street right-of-way.
   Turf.  A single-bladed grass or sod.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.310.020 LANDSCAPE AREA REQUIREMENTS.
Landscaping shall be provided in the locations specified below.
A.   Setbacks. Setbacks shall comply with the maximum front yard paving
requirements by zoning district in Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land
Uses and Zone-Specific Standards). All front and street side setback areas not
occupied by driveways, parking areas, walkways, building projections and
approved hardscape areas, shall be landscaped in compliance with this Chapter.
Interior side and rear setbacks shall be landscaped when visible to the public.
B.   Unused Areas.  All areas of a project site or a vacant lot not intended
for a specific use, including areas held for future development, shall be
landscaped.
C.   Parking Areas and Parkways. Parking areas shall be landscaped in
compliance with the following requirements:
   1.   Plant materials.  Plant materials shall be evenly distributed
throughout the parking lot to the extent feasible using a combination of trees,
shrubs, and ground cover.
   2.   Curbing.  Areas containing plant materials shall be bordered by a
concrete curb at least six inches high and six inches wide. Alternative barrier
design to protect landscaped areas from damage by vehicles may be approved by
the Director.
   3.   Location of planted area. Parking lot landscaping shall be designed so
that pedestrians are not required to cross planted areas to reach building
entrances from parked cars. This should be achieved through proper orientation
of the planted fingers and islands.
   4.   Bumper overhang areas. To increase the parking lot planted area, a
maximum of one and a half feet of the parking stall depth may be planted with
low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of paving, allowing a two-foot bumper
overhang, including the six-inch required curbing, while maintaining the
required parking dimensions. See Figure 3-6 (Bumper Overhang Area).
   Figure 3-6 Bumper Overhang Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4911.jpg]
 
   5.   Parking lot perimeter landscaping. Parking area perimeters shall be
planted as follows. The Director may adjust the tree spacing requirements of
this Subsection, based upon the growth characteristics and proper maintenance
practices for the species of trees proposed. See Figure 3-7 (Parking Lot
Perimeter Landscaping Requirements) at top of next page.
   Figure 3-7 Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping Requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4913.jpg]
 
      a.   Adjacent to streets.  Parking areas for non-residential uses
adjoining a public street shall be designed to provide a landscaped planting
strip between the street right-of-way and parking area with a minimum width of
five feet (inside dimension).
         i.   Screening plant materials. The landscaping shall be designed and
maintained to screen cars from view from the street, and plant materials shall
be selected to provide a minimum height of 36 inches at time of planting. The
Director may approve screening of less than 36 inches, when deemed necessary to
protect the public interest. Screening materials may include a combination of
plant materials, earth berms, solid masonry walls, raised planters, or other
screening devices to meet the intent of this requirement; however, screening
materials may not use only solid masonry walls without plant cover.
         ii.   Shade trees. Shade trees shall be provided at a minimum rate of
one for every 20 linear feet of landscaped area and may include areas of
clustered trees.
      b.   Adjacent to residential use.  Parking areas for non-residential uses
adjoining residential uses shall be designed to provide a landscaped planting
strip between the parking area and the common property line bordering the
residential use with a minimum width of five feet (inside dimension). One tree
shall be provided for each 20 linear feet of the landscaped planting strip.
         i.   A solid masonry wall with a minimum height of six feet shall be
provided along the property line to address land use compatibility issues, such
as nuisance noise and light or glare.
         ii.   For properties adjoining alleys, a planting strip of two feet
shall be provided on the public right-of-way side of a required masonry wall.
   6.   Interior parking lot planted areas.  Planted areas are required within
parking lots to provide shade, reduce pavement heat gain, and soften the
appearance of large paved areas. See
Figure 3-8 (Examples of Interior Parking Lot Landscaping) below.
      a.   Planter islands.  Planter islands with a minimum width of five feet
(inside dimension) and at least one tree shall be provided at the beginning and
end of every parking row. In addition, a planter island with a minimum width of
five feet (inside dimension) with a shade tree shall be provided at minimum
every four spaces within a parking row.
      b.   Larger projects.  Parking lots with more than 150 spaces shall
provide a concentration of landscape elements at primary entrances. Such
elements may include specimen trees, flowering plants, enhanced paving, and
project identification, as determined by the Director.
   Figure 3-8 Examples of Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4915.jpg]
 
(Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No.
2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.310.025 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.
A.   General Requirements.
   1.   Minimum width of landscaped areas. Landscaped areas that may be counted
toward required landscaping shall have a minimum width of three feet, exclusive
of the curb, wall, and footing below. In addition, the landscaped tree planters
shall have a minimum width of four feet in compliance with §
17.310.025.B.1.d. below.
   2.   Live Plant Material. All required landscape areas per §
17.310.020 (Landscape Area Requirements) and §
17.210.030.A. (Open Space Requirements for Multiple-Family Residential) shall
be planted with a minimum 75% live plant material. The remaining 25% of
required landscape areas or setbacks may consist of crushed rock, redwood
chips, pebbles, stone, and similar natural non-living material.
   3.   Concrete curb required.  When in or adjacent to a parking area or drive
aisle, planted areas shall be protected with a minimum six-inch high concrete
curb above the surrounding pavement or ground level.
   4.   Maintenance required. Landscaping shall be continuously maintained free
of weeds, debris, litter, or temporary signage. This is intended to include
proper pruning of trees and shrubs, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of
litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular
water of all plants.
   5.   Irrigation required. All planted areas shall be provided with a
permanent automatic irrigation system. This watering system shall consist of
piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers, bubblers,
drip emitters, or hose bibs, to insure a sufficient amount of water for plants
within the planted area.
B.   Planting Material.
   1.   Trees.
      a.   Trees shall be planted a minimum of three feet from any structure or
wall.
      b.   Newly planted trees shall be staked in compliance with City
standards. Stakes and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct
functions. Stakes and ties shall be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or
girdling on trunks or branches, and removed after trees are well-established.
      c.   The minimum width of planters containing trees shall be four feet
clear, interior dimensions, exclusive of curbs, walls, and footing below.
      d.   Trees in landscape planters less than ten feet in width, or located
closer than five feet from pavement, curbs, or a permanent structure, shall be
provided with root barriers.
      e.   Number of trees.
         i.   Parking area:  Refer to §
17.310.020.C. (Parking Areas and Parkways).
         ii.   Front/Street Side setbacks:  One per 40 linear feet of frontage
when the required setback is ten feet or greater in depth.
         iii.   Balance of site: One per 500 square feet of landscaped area.
See also landscaping requirements for common open space in §
17.210.030.A. (Open Space Requirements for Multiple-Family Residential).
         iv.   Street trees: One per 25 to 40 foot length of street frontage,
depending on the tree species and canopy width at maturity, as per the Culver
City Urban Forest Master Plan or Washington National Transit Oriented
Development District Streetscape Plan.
      f.   Minimum tree container sizes for all trees on a site shall be
specified as follows:
         i.   At least 20% of the trees shall be 36-inch box size or larger.
         ii.   At least 30% of the trees shall be 24-inch box size or larger.
         iii.   The remaining 50% shall be 15-gallon size or larger. The
Director may accept certain species of on-site trees at less than 15-gallon
size, if it is determined that the survival/establishment chances are enhanced
when planted at a smaller size.
         iv.   The Director may reduce the minimum tree container sizes
required based on site conditions.
      g.   Street trees shall be 24-inch box size or larger.
   2.   Ground cover and shrubs.
      a.   All planted areas should emphasize drought-tolerant plant materials
wherever possible.
      b.   Artificial shrubs, ground cover, or turf shall not be allowed.
      c.   All shrubs shall be planted from a minimum five-gallon-size
containers. One-gallon-size containers may be allowed for shrubs that are not
commonly available in five-gallon-size containers, subject to approval by the
Director.
C.   Plant selection and grouping.
   1.   Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in separate
high, medium, and low hydrozones.
   2.   Plants shall be selected appropriately, based upon their adaptability
to the climatic, geological, and topographical conditions of the site. The use
of drought-tolerant plant materials and locally appropriate California Native
Plants is encouraged wherever possible.
D.   Irrigation.
   1.   Runoff and overspray.
      a.   Soil types and infiltration rate shall be considered when designing
irrigation systems.
      b.   Irrigation systems shall be designed to eliminate runoff, overspray,
or other similar conditions where any water flows onto adjacent property, non-
irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures.
      c.   To eliminate runoff, proper irrigation equipment and schedules,
including repeat cycles, shall be used to closely match water application rates
to soil infiltration rates.
   2.   Equipment.
      a.   A separate landscape water meter shall be installed for all
projects, except for any project with a landscaped area of less than 5,000
square feet.
      b.   Automatic control systems, including an automatic rain shut-off
device, shall be required for all irrigation systems.
      c.   Plants that require different amounts of water shall be irrigated by
separate valves. If one valve is used for a given area, only plants with
similar water requirements shall be used in that area.
      d.   Anti-drain (check) valves shall be installed at strategic points on
all slopes to prevent low-head drainage.
      e.   Irrigation heads and emitters shall have matched precipitation rates
within each control valve circuit. Sprinkler heads shall be selected for proper
area coverage, application rate, operating pressure, adjustment capability, and
ease of maintenance.
E.   Maintenance.
   1.   Irrigation equipment shall be continuously maintained in good working
condition to assure water conservation, eliminate overspray and runoff.
   2.   Litter and weeds shall be removed from all landscaped areas on a
regular basis.
   3.   Turf areas shall be mowed and fertilized on a regular basis, and kept
green. Accumulations of leaves, twigs, bark, and other similar materials shall
be removed on a regular basis.
   4.   Landscaping shall be maintained in a manner consistent with a project's
approved final landscape plan. Maintenance of the approved planted areas shall
consist of regular watering, pruning, fertilizing, and mulching under a
schedule approved as part of the landscape plan.
   5.   Landscaping maintenance shall include the removal of dead, decayed,
diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, and debris constituting unsightly
appearance, dangerous to public safety and welfare, or detrimental to
neighboring properties or property values. Compliance shall be by removal,
replacement, or maintenance as determined by the Director.
   6.   All plant materials that, due to lack of maintenance, accident, damage,
disease, or other cause, fail to show a healthy appearance and growth shall be
replaced. Replacement plants shall conform to all standards that govern the
original planting installation, approved landscaping plan, or as approved by
the Director.
   7.   Before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued, a landscape maintenance
agreement ensuring continued maintenance of the planted areas shall be filed
with the Division and approved by the Director.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.310.030 LANDSCAPE PLAN APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
A.   Preliminary Landscape Plan. A preliminary landscape plan shall be
submitted as part of an application for all development projects with the
exception of single-family and two-family residential projects, and shall
include the following minimum information:
   1.   Proposed and existing buildings and structures.
   2.   Proposed parking areas.
   3.   Proposed landscaped areas.
   4.   A calculation of the total hardscape and planted areas.
   5.   Preliminary list of plant materials.
B.   Final Landscape Plan. Following approval of a land use permit, final
landscape and irrigation plans, prepared and signed by a California-licensed
landscape architect or licensed landscape contractor, shall be submitted to the
Division prior to the issuance of a building permit. The final landscape and
irrigation plan shall include the following minimum information. Other
information, as deemed necessary by the Director, including a grading design
plan, hardscape plan, and/or soils analysis, may also be required.
   1.   Landscape design plan specifications.  The landscape design (planting
and hardscape) plan(s) shall be drawn on project base sheets at a scale that
accurately and clearly identifies the following:
      a.   Plant materials, trees, shrubs, ground cover, turf, and other
vegetation. In addition to the new plant materials, all existing plants to
remain, and all existing plants to be removed or relocated, shall be
identified. Planting symbols shall be clearly drawn, and plants labeled by
botanical name, common name, container size, spacing, and quantities of each
group of plants indicated.
      b.   Property lines and street names.
      c.   Streets, driveways, walkways, steps, and other paved areas.
      d.   Pools, ponds, water features, fences, and retaining walls.
      e.   Designation of hardscape areas.
      f.   Existing and proposed buildings and structures, including pad
elevations, if applicable.
      g.   Natural features, including rock outcroppings, existing trees, and
existing shrubs, that will remain.
      h.   Tree staking, plant installation, soil preparation, and any other
applicable planting and installation details.
      i.   A calculation of the total planted area and percentage of turf area.
      j.   Designation of recreational areas.
      k.   Landscape installation specifications.
      l.   Landscape maintenance specifications, including landscape
contractors' maintenance period.
   2.   Irrigation design plan specifications.  The irrigation design plan
shall be drawn on project base sheets, at the same scale as the landscape
design plan, and shall accurately identify:
      a.   Location and size of separate water meters for the landscaped areas
as required, including service line and size.
      b.   Location and size of the point of connection (POC) for the existing
or modified irrigation system.
      c.   Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system,
including automatic controllers, main and lateral, valves, sprinkler heads,
moisture-sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, backflow prevention
devices, and automatic rain shut-off devices.
      d.   Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water
supply.
      e.   Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour),
and design operating pressure (psi) for each remote control valve and head
radius or water coverage for each head (diameter for full heads).
      f.   Estimated annual water use, expressed in inches per square foot of
landscaped area per year.
      g.   Hydrozones of high, medium, and low water usage shall be
differentiated by color or patterning. All plants listed on the plant list or
legend shall be classified and grouped by category of hydrozone.
C.   Certificate of Completion. A Certificate of Completion, signed and sealed
by the licensed landscape architect or licensed landscape contractor that
prepared the plans, and submitted after installation and inspection of the
project, shall be submitted prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.320: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section
   
17.320.005   Purpose
   
17.320.010   Applicability
   
17.320.015   General Parking Regulations
   
17.320.020   Number of Parking Spaces Required
   
17.320.025   Alternative Parking Provisions
   
17.320.030   Accessible Parking
   
17.320.035   Parking Design and Layout Guidelines
   
17.320.040   Driveway and Site Access Standards
   
17.320.045   Bicycle Parking
   
17.320.050   Loading Area Requirements
Cross-reference:
General parking and loading regulations, see
Chapter 7.03
§ 17.320.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter establishes regulations to ensure that parking and loading
facilities are properly designed and located to meet the needs of specific
uses.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.320.010 APPLICABILITY.
Every use and structure, including a change or expansion of a use or structure,
shall provide loading areas in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter,
as applicable. A use or structure, including a change or expansion of a use or
structure, that provides parking, shall comply with the provisions of this
Chapter. A use shall not be commenced, and structures shall not be occupied,
until improvements required by this Chapter are satisfactorily completed.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.320.015 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
A.   Parking and Loading Spaces to be Permanent. Parking and loading spaces
shall be permanently available, marked, and maintained for parking or loading
purposes. The Director may approve the temporary reduction of parking or
loading spaces, in conjunction with a seasonal or intermittent use, with the
approval of a Temporary Use Permit (see
Chapter 17.520), or during construction activities.
B.   Loading to be Unrestricted. Owners, lessees, tenants, or persons having
control of the operation of a premise, for which loading spaces are required,
shall not prevent, prohibit, or restrict authorized persons from using these
spaces.
C.   Restriction of Parking Area Use. Off-street parking, circulation, and
access areas shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking and
maneuvering of motorized, operative vehicles. For all non-residential uses, and
in the front setback area of residential uses, parking areas shall not be used
for the sale, lease, display, repair, or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats,
campers, mobile homes, merchandise, or equipment, or for any other use not
authorized by the provisions of this Title.
D.   Unimproved Areas. Portions of a parking area not improved for parking or
loading facilities or needed for vehicular circulation shall be landscaped in
compliance with plans approved by the City.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008;
Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.320.020 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
There shall be no minimum required parking for any use, except as may be
determined through a Comprehensive Plan. Any parking provided voluntarily or
otherwise, shall comply with the development standards outlined in this Chapter
or other applicable section of this Title.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-004 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008
§ 1 (part); Ord. 2014-002, § (part); Ord. No. 2017-003 § 2; Ord. No. 2018-001 §
2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-003 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2020-003 § 2 (part); Ord. No.
2020-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2021-003 (part); Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3 (part);
Ord. No. 2022-003 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.320.025 ALTERNATIVE PARKING PROVISIONS.
Where conditions preclude the provision of parking spaces in accordance with
the standards of §
17.320.035, the following procedures for alternative parking are available,
subject to City approval.
A.   Hayden Tract and Smiley Blackwelder Parking Districts. Parking Districts
for the parking impacted Hayden Tract and Smiley Blackwelder areas shall be
established as outlined in Map 3-1 and Map 3-2. In addition to the general
parking standards of this Chapter parking in the Districts are subject to the
following Parking District standards.
   1.   Automated Parking. Automated and semi-automated and stacked parking may
be provided on site or off-site within the Parking Districts subject to Parking
Plan approval by the Director subject to the following.
      a.   Site Plan. Submittal of a site plan prepared by a design
professional indicating all structures; the automated, semi-automated or
stacked parking location; number of parking stalls; parking facility address
and address of the property served by the parking; site ingress and egress
location(s); proposed queuing location (if any); and the identification of
adjacent land uses.
      b.   Operations Plan. Submittal of a parking operations plan describing
the number of parking attendants and working hours, and methods for automobile
storage and retrieval during nonbusiness hours.
      c.   Permanent Structure. All automated and semi-automated parking shall
be located within a permanent structure and operated with parking attendant
service during all hours of parking operation.
      d.   Technical Studies. Submittal of technical studies demonstrating that
the proposed design and operation of the automated or semi-automated parking
will not be detrimental to surrounding uses and properties in the vicinity
relative to noise, visual impacts, area parking and circulation and existing
on-site improvements.
      e.   Back-up Power. Documentation that the automated semi-automated or
stacked parking is serviced with alternative back-up power to allow emergency
operation of the parking system.
      f.   Inspection Report. A maintenance inspection report for any automated
semi-automated or stacked parking facility prepared at the sole expense of the
applicant shall be submitted annually to the Planning Division for review.
   2.   Managed Parking. Managed or valet parking may be provided for all on-
site or off-site parking within the Parking Districts subject to Parking Plan
approval by the Director which shall include: (a) the total parking spaces
provided; (b) the hours and method of parking operation; (c) number of parking
attendants serving the parking facility; and (d) methods for management of the
parking facility during non-operating hours.
   3.   Compact Spaces. Except as otherwise provided in §
17.320.035 compact spaces of seven feet, six inches by 15 feet, may be provided
for up to 30% of on-site or off-site parking within the Parking Districts.
   Map 3-1 Hayden Tract Parking District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4917.jpg]
   Map 3-2 Smiley Blackwelder Parking District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4919.jpg]
B.   Automated, Semi-Automated, and Stacked Parking. Automated, semi-automated,
and stacked parking may be provided for non-residential uses subject to
Administrative Use Permit approval pursuant to
Chapter 17.530 subject to the following:
   1.   Site Plan. Submittal of a site plan prepared by a design professional
indicating all structures; the automated, semi-automated or stacked parking
location; number of parking stalls; parking facility address and address of the
property served by the parking; site ingress and egress location(s); proposed
queuing location (if any); and the identification of adjacent land uses.
   2.   Operations Plan. Submittal of a parking operations plan describing the
number of parking attendants and working hours; methods for automobile storage
and retrieval during nonbusiness hours; provisions for over-sized vehicle
parking, handicapped parking, and short term parking (if applicable); vehicle
retrieval and through-put times; and other information determined by the
Director to be necessary.
   3.   Permanent Structure and Screening. All automated, semi-automated, and
stacked parking shall be located within a permanent structure and screened in a
manner to mitigate any potential visual impacts to surrounding properties.
Alternatives to a permanent structure including but not limited to a
freestanding permanent architectural screening structure or landscaping may be
considered as part of the Administrative Use Permit approval on a case by case
basis if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director that the
alternative provides a sufficient level of screening.
   4.   Technical Studies. Submittal of technical studies demonstrating that
the proposed design and operation of the automated, semi-automated, or stacked
parking will not be detrimental to surrounding uses and properties in the
vicinity relative to noise, visual impacts, area parking and circulation, and
existing on-site improvements.
   5.   Back-up Power. Documentation that the automated, semi-automated, or
stacked parking is serviced with alternative back-up power to allow emergency
operation of the parking system.
   6.   Inspection Report. A maintenance inspection report for any automated,
semi-automated, or stacked parking facility prepared at the sole expense of the
applicant shall be submitted annually to the Planning Division for review.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2013-010
§ 1; Ord. No. 2014-002, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-002 § 2 (part); Ord. No.
2019-009 § 2; Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.320.030 ACCESSIBLE PARKING.
Parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to persons with
disabilities as follows.
A.   Number of Spaces and Design Standards. Parking spaces for persons with
disabilities shall be provided in compliance with the Uniform Building Code and
the Federal Accessibility Guidelines.
B.   Residential Multiple-Family Uses. For each dwelling unit required to be
designed to accommodate the persons with disabilities or required to be made
adaptable for the persons with disabilities, the required parking shall be
provided in compliance with Cal. Admin. Code, Title 24, Part 2.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2014-002, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-
008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.320.035 PARKING DESIGN AND LAYOUT GUIDELINES.
When parking is provided, the following requirements shall apply unless
otherwise noted in this Title.
A.   Access to Parking Areas and Parking Spaces.
   1.   Access to parking areas. Parking areas shall be designed to prevent
access at any point other than at designated access drives.
   2.   Parking space location. Parking spaces shall not be located within ten
feet of an access driveway, measured from the property line. See Figure 3-9
(Parking Space Location) below. Uncovered parking spaces in the R1 and R2 zones
shall comply with §
17.320.035.P.3. (Allowable R1 and R2 uncovered parking placement).
   Figure 3-9 Parking Space Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4921.jpg]
   3.   Internal maneuvering area. Parking areas shall provide suitable
maneuvering room so that vehicles enter the street in a forward direction,
except for single-family homes, two-family homes, or triplexes on non-arterial
streets, which may be designed to permit backing a vehicle into a public street
right-of-way.
B.   Access to Adjacent Sites. Applicants for non-residential developments are
encouraged to provide shared vehicle and pedestrian access to adjacent non-
residential properties for convenience, safety, and efficient circulation.
C.    Parking Space and Lot Dimensions.
   1.   Parking spaces.
      a.   Residential spaces. Parking spaces within carports shall have
minimum dimensions of nine feet in width by 18 feet in length for each vehicle.
Parking spaces within garages shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet in
width by 18 feet in length for each vehicle with minimum interior dimensions
for a two-car garage of 20 feet, six inches in width by 18 feet in depth; and
for a one-car garage ten feet, six inches in width by 18 feet in depth.
Uncovered parking spaces shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet, six
inches in width by 18 feet in depth. Access to a garage or carport located
behind a dwelling unit shall have a backup aisle of 17 feet with a 45 degree
angle leading to a driveway. See Figure 3-10 (Residential Garage/Carport and
Driveway) below.
   Figure 3-10 Residential Garage/Carport and Driveway
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4923.jpg]
      b.   Tandem parking spaces. Each tandem parking space shall be nine feet
in width by 18 feet in depth.
         i.   Within residential districts or within the residential parking
area of a mixed use development, tandem parking spaces may be provided. Tandem
parking may be arranged to be no more than two spaces in depth.
         ii.   For non-residential uses, tandem parking may be provided where
authorized through a Parking Plan approval by the Director. The use of the
tandem parking for non-residential uses shall require that the operator of the
parking facility provide a valet or attendant at all times that the parking is
accessible to users, except where the Director determines that the nature of
the use and its operation will not require attended parking. Tandem parking may
be arranged to be no more than three spaces in depth.
      c.   Compact parking spaces. For non-residential uses, compact spaces may
be provided for up to 25% of the off-street parking provided. Compact spaces
shall measure a minimum of seven feet, six inches in width by 15 feet in
length, and shall not be eligible for further reductions (e.g. through an
Administrative Modification or other entitlement). Compact spaces shall be
clearly marked as compact.
      d.   All other parking spaces.  Minimum parking space dimensions shall be
as shown in
Table 3-3 (Parking Space and Drive Aisle Dimensions) and
Figure 3-11 (Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions).
   2.   Parking lot aisles. Drive aisles within parking areas shall be designed
and constructed in compliance with the following standards.
      a.   Aisle width.  Parking area aisles shall comply with the minimum
dimensional requirements in
Table 3-3 (Parking Space and Drive Aisle Dimensions) and
Figure 3-11 (Parking Space and Aisle Dimension).
      b.   Visibility. Drive aisles shall be designed and located so that
adequate visibility is ensured for pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists when
entering individual parking spaces, circulating within a parking facility, and
entering or leaving a parking facility.
   Table 3-3 Parking Space and Drive Aisle Dimensions
         Minimum Dimensions
Angle of A                         C            D
Parking  Stall Width  B            Stall Depth  Drive Aisle Width and Backup
         (1)          Stall Length (aisle to    One Way (2)(3) Two Way (2)(3)
                                   curb)
           Minimum Dimensions
Angle of   A                         C            D
Parking    Stall Width  B            Stall Depth  Drive Aisle Width and Backup
           (1)          Stall Length (aisle to    One Way (2)(3) Two Way (2)(3)
                                     curb)
0 degrees  8 feet, 6                 8 feet, 6
(parallel  inches       26 feet      inches       12 feet        18 feet
parking)
30 degrees 8 feet, 6    18 feet      17 feet      13 feet        20 feet
           inches
45 degrees 8 feet, 6    18 feet      19 feet      13 feet        20 feet
           inches
60 degrees 8 feet, 6    18 feet      20 feet      17 feet        21 feet
           inches
90 degrees 8 feet, 6    18 feet      18 feet      24 feet        24 feet
           inches
 
Notes:
(1)   Each parking space that is adjoined on either side of its longer
dimension by a fence, wall, partition, column, post or similar obstruction, and
the obstruction is located less than 14 feet from the access aisle, measured
along the length of the stall, shall have its minimum width increased by at
least 10 inches on the side of the obstruction.
(2)   The Director may require greater aisle widths where slopes or other
obstructions are encountered.
(3)   For all parking spaces that back out onto an alley, the width of the
alley shall be included in the minimum dimensions required for aisle width and
backup.
   Figure 3-11 Parking Space and Aisle Dimension
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4925.jpg]
 
D.   Curbing.
   1.   Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches
wide, with breaks to allow on-site drainage, shall be provided along the edges
of parking spaces adjacent to fences, walls, other structures, property lines,
pedestrian walkways and planted areas. Curbing shall be placed within the
parking space a minimum of two feet from the front of the space. Curbs are not
required where two parking spaces are contiguous at the width ("head to head").
Alternative barrier designs to protect planted areas may be approved by the
Director.
   2.   To increase the parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of two feet of
the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in
lieu of paving, allowing a two-foot bumper overhang while maintaining the
required parking dimensions per §
17.310.020.C.4 (Bumper overhang areas). See
Figure 3-6 (Bumper Overhand Area).
E.   Slopes of Driveways, Ramps, and Parking Areas.  The slopes of driveways,
ramps, and parking areas shall comply with the following requirements.
   1.   Driveways and ramps. Driveways and ramps shall not exceed a maximum
slope of 20%, measured along the driveway centerline. Where there is a change
in the slope of the driveway, it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Director that vehicles will be able to pass over the change in slope
without interference with an average vehicle's undercarriage. The 20 feet of
driveway or ramp closest to the exit shall not exceed a slope of 3% or as
determined appropriate by the Director.
   2.   Parking areas.  Parking areas shall have a maximum grade of 5%,
measured in any direction.
F.   Landscaping.  Parking area landscaping shall be provided in compliance
with
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
G.   Lighting. Parking areas within non-residential projects shall have
lighting that provides adequate illumination for security and safety, pursuant
to the standards in §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting).
H.   Directional Areas and Signs.
   1.   Parking spaces, aisles, approach lanes, and maneuvering areas shall be
clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure the safe and
efficient flow of vehicles.
   2.   The Director may require the installation of traffic signs, in addition
to directional arrows, to ensure the safe and efficient ingress and egress and
circulation of vehicles in a parking facility.
I.   Striping and Identification. Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with
a double striped line on each side of the parking space. The double striped
line shall consist of two four-inch-wide lines spaced six inches apart and
painted on the surface of the parking facility. Parking space width shall be
measured from the centerline between the two four-inch lines. Circulation
aisles, approach lanes, and turning areas shall be clearly marked with
directional arrows and lines to ensure safe traffic movement.
J.   Surfacing. Parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be paved and
permanently maintained with a minimum thickness of two inches of asphalt,
concrete, or other all-weather surface, over a minimum thickness of four inches
of a base material; or paved and permanently maintained with a minimum
thickness of four inches of Portland cement or as deemed appropriate by the
Director. Alternative surfaces for parking and loading areas may be approved by
the Community Development Director and the Public Works Director; provided that
the material used meets aesthetic standards as determined by the Director,
improves drainage and permeability, and responds to any historic guidelines for
the property and its setting.
K.   Interior Parking Clearance. Covered parking areas shall be provided with a
minimum of seven feet of unobstructed clearance from finished floor surface to
any ceiling, beam, entranceway, pipe, suspended sign or other obstruction,
improvement, or device overhead, except as approved by the Director for storage
cabinets or other suspended or cantilevered obstructions. Where a covered
parking area is intended for, or is accessible to, general public use, each
entrance shall be clearly posted with a sign indicating the minimum interior
clearance actually provided.
L.   Treatment of Parking Areas. In order to further the objective of reducing
the visual impacts of parking, driveways, and garage doors, projects shall
incorporate two or more of the following strategies:
   1.   Locate parking areas and garages underground, completely wrapped with
occupiable enclosed buildings, or to the rear half of the site.
   2.   Use garage doors constructed of enhanced materials other than vinyl,
fiberglass, or painted metal. Enhanced materials include wood, doors that
incorporate windows consistent with the architecture of the building, trellis
or trim around the door, carriage-style garage doors, or deeply recessed (eight
inches) doors.
   3.   Orient garage doors perpendicular to the front property line.
   4.   Design driveways and vehicle maneuvering areas with use of pattern and
such materials as integral color concrete, slate, brick, pervious concrete, or
areas of permeable surface.
   5.   Locate driveways on the side of the project lot so that the driveway is
not the central feature visible from the street.
   6.   Use landscaping to screen parking areas from the street (see §
17.310.020.C. (Parking Areas and Parkways).
   7.   Use single car width garage doors.
M.   Entrance Gates and Barriers. Gates or barriers at the entrance to shared
parking, if included, shall be set back a minimum of 18 feet from the property
line to prevent queuing into the public right-of-way and a minimum of 18 feet
from the building wall of the structure to minimize visibility from the public
right-of-way.
N.   Subterranean Parking. Subterranean parking structures shall comply with
all requirements of this Section, and the following additional requirements
when located within a required setback.
   1.   Invisibility. Subterranean parking shall not extend more than three
feet above finished grade.
   2.   Accommodate landscaping.  The subterranean structure shall be designed
to accommodate landscaping or other setback area improvements as required by
this Title.
   3.   Covered structure.  When located within a required street-facing
setback area, the subterranean structure shall be fully covered by landscaping.
O.   Parking Structures. Parking structures providing parking for residential
and non-residential uses shall comply with all requirements of this Section,
and the following additional requirements.
   1.   Parking structures shall comply with the setback requirements and
height limits of the applicable zoning district.
   2.   Above-ground parking structures and above grade portions of
subterranean parking structures shall be screened from the public right-of-way
using one or more of the following strategies:
      a.   Parking garage is wrapped by occupiable buildings or portions
thereof. Occupiable building area used to screen a parking garage shall be a
minimum depth of 30 feet on the ground floor.
      b.   Parking garage is screened with landscaping with a ten-foot minimum
depth.
      c.   Parking garage is screened with a solid or semi-solid building
material/crafted ornamental metal screens/art installation that is consistent
with the chosen architectural style of the project.
      d.   Parking levels above the ground level may extend to the building
facade but shall be designed and treated with the same level of detail,
material quality, and facade articulation as other facade areas (e.g., facade
articulation and modulation, use of real windows with glazing or false windows
defined by frames, lintels, or sills).
      e.   Parking structure lighting shall be screened, shielded, and/or
directed downward to reduce light trespass and glare onto the public right-of-
way and adjacent properties.
   3.   Parking structure facades facing residential zoning district parcels
shall:
      a.   Be enclosed to prevent light spill, noise, or pollutants from
impacting dwellings; and
      b.   Incorporate architectural design elements, including surface
treatments. offset planes, structural articulation, and landscaping to provide
visual interest and compatibility with adjacent dwellings.
P.   Special Parking Requirements for Residential Uses.
   1.   Driveway length. Except as otherwise allowed by this Title, within
residential zoning districts, access to every parking space or to a common/
shared parking area shall be provided by a paved driveway not less than 20 feet
in length, measured from the end of the parking space to the nearest public or
private street right-of-way line from which access to parking is provided,
except uncovered spaces which may be located in accordance with
Figure 3-12. In the R1 Zone, front-facing garages shall be set back at least 25
feet from the front property line.
   2.   No setback parking. Vehicles shall not be parked between the street
property line and the front or side of a residential unit except on a driveway
leading to a garage or carport, or on a designated uncovered parking space.
   3.   Allowable R1 and R2 uncovered parking placement. In the R1 and R2
zones, any uncovered parking provided shall be placed within 15 feet of a
maximum of one interior side yard property line and/or shall be fully screened
from view of the public right-of-way by the primary structure. An additional
five feet of permeable hardscape area may be allowed when no other parking is
provided onsite. Front yard-facing parking not located within 15 feet of an
interior side yard property line shall be fully covered and enclosed. See
Figure 3-12 (Allowable R1 and R2 Uncovered Parking Placement) below. For corner
lots, uncovered parking accessed from the street side and located in the rear
half of the lot may be screened by a solid six-foot-high fence.
   Figure 3-12 Allowable R1 and R2 Uncovered Parking Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4927.jpg]
 
Q.   Electric Vehicle (EV) Parking. Each land use type shall be provided the
number of parking spaces equipped with electric vehicle (EV) charging
infrastructure for each of the three levels defined below, as set forth in this
Section, except where a greater number of spaces are required through the
California Green Building Code, a conditional use permit or other permit
approval. Surplus EV spaces provided at higher EV levels can be credited toward
meeting the required quantity for lower EV levels, such that the overall
minimum cumulative quantity is provided at the minimum levels or higher.
Property owners shall inform tenants of the availability of EV Ready and EV
Capable spaces.
   1.   Definitions.
      a.   "EV Capable." Installation of raceway, conduit, and panel capacity
to accommodate the future installation of a dedicated branch circuit and 208/
240 volt (Level 2) chargers/charging stations.
      b.   "EV Ready." A complete circuit installation, including raceway,
conduit, wiring, receptacle, circuit breakers, dedicated branch circuit, 208/
240 volt 40 amp panel capacity, and any other necessary components to support
the future installation of a Level 2 charger/charging station.
      c.   "Full EV Charger/Charging Station." All necessary components
required for EV Ready, in addition to an already installed charger/charging
station (208/240 volt, Level 2).
   2.   Multiple-Family Residential Uses.
      a.   Quantity of EV Capable: 20% of the parking spaces provided.
      b.   Quantity of EV Ready: 10% of the parking spaces provided.
      c.   Quantity of Full EV Charger/Charging Station: 10% of the parking
spaces provided.
      d.   Requirements for Full EV Chargers/Charging Stations shall not apply
to parking spaces that are located within individual privately accessible
garages that correspond to a specific dwelling unit.
   3.   Non-Residential Uses.
      a.   Quantity of EV Capable: 20% of the parking spaces provided.
      b.   Quantity of EV Ready: 10% of the parking spaces provided.
      c.   Quantity of Full EV Charger/Charging Station: 10% of the parking
spaces provided.(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2014-002, § 2 (part);
Ord. No. 2019-009 § 2; Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3
(part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2023-002, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2024-
001, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.320.040 DRIVEWAY AND SITE ACCESS STANDARDS.
A.   Driveway Widths. Minimum driveway widths shall be as follows:
   1.   Driveway serves 1-20 spaces: 10 feet wide.
   2.   Driveway serves residential use with 20 or more spaces: 18 feet wide.
   3.   Driveway serves non-residential use with 20 or more spaces: 25 feet
wide.
   4.   Driveways serving as parking aisles shall be increased in width as
necessary to provide parking stall backup area, as required by §
17.320.035 (Parking Design and Layout Guidelines).
   5.   Driveway aprons shall conform to standards established in
Chapter 9.08 (Streets, Sidewalks and Parkways) of the CCMC.
B.   Garage Access. A driveway to a residential parking garage located behind a
dwelling shall meet the access and maneuvering standards of §
17.320.035 (Parking Design and Layout Guidelines).
C.   Visibility at Driveways and Intersections. Driveways and driveway
landscaping shall be designed to maintain visibility and minimize interference
with passing pedestrians. When within a 15 foot intersection safety sightline
or five feet of the intersection of a driveway or alley with the public right-
of-way, landscaping shall be no taller than 30 inches in height (see
Figure 3-5 (Measurement of Fences, Walls, and Landscaping Height). Landscaping
adjacent the walls of the building shall be designed not to interfere with
motorists' views of the sidewalk and pedestrians' views of vehicles exiting the
project.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.320.045 BICYCLE PARKING.
Bicycle parking shall be provided for all multi-family projects and non-
residential uses in compliance with this Section.
A.   Number of Bicycle Spaces Required.
   1.   For all residential buildings containing three or more units the number
of bicycle parking spaces shall be provided onsite per Table 3-5 below.
   Table 3-5 Bicycle Parking Requirements Multiple-Family Residential Uses
Use/Number of Dwelling Short-Term Spaces Required  Long-Term Spaces Required
Units                  (1)
Use/Number of Dwelling    Short-Term Spaces Required  Long-Term Spaces Required
Units                     (1)
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
3-25 dwelling units       1 per 10 units              1 per unit
26-100 dwelling units     1 per 15 units              1 per 1.5 units
101-200                   1 per 20 units              1 per 2 units
201+                      1 per 30 units              1 per 4 units
Residential care facility 1 per 10,000 sq. ft.        1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
Senior citizen congregate 1 space for each 20         1 space for each 10
care housing              dwelling units. Minimum     dwelling units. Minimum
                          requirement is 2 spaces.    requirement is 2 spaces.
Notes:
   (1)   A minimum of 2 short-term spaces shall be provided in all cases.
 
   2.   For all non-residential buildings, the number of bicycle parking spaces
shall be provided onsite per Table 3-6 below.
   Table 3-6 Bicycle Parking Requirements - Non-Residential Uses
Use Short-Term Spaces Required (1) Long-Term Spaces Required
Use                       Short-Term Spaces Required Long-Term Spaces Required
                          (1)
                          1 per 2,500 square feet
                          For uses larger than
                          50,000 square feet of
Health clubs              occupied floor area, 10    1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
                          short-term spaces plus one
                          short-term space for every
                          additional 10,000 occupied
                          square feet.
Office                    1 per 10,000 sq. ft.       1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
Personal Services,        1 per 2,000 sq. ft.        1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
restaurants, and bars
                          1 per 2,500 square feet;
                          For uses larger than
                          50,000 square feet of
Retail, general           occupied floor area, 10    1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
                          short-term spaces plus one
                          short-term space for every
                          additional 10,000 occupied
                          square feet.
All other commercial uses 1 per 10,000 sq. ft.       1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
Schools, colleges,
universities, specialized 1 per 1,000 sq. ft.        1 per 2,000 sq. ft.
instruction
Schools, kindergarten     2 per classroom            1 per 10 classrooms
through grade 12
Day care centers          2 per classroom            1 per 1 classroom
                                                     1 per 30 hotel rooms, plus
                                                     one long-term space for
Hotels and motels         1 per 30 hotel rooms       every 5,000 square feet of
                                                     occupied floor area of
                                                     conference, meeting or
                                                     function rooms
All other assembly uses   1 per 10,000 sq. ft.       1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
All industrial uses       Minimum of 2               1 per 10,000 sq. ft.
Notes:
   (1)   A minimum of 2 short-term and 2 long-term spaces shall be provided in
all cases.
 
   3.   For uses not listed, bicycle parking shall be provided, based on the
most similar use in the table, as determined by the Director.
B.   Bicycle Parking Design.
   1.   Parking equipment.  Each bicycle parking space shall include a
stationary parking device, as indicated below, to adequately secure the
bicycle.
      a.   Short-term bicycle parking. Short-term bicycle parking shall consist
of bicycle racks that support the bicycle frame at two points, including
inverted - "U" bicycle racks or similar. Racks that support only the wheel of
the bicycle are not permissible.
         i.   Racks shall allow for the bicycle frame and at one wheel to be
locked to the racks.
         ii.   The rack shall allow for the use of a cable as well as a U-
shaped lock.
         iii.   If bicycles can be locked to each side of the rack, each side
shall be counted toward a required space.
         iv.   Racks shall be securely anchored to a permanent surface.
         v.   If more than 20 short-term bicycle parking spaces are provided,
at least 50%shall be covered by a roof or overhang.
      b.   Long-term bicycle parking. Long-term bicycle parking shall be
secured from the general public and enclosed on all sides to protect bicycles
from inclement weather.
         i.   Acceptable examples of long-term bicycle parking include
individual bicycle lockers, bike racks within a bicycle room, and bicycle
cages.
         ii.   Except in the cases of lockers, all long-term bicycle parking
shall provide means of securing the bicycle frame at two points to a securely
anchored rack.
   2.   Parking layout and siting requirements.
      a.   Bicycle spaces shall be separated from motor vehicle parking spaces
by at least five feet of open area and a physical barrier.
      b.   A minimum five-foot wide access aisle shall be provided for all
bicycle parking spaces.
      c.   Spaces shall not be required to rely on stairs or escalators for
access. For spaces allowed above or below the ground floor, elevators shall be
a minimum of six feet, two inches to accommodate a standard adult bicycle with
both wheels on the floor.
      d.   Short-term spaces shall be located on the ground floor, outside of
the building, or with direct access to a public right of way, no more than 50
feet of walking distance from the main pedestrian entrance/access to the
building, and with maximum visibility from the pedestrian access.
      e.   Long-term spaces shall be located in one of the following locations,
or in a combination thereof:
         i.   On the ground floor within 50 feet of the main entrance, with
safe and convenient access from the public right of way and lobby area.
         ii.   On a floor above or below the ground floor, including a parking
structure, within 50 feet of the elevator, with safe, convenient, and dedicated
access between the bicycle parking and the elevator.
   3.   Parking dimensional requirements.
      a.   Short-term and long-term spaces shall be a minimum of two feet wide
by six feet long. Bicycle racks, including those within communal bike
enclosures, shall be spaced at minimum 30 inches apart and 30 inches from a
wall or other obstruction on any side, measured from the centerline of the
rack. Individual bicycle enclosures such as lockers or cages shall not require
clearance from adjacent enclosures or obstructions. A minimum of seven feet of
vertical clearance shall be provided at all bicycle parking spaces.
      b.   If more than 20 long-term spaces are provided, a minimum 100 square
feet of workspace is required adjacent to the bicycle parking area for bicycle
maintenance work; the workspace shall be adjacent to the area with the most
bicycle spaces if spaces are provided in more than one area within the site.
      c.   Bicycle rooms shall provide outlets for charging electric bicycles.
C.   Lockers and Showers. For non-residential uses, one personal locker shall
be provided for each required long-term bicycle parking space for use by all
genders. Showers for employee use shall be provided per Table 3-7 below.
   Table 3-7 Required Showers for Non-Residential Uses
 
Square Feet     Showers Required
25,000-99,999   1 shower for each gender
100,000-199,999 2 showers for each gender
200,000 or more 1 additional shower for each gender for every 100,000 square
                feet or portion thereof
 
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No.
2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.320.050 LOADING AREA REQUIREMENTS.
A.    Loading Area Size Categories. Loading areas shall comply with the minimum
dimensions, area, and clearance requirements in Table 3-8 below.
   Table 3-8 Loading Area Size and Dimensions
 
Size        Minimum Dimensions Minimum Area    Overhead Clearance
Medium      10 feet x 30 feet  300 square feet 14 feet
            12 feet x 25 feet
Large       12 feet x 40 feet  480 square feet 14 feet
Extra Large 12 feet x 60 feet  720 square feet 14 feet
            19 feet x 40 feet
 
B.   Number of Loading Spaces Required. Non-residential uses shall provide the
number of loading spaces in compliance with Table 3-9 below.
   Table 3-9 Required Loading Spaces
 
Floor Area             Loading Size and Quantity Required (1)
2,501 – 7,500 sq. ft.1 Medium space
7,501 – 50,000 sq. ft1 Large space
50,000 sq. ft. or more 1 Extra Large space
Notes:
   (1)   Regardless of floor area, for any building having a dock high or
depressed ramp accessible to vehicles, one large loading space shall be
provided for each dock high or depressed ramp; or one or more extra-large
loading areas may be required, if the City determines that tractor and double
trailer rigs may use the dock high or depressed ramp.
 
C.   Standards for Loading Areas. Loading areas shall be provided in the
following manner.
   1.   Access.  Loading areas accessible only from a public street right-of-
way shall be located to allow head-in and head-out access from and to the
public street right-of-way. Back-in access may be permitted if it is determined
by the Director that no feasible alternative exists.
   2.   Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing
adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall comply
with §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting).
   3.   Loading ramps/docks.  Plans for loading ramps or truck wells shall be
accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions, and
overhead clearances.
   4.   Location and Screening. Loading areas shall be located and screened per
§
17.300.035.C. (Utilities, Equipment, Service, Loading, and Refuse Areas).
   5.   Identification. Loading areas shall be designed, laid out, and clearly
marked as being distinct from required parking spaces and aisles, unless the
City approves the use of the parking area as an undesignated overlay loading
area during non-business hours.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.330: SIGNS
Section
   
17.330.005   Purpose
   
17.330.010   Applicability; Clause
   
17.330.015   Sign Definitions
   
17.330.020   General Restrictions and Prohibited and Restricted Signs
   
17.330.025   Sign Permits
   
17.330.030   General Requirements for all Signs
   
17.330.035   Permanent Signs
   
17.330.040   Temporary Signs
   
17.330.045   Historical Signs
   
17.330.050   Signs on Public Property
   
17.330.055   Nonconforming Signs
   
17.330.060   Administration and Enforcement
Cross-reference:
General sign regulations, see §§
13.02.200 et seq.
§ 17.330.005 PURPOSE.
A.   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a comprehensive system of
reasonable, effective, consistent, and nondiscriminatory sign standards and
requirements to:
   1.   Protect the general public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of
the City;
   2.   Promote and accomplish the goals, policies, and measures of the General
Plan related to encouraging high-quality development, new, and innovative
design practices and techniques; reflecting local historical and cultural
resources; and promoting clear and flexible standards;
   3.   Ensure freedom of expression of signs, including noncommercial
messages, by maintaining content neutrality in messaging and appropriately
regulating the time, place, and manner under which signs may be displayed;
   4.   Preserve and improve the appearance of the City, protect the City from
visual clutter and blight, and promote attractive and harmonious structures and
environments by regulating the design, location, type, quality of materials,
scale, illumination, and maintenance of signs;
   5.   Promote signs that identify businesses and premises without confusion
through clear and unambiguous sign standards that enable fair and consistent
enforcement;
   6.   Protect and improve the local economy and quality of life by
encouraging adequate signage and preserving and enhancing the appearance of the
streetscape;
   7.   Promote high standards for sign design while maintaining flexibility
and encouraging creative expression; and
   8.   Allow adequate and appropriate signage while meeting public safety
objectives.
B.   The regulations of this Chapter are not intended to permit any violations
of the provisions of any other lawful ordinance, nor to prohibit the use of any
sign required by any law superior to that of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.010 APPLICABILITY; CLAUSE.
A.   Regulatory Scope. The regulations of this Chapter shall apply to all signs
that are placed on private property and visible from public property or nearby
properties, in the public right-of-way, and on property owned by public
agencies over which the City has zoning authority and shall apply in all zoning
districts except as otherwise provided by a Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant
to
Chapter 17.560 in the Planned Development (PD) zoning district.
B.   Sign Permit Required. A sign permit shall be required for the specific
sign types in compliance with §
17.330.025 (Sign Permits) of this Chapter. In addition, all signs meeting the
definition of "structure" within the Uniform Building Code are subject to the
structural requirements of that Code, and may be mounted, erected, or displayed
only when a valid building permit has been issued.
C.   Figures and Graphics. Figures, graphics, and pictures are included in this
Chapter to illustrate the minimum intent and requirement of the text. In the
case of a conflict between the text of this Chapter and any figure, graphic, or
picture, the text shall govern.
D.   Substitution Clause. No part of this Chapter shall be construed to favor
commercial speech over non-commercial speech. A non-commercial message may be
substituted for any commercial message displayed on a sign, or the content of
any non-commercial message displayed on a sign may be changed to a different
non-commercial message, without the need for any approval or permit, provided
that the sign otherwise complies with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.015 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Abandoned Signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, service, or
product no longer conducted or sold on the premises 180 days after the
discontinuance or abandonment, excepts sign pursuant to §
17.330.045 (Historical Signs) or as provided in §
17.330.055 (Nonconforming Signs).
   Architectural Feature. The same meaning as in
Chapter 17.700: Definitions.
   Awning. The same meaning as in
Chapter 17.700 Definitons.
   Background Canopy Area. The outer surface area of a canopy that is
reasonably visible to public view.
   Background Wall Area. The largest rectangular opaque portion of each wall
segment within which wall signs are displayed.
   Backlit Characters. That method of sign illumination achieved by concealing
the light source between the three-dimensional opaque letters, numbers, or
other characters of a sign, and the solid surface of a building or structure on
which the sign characters are mounted, that results in the nighttime perception
of a halo around the silhouette of each sign character.
   Building Frontage. The width of a building that fronts on a public street or
faces a plaza, courtyard, pedestrian corridor or walkway, parking lot or alley,
where customer access to the building is available.
   Business Frontage.  The same meaning as in
Chapter 17.700: Definitions.
   Canopy, Nonstructural. See Awning.
   Canopy, Structural. The same meaning as in
Chapter 17.700: Definitions.
      Channel Letters. Three- dimensional, individually cut letters or figures,
illuminated or nonilluminated, affixed to a structure.
   Figure 3-13 Channel Letters
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5022.png]
 
   City Engineer/Public Work Director. The City’s City Engineer/Public Works
Direcor, including their designee.
   Commercial Message. Naming, advertising, or calling attention to a business,
product, service, or other activity concerning a proposed economic transaction
or interest of the sponsor or audience.
   Director. The Planning and Development Director, or his or her designee.
   External Illumination. Illumination by a light source located on the
exterior of the sign or nearby and directed toward the sign to shine on the
sign face.
   False Mansard.  The same meaning as in
Chapter 17.700: Definitions.
   Logo. An established identifying symbol or mark associated with a business
or business entity.
   Mural. The graphic artwork applied to and made an integral part of an
exterior wall of a structure, public or private, that does not have any
electrical or mechanical components. A mural is distinguishable from graffiti
based on the property owner's permission to paint or affix the mural onto the
property.
   Noncommercial Message. Any form of communication or expression that does not
promote or advertise a specific product, service, or commercial transaction,
including, without limitation, political or religious speech, art, music, etc.
   Nonconforming Sign.  Any sign, including its physical structure and
supporting elements, that was lawfully erected and maintained in compliance
with all applicable laws in effect at the time of original installation, but
that does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
   Parapet. The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line.
   Public Property. All facilities, structures, and real property owned or
controlled by the City, including but not limited to, the public right-of-way
and parks.
   Sign. Any device intended for visual communication and that contains any
announcement, declaration, demonstration, insignia, banner, pennant,
illustration, logo, trademark, or graphic used to advertise or promote the
interest of any person, business group, or enterprise. This definition does not
include noncommercial message murals, paintings, non-architectural decorative
elements, or other works of art that do not advertise or promote the interest
of any person, business group, or enterprise. Definitions for different types
of signs are as follows:
      A-frame Sign. A sign that is readily moveable and not permanently affixed
to a structure or the ground, that generally includes an A-frame structure or
similar lowprofile, and that is usually hinged at the top or attached in a
similar manner and widened at the bottom to form a shaped similar to the letter
"A." Other variations of such signs may be in the shape of the letter "T"
(inverted) or the letter "H." This sign type is also referred to as a "Sandwich
Board Sign" and "Portable Freestanding Sign."
   Figure 3-14 A-Frame Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4984.png]
 
      Animated Sign. A sign, other than electronic message sign, whereby the
sign itself or the information conveyed incorporates or involves action,
motion, or the appearance of action or motion, such as flashing lights, color
changes, moving parts, reflective materials, rotating images (also referred to
as “Moving Sign”).
      Banner Sign. A sign made of durable cloth, plastic, or similar non-rigid
material that displays business identification, advertising, or promotional
message, and is displayed only for a short period of time. This sign type does
not include flas (see “Flag”).
      Billboard. An off-premises sign designed for changeable advertising copy,
which is normally used for the advertisement of goods, products, or services,
typically designed to be viewed from arterial roads or freeways.
      Blade Sign. A sign that is supported by a structure attached to a
building and projected downward or outward from the building in a manner such
that both sides of the sign are visible (also referred to as “Bracket Sign,”
“Projecting Sign,” or “Suspended Sign”).
Figure 3-15 Blade Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4986.png]
 
Figure 3-16 Suspended Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4988.png]
      Cabinet or Cabinet Sign. A sign that contains all the text and/or logo
symbols within a single enclosed cabinet, which is a single enclosed frame with
flat or shaped panels mounted to a wall or other surface, and which may or may
not be illuminated.
   Figure 3-17 Cabinet Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4990.png]
 
      Changeable Copy Sign. A sign, not including an electronic message sign,
with a message comprising of letters, numbers, or other characters that are
manually or mechanically changed to display different messages.
      Construction Sign. A temporary sign placed at a construction site that
provides information regarding the project architect, owner, contractor, etc.
      Digital Sign. See “Electronic Message Sign.”
      Directional Sign. A sign provided to identify to motorists or pedestrians
an entry or exit point to or from an adjacent public right-of-way, or to or
from various points of passage on or within private property.
      Directory Sign, Business. A sign listing the names and locations of a
multiple tenant structure or center.
      Electronic Message Sign. A sign with variable messages comprised of
letters, numbers, figures, images, and/or other characters that utilizes
computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy.
These signs generally include display using LEDs (light emitting diodes), CCDs
(charge coupled devices), plasma, or functionally equivalent technologies to
display a series of still images or full motion, usually remotely programmable
and changeable, and are sometimes referred to as "Digital Signs" and "LED
Signs."
      Emitting Sign. A sign that emits smoke, stream, steam, mist, noise,
laser, or hologram lights, or other similar features.
      False Mansard Sign. A sign located on a false mansard, as defined in this
Section.
      Feather Sign. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic fabric, or
similar lightweight, non-rigid material, typically taller than it is longer,
and supported by a single vertical pole mounted into the ground or on a
portable structure. This sign type does not include flags (see “Flag”).
   Figure 3-18 Feather Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4992.png]
 
      Flag. A fabric sheet that is mounted on a pole, freestanding, or attached
to a structure or building containing a non-commercial message. This sign type
does not include feather signs, banners, or pennants.
      Foam Letter Sign. A sign composed of letters typically made of
lightweight, dense foam, such as polystyrene, often coated with paint.
      Freestanding Sign. A sign displayed on, and totally supported by, one or
more support elements on the ground, with no part of the sign attached to a
building or similar structure. Types of freestanding signs include “Pylon
Sign,” “Pole Sign,” and “Monument Sign.”
      Freeway-oriented Sign. On-site signs with high overall height that are
directed to be visible from a freeway.
      Inflatable Sign. A sign that is an air-inflated object, such as a
balloon, that may be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the
ground or a structure, and either filled with air or gas or equipped with a
portable blower motor that provides a constant flow of air into the device.
(Also referred to as "Balloon Sign.")
   Figure 3-19 Inflatable Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4994.png]
 
      Menu Board. A permanently installed sign with changeable copy (electronic
message or manual) to provide product and/or service information for drive-
through service at a business where customers remain seated in a vehicle
occupying a drive-through service lane.
      Monument Sign. A freestanding ground sign of low overall height with a
decorative cap, decorative trim, and decorative solid base.
   Figure 3-20 Monument Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4996.png]
 
      Neon Sign. A sign illuminated by or utilizing neon tubing, and/or related
inert gases, or products that produce the same or similar effect as neon, such
as flexible light- emitting diode (LED) neon-like tubing.
      Off-site Sign. Any sign with a message that does not related directly to
an active uses of premises on which it is displayed (also referred to as “Off-
premise Sign”).
      On- site Sign. Any sign with a message that relates directly to an active
use of the premises on which it is displayed. All noncommercial signs are
considered on-site signs (also referred to as “On-premises Sign”).
      Parapet Wall Sign. A wall sign located below the top of the parapet line
of a building, and above the top of the window line of the highest story of the
building.
   Figure 3-21 Parapet Wall Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4998.png]
 
      Pennant. A triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other material,
whether or not containing a message of any kind, commonly attached by strings
or strands intended to flap in the wind. This sign type does not include flags
(see “Flag”).
   Figure 3-22 Pennant Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5000.png]
 
      Permanent Sign. A sign constructed of durable materials that will resist
environmental loads such as wind, precludes ready removal or movement of the
sign, and is intended to exist for a duration of time coincident with the use
or occupant located on the premises.
      Plaque. A sign generally highlighting dates of construction, historical
accomplishments, personal accolades, and similar events when carved in stone,
concrete, or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other similar
permanent material.
      Pole Sign. An elevated freestanding sign supported by one or more exposed
poles that are permanently attached directly into or upon the ground.
   Figure 3-23 Pole Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5002.png]
 
      Pylon Sign. A free standing sign supported and in direct contact with the
ground or one or more solid, monumental structures or pylon that typically has
a sign face with a vertical dimension that is larger than its horizontal
dimension, and includes a decorative base, cap, and trim.
   Figure 3-24 Pylon Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5004.png]
 
      Roof Sign. A sign erected, constructed, or placed upon or over a roof of
a building, including a mansard roof, and which is wholly or partly supported
by such a building.
   Figure 3-25 Roof Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5006.png]
 
      Temporary Sign. A sign that is intended to be displayed for a definite
and limited period of time and that is not permanently installed, affixed, or
maintained on a building or structure.
      Theater Sign, Marquee. A sign attached to, or made an integral part of,
the structural canopy of a theater.
   Figure 3-26 Theater Marquee Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5008.png]
 
      Theater Sign, Above Roof Identification. Vertical identification signs,
consisting of individual characters displayed on sculpted, visually prominent
architectural features that rise vertically above a theater building roof.
   Figure 3-27 Theater Above-Roof Identification Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5010.png]
 
      Vehicle Sign. Any sign or device placed on, mounted on, or affixed to a
motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer, or other conveyance that
advertises, identifies, or promotes a business, but excluding signs that are
permanently or magnetically attached to motor vehicles or rolling stock that
are regularly used to conduct normal business activities, such as deliveries,
service calls, field work, or related duties. Vehicle Signs shall not include
signs wrapped on a vehicle actively being used to load, transport, or unload
persons, goods, or services in the normal course of business.
      Wall Painted Sign. A sign that is painted directly onto the building
wall.
   Figure 2-28 Wall Painted Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5012.png]
 
      Wall Sign. A sign that is displayed on, or is attached to, an exterior
wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a line
approximately parallel to the plane of the building or structure wall.
   Figure 3-29 Wall Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5014.png]
 
      Window Sign. A permanent or temporary sign that is displayed on the
surface of any glass or glazed material, or that is displayed inside and close
enough to a window to be reasonably visible from outside the window.
   Figure 3-30 Window Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5016.png]
 
      Yard Sign. Any temporary sign placed in the ground or attached to a
supporting structure, posts, or poles that is not attached to any building or
structure.
   Figure 3-31 Yard Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5018.png]
 
   Sign Clearance. The smallest vertical distance between finished grade and
the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.
   Figure 3-32 Sign Clearance
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5020.png]
 
   Sign Copy. The message or content of a sign, which may include letters,
numerals, figures, or other symbolic representation s, including trademarks and
logos.
   Sign Face. The area of a sign that includes copy and distinct background
surfaces.
   Sign, Hazardous. A sign that constitutes a public nuisance or potential
threat to the health, safety, or well-being of the general public due to its
height, illumination intensity, location, movement, placement, size, or other
design features or characteristics.
   Special Event. The same meaning as in
Chapter 17.700: Definitions.
   String Lights. Small lights consisting of clear or non-colored bulbs that
are not more than one inch in length spaced evenly along a wire, string, or
cable and used for decoration purposes.
   Support Element. The structural portion of a sign that secures it to the
ground, a building, or to another structure.
   Temporary Event. A duly licensed and approved activity of limited duration,
directly related to an established business on the premises where the event is
held, such as outdoor sales of holiday trees by a supermarket, or a weekend
festive promotion for a business staged outdoors and providing complimentary
food, music, entertainment or similar attractions to entice public attendance
or participation.
   Trademark. A word or name that, with a distinctive type of letter style, is
associated with a business or business entity.
   Vertical Clearance. The distance from the bottom of a sign but not including
the support elements of a freestanding sign, to the average finished grade
below, or to the grade of the nearest point of an adjoining public right-of-way
with a higher elevation, if within five feet thereof.
   Wayfinding Kiosk. An interactive digital wayfinding kiosk, with one or more
screens and each screen being no greater than 15 square feet in size, installed
on public property which shall provide messageing slected by the City and may
include commercial advertising.
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.020 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED SIGNS.
A.   Prohibited Signs. The following signs and sign components are prohibited.
Sign types not expressly permitted in this Chapter are prohibited.
   1.   Abandoned signs.
   2.   Emitting signs.
   3.   Foam letter signs.
   4.   Billboards.
   5.   Hazardous signs.
   6.   Home occupation advertising signs.
   7.   Off-site signs.
   8.   Pole signs.
   9.   Signs that cover any portion of an architectural feature or a visually
prominent three-dimensional relief detail that adorns, embellishes, or
ornaments an architectural feature of a building or structure (e.g., a fresco,
medallion, lantern, decorative tile work, crown molding, cornice, routed or
recessed numerals or letters, or other similar features).
   10.   Vehicle signs.
   11.   Signs that interfere with building access, including but not limited
to, points of ingress and egress from buildings and emergency exit routes;
interfere with pedestrian or vehicle movement within the public right-of-way;
and/or block view of traffic and traffic control devices.
   12.   Signs that resemble traffic signs or traffic lights.
   13.   Signs on public property, except as required or authorized by a
governmental agency, and except as permitted by §
17.330.050 (Signs on Public Property).
   14.   Signs attached to trees, light or traffic fixtures, and utility poles.
B.   Restricted Sign Types. The following types of signs are prohibited except
where specifically authorized by this Chapter.
   1.   Active signs, including animated signs, blinking signs, flashing signs,
and traffic variable signs, except as approved under a master sign program
pursuant to §
17.330.025C.1. (Master Sign Program).
   2.   A-frame signs, except as provided by §
17.330.025B.1. (Sign Permit for Temporary Signs-Applicability and Exemptions)
and
Table 3-11.
   3.   Changeable copy signs, except as provided by §§
17.330.025C.1.c.i. (Comprehensive Sign Programs- Master Sign Program),
17.330.035C.3. (Permanent Sign Standards by Sign Type - Monument Signs),
17.330.035D. (Permanent Signs for Specific Uses of Property), or as may be
approved under a master sign program.
   4.   Freeway-oriented signs, except as approved under a master sign program.
   5.   Electronic message signs, except as provided by §§
17.330.035D. (Permanent Signs for Specific Uses of Property) and
17.330.050 (Signs on Public Property).
   6.   Signs that are added to or modified on historically designated
buildings or structures, except as may be approved under
Chapter 15.05. Historic Preservation Program.
   7.   Off-site signs, except as provided by §§
17.330.050 (Signs on Public Property) and
17.330.055 (Nonconforming Signs).
   8.   Roof signs, except theater above roof signs pursuant to §§
17.330.035D.4. (Permanent Signs for Specific Uses of Property- Theater Marquee
and Theater Above Roof Identification Signs) and
17.330.025C.1. (Comprehensive Sign Programs - Master Sign Program), or as may
be permitted by
Chapter 15.05. Historic Preservation Program.
   9.   Inflatable signs, except as provided by §§
17.330.040B. (Temporary Signs - Temporary Sign Standards by Zoning District/
Use) and
17.330.040D.4. (Inflatable/Balloon Signs).
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.025 SIGN PERMITS.
A.   Sign Permit for Permanent Signs.
   1.   Applicability and exemptions. A sign permit is required to erect, move,
alter, replace, suspend, display, or attach a permanent sign unless otherwise
specified in this Chapter. Changes to sign copy, and the normal maintenance of
a sign, including cleaning, repainting, or repairing, except when prohibited
for a nonconforming sign in accordance with §
17.330.055 (Nonconforming Signs), are exempt from a sign permit.
      a.   Types of permanent signs exempted without limitations. The following
sign types are exempt from a sign permit and the requirements of this Chapter
and shall not count towards the cumulative allowable sign area, but shall
satisfy all other permit requirements, as applicable (e.g., Building,
Electrical, Encroachment, etc.) of the Municipal Code.
         i.   Affiliation signs. Signs that provide notices of services (e.g.,
credit cards accepted, trade affiliations, etc.). Signs or notices shall not
exceed one square foot in area for each sign, and no more than three signs
shall be allowed for each business.
         ii.   Commemorative plaques. Tablets and plaques installed by the City
or by a County, State, or Federal recognized historical organization exempt
from Federal taxation under Section 501 of USC Title 26 (IRS Code), that are no
larger than six square feet, or signs authorized and installed by City, County,
State, or Federal agencies on public owned lands.
         iii.   Equipment signs. Signs incorporated into allowed displays,
machinery, or equipment by a manufacturer, distributor, or vendor and
identifying or advertising only the product or service dispensed by the machine
or equipment, such as signs customarily fixed to automated teller machines
(ATMs), vending machines, and gasoline pumps.
         iv.   Interior graphics or signage. Signs within a building that are
not visible from the public right of way or from nearby properties.
         v.   Site address signs. Street address (number) signs, building
identification signs, and nameplates on residences and business locations,
provided such signs do not exceed three square feet in area and are limited to
one sign per property frontage.
         vi.   Flags, provided they do not obscure traffic signs, block
traffic, or block vehicular or pedestrian traffic line of sight.
      b.   Types of permanent signs exempted with limitations. The following
permanent sign types are exempt from a sign permit and shall not count as sign
area if they meet the size, height, duration, maximum number limitations, and
any other additional requirements set forth in
Table 3-10. If the allowed sign area is exceeded, these signs shall require a
sign permit and an administrative modification as set forth in §§
17.550.005-
17.550.020 (Administrative Modification). An administrative modification may
only be granted for an increase in sign area of up to 10%. Signs exempted with
limitations shall satisfy all other permit requirements, as applicable (e.g.,
Building, Electrical, Encroachment, etc.) of the Municipal Code.
 
TABLE 3-10 PERMANENT SIGNS EXEMPT WITH LIMITATIONS
          Maximum    Maximum    Maximum
Sign Type Number     Sign Area  Sign       Additional Requirements
                                Height
                                           -Shall be attached to a building, and not a
                                Shall be   pole or other structure.
                     1 square   below the  -Shall be placed only on a ground floor
                     foot per   roof eave  facade near the main entrance of a building
          1 per      linear     line,      or tenant space.
          frontage   foot of    structural -Shall not project more than 4 feet from the
          of either  frontage   canopy,    facade of the building wall upon which the
          the        of either  awning,    sign is mounted.
          street,    the        arcade,    -Any encroachment into a public right-of-way
          interior   building,  bottom of  is subject to a permit in accordance with §
          plaza or   interior   a parapet, 9.08.110.
Blade     courtyard, plaza or   and        -Sign supports and brackets shall be
signs     or parking courtyard, maintain a compatible with the design and scale of the
          lot/alley  or parking vertical   sign.
          for single lot from   clearance  -Signs and supporting structures shall be
          tenants    which the  of at      designed as an integral design element of a
          1 per      sign       least 8    building’s architecture.
          tenant     projects,  feet above -For double-sided signs, the sign area shall
          space for  but not    the        be taken from on side of the sign only.
          multiple   more than  highest    -No sign shall project over a public alley
          tenants    6 square   adjacent   and no sign shall project closer than 2 feet
                     feet total finished   to the curb line.
                                grade.     -Signs shall be consistent with the
                                           construction, design, and maintenance
                                           standards of this Chapter.
                     Shall
                     cover not
                     more than             -Glass door shall be considered as windows,
                     25% of the            and a glass door sign shall be considered a
                     total                 window sign.
                     window                -Window signs shall not be located on any
                     glass area            window above the first story.
Window    N/A        of the     N/A        -Signs shall be painted or mounted on the
signs                first                 inside of doors and windows.
                     floor,                -Signs in the interior of a building placed
                     including             within 3 feet of a storefront window shall be
                     glass                 counted as a window sign.
                     doors, of             -Window signs are applicable to businesses
                     the                   only.
                     building
                     frontage1.
                                           Applicable only to businesses on a site
                                           accessed only from an arcade, alley,
                                           courtyard, or mall, or having similar limited
Directory            Maximum 24            visibility.
signs,    2 per site square     8 feet     -Only external illumination is allowed.
business             feet each.            -Shall be located on a freestanding sign
                                           adjacent to the building.
                                           -Signs shall not conflict with vehicle or
                                           pedestrian access or nor vehicle parking
                                           spaces.
1 Building frontage width is measured as the widest point on an architectural elevation.
 
   2.   Compliance with standards. The Director shall approve a permanent sign
permit unless any of the following findings are made, based on substantial
evidence:
      a.   The sign does not comply with the standards of this Chapter;
      b.   The sign is not in substantial compliance with the design principles
outlined in §
17.330.030G. (General Requirements for All Signs - Design);
      c.   The sign will impair pedestrian and vehicular safety from the right-
of-way; and
      d.   The design, placement, and proposed construction of the sign will
threaten the public physical health, safety, or welfare.
B.   Sign permit for temporary signs.
   1.   Applicability and exemptions. A sign permit is required to erect, move,
alter, replace, suspend, display, or attach a temporary sign, unless otherwise
specified in this Chapter.
      a.   A temporary sign approved as part of a temporary use, special event,
or temporary permit pursuant to
Chapter 17.520 that is otherwise consistent with this Chapter shall not require
a temporary sign permit.
      b.   The following temporary sign types are exempt from a sign permit if
they meet the size, height, duration, maximum number limitations, and any other
additional requirements set forth in
Table 3-11. Signs exempted with limitations shall satisfy all other permit
requirements, as applicable (e.g., Building, Electrical, Encroachment, etc.) of
the Municipal Code.
TABLE 3-11 TEMPORARY SIGNS EXEMPT WITH LIMITATIONS
Sign Type Maximum Number Maximum Sign Area Maximum Sign Height Additional
                                                               Requirements
TABLE 3-11 TEMPORARY SIGNS EXEMPT WITH LIMITATIONS
               Maximum      Maximum    Maximum
Sign Type      Number       Sign Area  Sign    Additional Requirements
                                       Height
                                               -Signs shall only be displayed in front of the
                                               place of business and with an access width of at
                                               least 4 feet maintained for pedestrian and
                                               wheelchair access in compliance with the American
                                               Disabilities Act (ADA).
               1 per                           -Signs may only be displayed during the hours of
A-frame signs  business     6 square   3 feet  business and for one-half hour prior to and
               frontage 1   feet each          following business hours at a maximum. Signs shall
                                               be removed beyond these hours and when the
                                               establishment is not open for business.
                                               -Any encroachment into the public right-of-way is
                                               subject to a permit in accordance with § 9.09.110.
                                               -Signs shall not obscure traffic signs or block
                                               public access or traffic line of sight.
Yard signs on
private
property where 1 per street                    -Signs shall only be posted on the subject site.
there is a     frontage of                     -Signs shall be removed immediately following the
garage/yard    the subject  6 square           close of the sale.
sale, estate   property on  feet       3 feet  -Signs shall not be illuminated.
sale, food     which the                       -Signs shall not obscure traffic signs or block
sale, or       event is                        public access or traffic line of sight.
similar        taking place                    -Signs shall be installed securely in the ground.
temporary sale
taking place
                            24 square
                            feet for
                            sign with
Yard signs on               post or 6  6 feet
private                     square     for     -Signs shall only be posted on the subject site.
property                    feet for   sign    -Signs shall be removed within 7 days after the
offered for    1 per street other      with    close of the sale or upon lease/rent.
sale, lease,   frontage     signs. In  post.   -Signs shall not be illuminated.
or rent in                  no case    4 feet  -Signs shall not obscure traffic signs or block
residential                 shall      for     public access or traffic line of sight.
zoning                      cumulative other   -Signs shall be installed securely in the ground.
districts                   sign area  signs
                            exceed 24
                            square
                            feet.
Yard signs on                                  -Signs shall only be posted on the subject
private                                        property.
property                                       -Signs shall not be illuminated.
offered for                                    -Signs shall be removed within 7 days after the
sale, lease,   1 per street 32 square  8 feet  close of escrow, rental, or lease of property.
or rent in     frontage     feet each          -Signs shall not obscure traffic signs or block
nonresidential                                 public access or traffic line of sight.
and mixed use                                  -Signs shall be maintained in good, clean, and safe
zoning                                         condition.
districts                                      -Signs shall be installed securely in the ground.
Yard signs on
private                                        -Permission shall be granted by the owner of the
property                                       property on which such signs are posted.
displaying     1 per        16 square          -Signs shall not be illuminated.
noncommercia l residence    feet total 3 feet  -Signs shall not obscure traffic signs or block
messages in                                    public access or traffic line of sight.
residential                                    -Signs shall be installed securely in the ground.
zoning                                         -There is no limitation on duration of such signs.
district
Yard signs on
private                                        -Permission shall be granted by the owner of the
property                    24 square          property on which such signs are posted.
displaying                  feet               -Signs shall not be illuminated.
noncommercia l N/A          cumulative 3 feet  -Signs shall not obscure traffic signs or block
messages                    total one          public access or traffic line of sight.
associated                  property           -Signs shall be installed securely in the ground.
with limited                                   -Signs shall be removed within 7 days following
time period                                    conclusion of the event.
events
                                               -Signs shall only be posted on the subject
                                               property.
                                               -Signs shall not be illuminated.
Construction   1 per street                    -Signs may be installed upon issuance of a Building
signs/         frontage of  24 square  6 feet  Permit or Grading Permit and shall be removed
subdivision    construction feet               within 7 days after the Certificate of Occupancy or
signs          site                            Building Permit final inspection, whichever occurs
                                               later.
                                               -Signs shall not obscure traffic signs or block
                                               public access or traffic line of sight.
1Business frontage width is measured as the widest point on an architectural elevation.
 
   2.   Compliance with standards. A temporary sign is allowed unless the City
makes any of these findings, based on substantial evidence.
      a.   The sign does not comply with the standards of §
17.330.040 (Temporary Signs);
      b.   The sign is not in substantial compliance with the design principles
outlined in §
17.330.030F. (Design);
      c.   The sign will impair pedestrian and vehicular safety from the right-
of-way; and
      d.   The design, placement, and proposed construction of the sign will
threaten the public health, safety, or welfare.
C.   Comprehensive Sign Programs.
   1.   Master sign program.
      a.   The purpose of a master sign program is to provide a mechanism to
modify the sign regulations established in this Chapter.
      b.   A master sign program may be:
         i.   Required by the Director for any development that requires an
administrative site plan review or site plan review in compliance with
Chapter 17.540 (Administrative Site Plan Review and Site Plan Review), or a
similar discretionary review; or
         ii.   Requested by the owner or master lessor of a development; or
         iii.   Initiated by the City for a particular area to further a
specific plan, revitalization program, overlay zone, or other area wide
planning tool.
      c.   A master sign program may include provisions that deviate from the
standard sign provisions related to sign type, size, location, construction
materials, and design, based on the particular and unique features of the
development, and may include, but not be limited to, allowances for the
following:
         i.   Changeable copy signs, not otherwise permitted by this Chapter;
         ii.   Active signs and features as described in §
17.330.020B.1. (General Restrictions - Restricted Sign Types);
         iii.   Freeway-oriented signs;
         iv.   Banners, flags, and/or pennants for a vehicle dealership;
         v.   Vertical identification signs, consisting of individual
characters displayed on sculpted, visually prominent architectural features
that rise vertically above a theater building roof as identified in §
17.330.035D.4. (Permanent Signs for Specific Uses of Property- Theater Marquee
and Theater Above Roof Identification Signs);
         vi.   Exposed electrical raceways and other sign mounting methods
where electronic components of the sign are not enclosed, if the architecture
of the building prevents the enclosure of the raceway within a wall (e.g., sign
located on a pitched roof below the roofline).
         vii.   Theater marquee signs located above the roof eave.
         viii.   Signs on building architectural features that appear as walls
and that protrude above the roofline but are not considered roof signs, parapet
signs, or false mansard signs. Such signs shall be considered wall signs and
regulated pursuant to §§
17.330.030C. (General Requirements for All Signs - Area Measurement) and D.
(Height Measurement), and §§
17.330.035A. (Permanent Signs - Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/
Use) and
17.330.035C.5. (Permanent Standards by Sign Type -Walt Signs). Such signs shall
not exceed the maximum allowable sign area for wall signs on a building.
      d.   An applicant for a master sign program shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Director how the total sign proposal for the development
meets, on balance, the general purpose and intent of this Chapter.
      e.   A master sign program, or its equivalent, that was approved by the
City prior to the effective date of this Chapter, or any amendment to this
Chapter, shall be deemed to conform to this Chapter.
      f.   A master sign program shall consist of plans and text describing the
details of all signs that may be displayed on the premises.
      g.   An amendment to a master sign program shall be obtained for
revisions to the original approval, including but not limited to the following.
The Director shall have the authority to determine if revisions to a master
sign program are extensive and a new master sign program is required.
         i.   Sign type
         ii.   Sign location
         iii.   Enlargement of sign area by more than 10% but less than 20%.
      h.   The Director shall approve or disapprove an application for a master
sign program and any amendment in consideration of the following standards:
         i.   The master sign program is consistent with the general purpose
and intent of this Chapter; and
         ii.   The master sign program will not impair pedestrian and vehicular
safety; and
         iii.   The master sign program will not threaten the public health,
safety, or welfare.
   2.   Multiple-business sign program.
      a.   The purpose of a multiple-business sign program is to achieve design
compatibility among all signs displayed on a single-ownership parcel that is
occupied by multiple businesses.
      b.   The submittal of a multiple-business sign program shall be required
for each multi-tenant development occupied by four or more separate businesses
at the time the first new permanent sign is proposed, except that a multiple
business sign program is not required for a project with an approved master
sign program.
      c.   A multiple-business sign program, or the equivalent, approved prior
to the effective date of this Chapter, or any amendment to this Chapter, shall
be revised, if necessary, to conform to this Chapter at the time a new
permanent sign is proposed on the premises.
      d.   A multiple-business sign program shall be submitted by, or with the
consent of, the property owner or master lessor.
      e.   A multiple-business sign program shall consist of plans and text
describing the details of all signs that may be displayed on the premises.
      f.   Only the types of signs allowed by the regulations of this Chapter
shall be approved under a multiple-business sign program.
      g.   The Director shall approve or disapprove an application for a
multiple business sign program in consideration of the following standards:
         i.   The multiple-business sign program complies with the standards of
this Chapter;
         ii.   The signs in the multiple-business sign program are visually
related or complementary to one another through design and structural features;
         iii.   The multiple-business sign program will not impair pedestrian
and vehicular safety from the right-of-way; and
         iv.   The multiple-business sign program will not threaten the public
health, safety, or welfare.
D.   Variance. A Variance from the provisions of this Chapter shall be
considered in accordance with the provisions for a Variance in
Chapter 17.550 (Variances, Administrative Modifications and Reasonable
Accommodations).
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.030 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS.
A.   Content Neutrality. It is the policy of the City to regulate signs in a
constitutional manner that is content-neutral with respect to both
noncommercial and commercial messages. For the purposes of this Chapter, a
content-neutral regulation is a "time, place, or manner" regulation, which, as
the name suggests, does no more than place limits on when, where, and how a
message may be displayed or conveyed.
B.   Illumination.
   1.   General requirements.
      a.   Permanent signs may be internally or externally illuminated and
shall not blink, flash, flutter, or change light intensity, brightness, or
color, except neon, fiber optic, or light-emitting diode (LED) light sources
that are permitted to gradually change color, or as may be approved under a
master sign program pursuant to §
17.330.025C.1. (Comprehensive Sign Programs - Master Sign Program).
      b.   No illumination of temporary signs is permitted.
      c.   Reflector bulbs and incandescent lamps that exceed 15 watts shall
not be used on the exterior sign surface so that the face of the bulb or lamp
is exposed to a public right-of-way or adjacent property. This provision does
not apply to light-emitting diodes (LEDs) associated with electronic message
signs.
      d.   Sign illumination shall utilize energy-efficient light sources, such
as LEDs, to the greatest extent possible.
      e.   Sign illumination shall not interfere with the use and enjoyment of
adjacent properties, create a public nuisance, or create public safety hazards.
      f.   Light sources exterior to a sign shall be directed and shielded to
illuminate only the sign face or copy.
      g.   Trespass of light and glare from sign illumination onto adjacent
properties or the public right-of-way is prohibited. Illuminated signs located
adjacent to residentially zoned areas, not including mixed-use zoning
districts, shall be controlled by a rheostat or other acceptable method to
reduce glare that creates a nuisance for residential buildings in direct line
of sight to the sign.
      h.   Signs shall not use colored lights or other design elements that may
be confused with or mistaken for traffic-control devices.
      i.   No sign illumination system shall contain or use any beacon, spot,
or stroboscopic light.
      j.   String lights with light bulbs exceeding one watt are prohibited
exterior to a building, except in connection with allowable temporary signs and
displays, or as may be allowed in connection with special or temporary events.
   2.   Neon lights. Neon tubing, including exposed neon tubing, for signs and
architectural elements shall only be permitted in non-residential and mixed-use
zoning districts. Neon lighting adjacent to residentially zoned areas, not
including mixed-use zoning districts, shall not exceed one-half foot candle
measured at the property line.
C.   Area Measurement.
   1.   Calculating sign area - generally.
      a.   Supporting structures, such as sign bases and columns, and non-
architectural decorative sign features shall not be included in any calculation
of sign area, provided they contain no lettering or graphics except for
addresses.
   Figure 3-33 Calculating Sign Area - Generally
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5024.png]
 
      b.    Where separate or individual component elements of a sign are
spaced or separated from one another, each component element shall be
considered a separate sign.
      c.   For buildings with two or more frontages, the length of the wall and
allowable sign area shall be calculated separately for each building frontage.
   2.   Calculating sign area - single-faced signs. Sign area for single-faced
signs shall be calculated by enclosing the limits of the entire face of a sign
inclusive of the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding within a
single continuous perimeter composed of single and vertical lines with no more
than eight corners.
   Figure 3-34 Single-Faced Sign Area Calculation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5026.png]
 
   3.   Calc ulating sign area - double-f aced signs. Only one face of a
double-f aced sign shall be used to calculate the permitted area of a double-
faced sign. Where the two faces are not equal in size, the larger sign face
shall be used.
   4.   Calculating sign area - three-dimensional signs. For signs that consist
of or have attached to them one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e., balls,
clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks), the sign area shall
be calculated by adding the area of two abutting surfaces of the smallest cube
that encompasses the sign. Signs with three-dimensional objects that project
six inches or less from the sign face shall be measured as a single-face sign.
D.   Height Measurement.
   1.   Freestanding sign. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured
from the highest part of the freestanding sign, including any decorative
features, to the highest elevation of the adjoining finished grade directly
beneath the freestanding sign. The area beneath the sign shall not be
artificially built up or bermed to achieve a higher finished grade but shall
generally match the finished grade of land area which it s adjacent.
   Figure 3-35 Freest anding Sign Height Measu rement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5028.png]
 
   2.     Wall sign. The height of a wall sign shall be the greatest vertical
distance measur ed from the highest point of the wall sign to the lowest point
of the wall sign.
   Figure 3-36 Wall Sign Height Measur ement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5030.png]
 
   3.    Wall painted sign. The height of a painted wall sign shall be the same
as for a wall sign, as specified in this Chapter.
E.   Construction.
   1.   Materials.
      a.   Sign materials shall be durable, long-lasting, and capable of
withstanding weathering for the life of the sign with reasonable maintenance.
Paper, plywood, and other materials subject to rapid deterioration shall only
be used for temporary signs. Durable fabric may be used for awning signs.
      b.   Reflective materials shall not be included on signs.
   2.   Supporting structures. The size of the supporting structures shall be
proportional to the sign they are supporting. In general, fewer larger supports
are preferable to many smaller supports.
   3.   Mounting. All permanent signs shall be firmly anchored, shall comply
with all requirements for public safety, and shall satisfy all applicable codes
and all other applicable government rules, regulations, and policies.
   4.   Quality construction. All permanent signs shall be constructed by
persons whose principal business is building construction or a related trade,
including sign manufacturing and installation businesses, or others capable of
producing professional results.
   5.   Location requirements for traffic safety. No sign, sign structure, or
supporting structure shall create a physical or visual obstruction that would
constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard.
   6.   Removal and replacement. When a sign is removed or replaced, all
brackets, posts, columns, and other supporting structures shall also be
removed, any electrical components shall be removed and/or capped, and any
resulting holes filled. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match
the adjacent portion of the building.
F.   Maintenance.
   1.   Generally. All parts of a sign shall be maintained in a good and safe
condition and adequately protected from weathering and deterioration.
   2.   Repairs. Any sign or supporting structure that is sagging, leaning,
fallen, decayed, broken, deteriorated, missing, has inoperative lights, or is
in an otherwise dilapidated condition shall be promptly repaired with materials
and design of equal or better quality as the original design to the
satisfaction of the Director.
G.   Design.
   1.   Building design compatibility. Signs shall be consistent with the
overall design and identity of the building, including the architecture, and
complement the overall aesthetic of the building and site. Architectural
compatibility shall be assessed based on sign size, location, style,
construction materials, and design of the sign structure.
   2.   Illumination. Illumination shall accent signs consistent with the
character of the building.
   3.   Sign hierarchy. If more than one sign type is located on a single
building facade, signs shall be scaled in a clear hierarchy and address
different viewer orientations and audiences.
   4.   Relationship to street trees and landscaping. Sign placement shall
consider the location of required street trees and potential tree growth over
time, with placement at locations of most suitable viewing while complying with
all sign requirements.
   5.   Sign location. Signs shall be visible from the public right-of-way
adjacent to the site, as feasible, and/or from areas of pedestrian access to
building entries.
   6.   Sign legibility. Signs and sign copy shall be scaled appropriately and
clearly legible for the intended audience.
   7.   Electronic raceways. Exposed raceways and other sign mounting methods
where electronic components of the sign are not enclosed are prohibited, except
where approved pursuant §
17.330.025C.1.c.vi. (Master Sign Program).
   8.   Support elements. The support elements for all signs that include angle
iron, bracing, guy wires, or similar features shall be concealed.
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.035 PERMANENT SIGNS.
A.   Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use. All permanent signs not
otherwise exempt shall comply with the standards of this Chapter pursuant to §
17.330.025A.1. (Sign Permits - Sign Permit for Permanent Signs -Applicability
and Exemptions) and 2. (Compliance with Standards).
Tables 3-12 and
3-13 identify the sign type, number of signs, sign area, and sign height
allowed in each zoning district by land use for signs requiring a sign permit,
as well as additional sign-specific regulations.
TABLE 3-12
STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS: RESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS, MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS, AND RESIDENTIAL USES IN PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS NOT REGULATED BY A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
Sign Type Maximum Number of Maximum Sign Area Maximum Sign Height Additional
          Signs             Per Sign                              Requirements
TABLE 3-12
STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS: RESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS, MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS, AND RESIDENTIAL USES IN PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS NOT REGULATED BY A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
Sign Type      Maximum Number  Maximum Sign   Maximum Sign     Additional
               of Signs        Area Per Sign  Height           Requirements
1. Single-Family Residential Subdivision Development
               1 per major                    5 feet (includes See §§
Monument signs neighborhood    30 square feet decorative cap   17.330.035B. and
               entrance                       and base)        17.330.035C.3.
2. Multiple-Family Residential Uses
                                                               -Permitted only
                                                               for developments
               1 per building                 5 feet           with more than
Monument signs street frontage 23 square feet (including base  12 dwelling
               with a vehicle                 and decorative   units.
               entrance                       cap)             -See §§
                                                               17.330.035B. and
                                                               17.330.035C.3.
                                              Shall not be
                                              displayed above  See §§
Wall signs     1 per building  16 square feet second story and 17.330.035B. and
               street frontage                shall not extend 17.330.035C.5.
                                              above the eave
                                              line
                                                               -Permitted only
                                                               for developments
                                                               with more than
                                                               12 dwelling
                                                               units.
                                                               -Signs shall be
Driveway/on-                                                   securely
site traffic   6 total on a    4 square feet  4 feet           attached to the
directional    site                                            ground in
                                                               landscaped
                                                               areas.
                                                               -Signs shall not
                                                               obstruct access
                                                               and shall be
                                                               placed to avoid
                                                               traffic hazards.
 
TABLE 3-13
STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS: NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS; NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN MIXED-USE, RESIDENTIAL, AND SPECIAL PURPOSE
ZONING DISTRICTS; AND NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
NOT REGULATED BY A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
Sign Type    Maximum Number of Maximum Sign Area Maximum Sign Additional
          Signs                   Per Sign          Height       Requirements
TABLE 3-13
STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS: NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS; NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN MIXED-USE, RESIDENTIAL, AND SPECIAL PURPOSE
ZONING DISTRICTS; AND NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS NOT REGULATED BY A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
               Maximum Number of Maximum
Sign Type   Signs                   Sign Area  Maximum Sign Height                                                    Additional Requirements
                                    Per Sign
1. Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
                                    24 square  Shall not be displayed above second story and shall not extend above   See §§
Wall signs  1 per business frontage feet       the roof eave.                                                         17.330.035B. and
                                                                                                                      17.330.035C.5.
2. Nonresidential Uses in Mixed-Use, Special Purpose, and Planned Development1 Zoning Districts
                                    Front of
                                    awning: 1
                                    1/2 square
                                    feet of
                                    sign area
                                    per linear
                                    foot of
                                    awning
                                    width.
                                    Sides of
                                    awning: 2
                                    square
                                    feet of                                                                           See §§
Awning      N/A                     sign area  Sign limited by location, not by height, when on the face of an        17.330.035B. and
signs                               per linear awning.                                                                17.330.035C.1.
                                    foot of
                                    awning
                                    depth.
                                    Sign area
                                    shall not
                                    exceed 40%
                                    of the
                                    background
                                    awning
                                    area on
                                    which the
                                    sign is
                                    displayed.
                                    Front of
                                    canopy: 1
                                    1/2 square
                                    feet of
                                    sign area
                                    per linear
                                    foot of
                                    canopy
                                    width.
                                    Sides of
                                    canopy: 2
                                    square
                                    feet of
                                    sign area
                                    per linear
                                    foot of
                                    canopy
                                    depth.
Canopy,     Single tenant: 1 per    When       Limited by location, not by height, when on the face of a canopy.      See §§
structural  building frontage.      mounted    When not located on the face of a canopy, 24 inches as measured from   17.330.035B. and
signs       Multiple tenant: 1 per  above or   the lowest point on the sign.                                          17.330.035C.2.
            tenant space.           below a
                                    canopy, 1
                                    1/2 square
                                    feet of
                                    sign area
                                    per linear
                                    feet of
                                    canopy
                                    width.
                                    Sign area
                                    shall not
                                    exceed 40%
                                    of the
                                    background
                                    canopy
                                    area on
                                    which the
                                    sign is
                                    displayed.
            1 for each site with a
            minimum 100 linear feet 50 square
            of street frontage,     feet each,
Monument    with 1 additional sign  with       6 feet inclusive of decorative base and cap, except as provided in §  See §
signs       for each additional 200 maximum    17.330.035C.3                                                          17.330.035C.3.
            linear feet of street   250 square
            frontage, up to a       feet
            maximum of 5 monument   total.
            signs.
            Single tenant: 1 per
            street frontage with a                                                                                    -Prohibited in cemetery (§
            minimum 150 lineal                                                                                        17.250.020), transportation (§
            feet.                   100 square                                                                        17.250.025), and open space (§
Pylon signs Multiple tenant: 1 per  feet each  25 feet, inclusive of decorative base and cap.                         17.250.030) special purpose
            street frontage.                                                                                          zoning districts.
            Street frontages of 300                                                                                   -See §
            feet or more may have a                                                                                   17.330.035C.4.
            second pylon.
                                    Whichever
                                    of the
                                    following
                                    is
                                    greater:
                                    1) 25
                                    square
                                    feet, or
                                    2) 1 1/
                                    2 square
                                    feet of
                                    sign area
                                    per linear
                                    foot of
                                    business
            N/A (sign limited by    frontage2,                                                                        See §§
Wall signs  area and location, not  up to a    Must be located at least 6 inches below roof edge or eave.             17.330.035B. and
            by number)              maximum of                                                                        17.330.035C.5.
                                    200 square
                                    feet of
                                    wall sign
                                    per
                                    business
                                    frontage.
                                    Wall sign
                                    area shall
                                    not exceed
                                    40% of the
                                    background
                                    wall area
                                    on which
                                    the sign
                                    is placed.
                                    Whichever
                                    of the
                                    following
                                    is
                                    greater:
                                    1) 25
                                    square
                                    feet, or
                                    2) 1 1/
                                    2 square                                                                          -Sign area in the total allowed
Parapet and                         feet of                                                                           for wall sign.
false       1 per street frontage   sign area  Shall not extend above or below the parapet or mansard roof edges.     -See §§
mansard                             per linear                                                                        17.330.035B. and
signs                               foot of                                                                           17.330.035C.6. and 7.
                                    business
                                    frontage2,
                                    up to a
                                    maximum of
                                    200 square
                                    feet of
                                    wall sign
                                    per
                                    business
                                    frontage.
                                                                                                                      -Signs shall be securely
Directional                                                                                                           attached on the ground in
signs- on-  6 total on a site       4 square   4 feet                                                                 landscaped areas.
site                                feet                                                                              -Signs shall not obstruct access
traffic                                                                                                               and shall be placed to avoid
                                                                                                                      traffic hazards.
1Where signs are not regulated in a Comprehensive Plan.
2Business frontage width is measured as the widest point on an architectural elevation.
 
B.   Sign Allowance - Permanent Signs. The maximum total sign area for
permanent building signs, which are signs mounted or painted on a building,
shall be 24 square feet per business frontage. For the purpose of this Chapter,
building signs shall include wall, canopy, awning, false mansard, and parapet
signs. Theater marquee and theater above roof identification signs are exempt
from this provision.
C.   Permanent Sign Standards by Sign Type. This Subsection establishes sign
types and standards for permanent signs.
   1.   Awning signs. Awning signs are permitted pursuant to §
17.330.035A.2. (Standards for Permanent Signs) and the following regulations:
      a.   Location. Awnings that display signage shall be limited to building
frontages on the ground floor of buildings. Signs may be placed on the front
and/or sides of the awning.
      b.   Combined sign area. Awning signs shall count as building signs for
the purpose of calculating maximum allowable sign area.
   Figure 3-37 Awning Sign Text Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5032.png]
      c.    Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of at least eight
feet from the bottom of the awning to the highest finished grade shall be
maintained.
      d.    Setback and projection into public right-of-way. A minimum of two
feet between the edge of the awning and the outer curb face shall be
maintained. Any encroachment into the public right-of-way is subject to City
Engineer/Public Works Director approval in accordance with Section 9.08.110.
   2.   Canopy, structural signs. Structural canopy signs are permitted
pursuant to §
17.330.035A.2. (Standards for Permanent Signs) and the following regulations:
      a.   Location. Canopies that display sign age shall be limited to
building frontages on the ground floor of buildings. Signs may be placed on the
front, sides, or top of the exterior surfaces the canopy. No part of a canopy
sign displayed on the vertical or sloped surface of a canopy shall project
beyond the edges of the canopy surface on which it is displayed
   Figure 3-38 Canopy Sign Text Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5034.png]
 
      b.    Combined sign area. Canopy signs shall count as building signs for
the purpose of calculating maximum allowable sign area.
      c.    Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of at least eight
feet from the bottom of the canopy to the highest finished grade shall be
maintained.
      d.    Setback and projection into public right-of-way. A minimum of two
feet between the edge of the canopy and the outer curb face shall be
maintained. Any encroachment into the public right-of-way is subject to City
Engineer/Public Works Director approval in accordance with §
9.08.110.
   3.   Monument signs. Monument signs shall be permitted pursuant to §§
17.330.035A.1. and 2. ( Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use) and
the following regulations:
      a.   Location. Monument signs shall be located only along a site frontage
adjoining a public right-of-way and placed as follows, except as provided in §
17.330.035C.3.f.:
         i.   Nonresidential uses.
            (1)   A minimum distance of five feet from street facing property
lines and 15 feet from interior property lines;
            (2)   A minimum distance of 50 feet from the boundary of any
abutting property in a residential zoning district;
            (3)   A minimum distance of ten feet from the edge of a driveway;
            (4)   A minimum distance of 50 feet from other monument signs along
the same frontage, including adjacent property;
            (5)   A minimum distance of 150 feet from any pylon sign on the
same frontage, including adjacent property; and
            (6)   As near to the middle of the street frontage as practical or
at a major driveway entrance to the site from the street frontage.
         ii.   Residential uses. A minimum distance of ten feet from every
adjoining lot and five feet from every street-facing lot line.
      b.   Multi-business sign copy. Monument signs for multiple businesses on
a site may include the names of individual businesses as well as the building
center name and street address and shall not exceed four vertically stacked
rows of individual business signs.
      c.   Decorative features required. Monument signs shall include a
decorative cap, decorative base, and decorative trim in proportion to the sign.
Decorative features shall not be included in any calculation of sign area,
provided letters and/or graphics do not appear on the decorative features.
Decorative features shall be constructed of decorative masonry materials,
including but not limited to stucco, rock, brick, or veneer, or other durable
solid material.
   Figure 3-39 Monument Sign Features
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5036.png]
 
      d.     Landscaping required. Monument signs shall be located in a
landscaped area that is of a shape, design, and size to provide ground
definition to the sign and not obscure the legibility of the sign, as
determined by the Director. The landscaped area shall be a minimum of 20 square
feet in size, unless the Director determines such landscaping would result in a
safety hazard or parking non-conformity.
      e.   Design. Where there is more than one monument sign on a site, all
such signs shall have designs that are visually related or complementary to
each other in the use of design elements, including sign shape, sign
components, sign structure, and construction materials.
      f.   Group assembly uses. One monument sign is permitted for a group
assembly building site, including private schools, cultural facilities,
religious facilities, theaters, and similar uses and is allowed changeable
copy. The distancing requirements of §
17.330.035C.3.a. (Permanent Signs Permanent Sign Standards by Sign Type -
Monument Signs - Location) shall not apply.
   4.   Pylon signs. Pylon signs shall be allowed only when wall signs cannot
be seen from the public right-of-way, as determined by the Director, except as
provided in §
17.330.035D.4. (Permanent Signs for Specific Uses of Property Theater Marquee
and Theater Above Roof Identification Signs). Pylon signs shall be permitted
pursuant to §
17.330.035A.2. (Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use) and the
following regulations:
      a.   Location. Pylon signs shall be located only along a site frontage
adjoining a public right-of-way and placed as follows:
         i.   A minimum distance of five feet from the street facing property
lines and 15 feet from the interior property lines;
         ii.   A minimum distance of 75 feet from the boundary of any abutting
property in a residential zoning district;
         iii.   A minimum distance of 150 feet from other pylon or monument
signs along the same frontage, including on adjacent property;
         iv.   A minimum distance of ten feet from the edge of a driveway;
         v.   As near to the middle of the street frontage as practical or at a
major driveway entrance to the site from the street frontage; and
         vi.   No portion of the pylon sign shall project over any adjacent
property or public right-of-way.
      b.   Multi-business sign copy. Pylon signs for multiple businesses on a
site may include the names of individual businesses as well as the building
center name and street address.
      c.   Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of 12 feet between
the bottom of the sign and the adjacent ground surface is required for pylon
signs projecting over pedestrian walkways, where permitted.
      d.   Decorative features required. Pylon signs shall include a decorative
cap, decorative post or columns or base, and decorative trim in proportion to
the sign. Decorative features shall not be included in any calculation of sign
area, provided letters and/or graphics do not appear on the decorative
features. Decorative features shall be constructed of decorative masonry
materials, including but not limited to, stucco, rock, brick, or veneer, or
other durable solid material.
      e.   Sign mounting. Pylon signs shall be mounted on at least two supports
or have a solid base. The linear dimension of any post or column shall be at
least 12 inches and no more than 36 inches. Supports shall be well-designed,
compatible in scale with the design of the sign, and have a continuous finished
appearance. Posts shall not include exposed metal but shall be surrounded by a
decorative cover architecturally compatible with the sign cabinet
   Figure 3-40 Multiple Tenant Pylon Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5038.png]
      f.   Design. Where there is more than one pylon sign on a site, all such
signs shall have designs that are visually related or complementary to each
other in the use of design elements, including sign shape, sign components,
sign structure, and construction materials.
      g.    Landscaping required. Pylon signs shall be located in a landscaped
area that is of a shape, design, and size to provide ground definition to the
sign, as determined by the Director. The landscaped area shall be a minimum of
30 square feet in size, unless the Director determines such landscaping would
result in a safety hazard or parking non-conformity.
   5.   Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted pursuant to §
17.330.035A. (Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use) and the
following regulations:
      a.   Location.
         i.    Wall signs shall be affixed to a wall and shall not cover,
wholly or partially, doors, windows, or architectural features (e.g., cornices,
transom windows, vertical piers, and similar elements).
         ii.   Wall signs shall be placed flat against the wall of the
structure and shall not project from the wall more than 12 inches.
         iii.   Walls signs on a building with two or more businesses shall be
placed on the portions of exterior building walls that correspond with the
interior location of the business to which the sign pertains. Where this
provision would not result in a reasonably visible sign from the adjacent
public right-of-way or interior plaza, courtyard, or parking lot on the site,
the Director may approve an alternate sign placement.
         iv.   Walls on the same wall segment for horizontally adjacent
businesses shall have a minimum separation of four feet, and for vertically
adjacent businesses shall have a minimum separation of two feet. Where these
provisions would not result in a reasonably visible sign, including but not
limited to unusual building design or configuration conditions, the Director
may approve deviations from the separation standards.
      b.   Wall painted signs. Standards for wall painted signs shall be the
same as for wall signs, specified in this Chapter.
      c.   Wall signs on architectural features above roofline. Signs on
architectural features that appear as walls protruding above the roof line,
except parapet and false mansard signs, shall only be approved as a sign
modification pursuant to §
17.330.025C.1. (Comprehensive Sign Programs - Master Sign Program).
   Figure 3-41 Architectural Feature Above Roofline
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5040.png]
      d.   Combined sign area. Wall signs on architectural features above
rooflines count as building signs for the purpose of calculating maximum
allowable sign area.
   6.   Parapet signs. A parapet sign is allowed only if the vertical distance
between the bottom of the parapet and the top of the window line below is less
than 18 inches.
      a.   Location.
         i.   Parapet signs shall be placed flat against the parapet and shall
not project from it more than 12 inches.
         ii.   Parapet signs shall not extend above the top or below the bottom
of the parapet.
      b.   Combined sign area. Parapet signs count as building signs for the
purposes of calculating maximum allowable sign area.
   7.   False mansard signs. A false mansard sign is allowed only if the
vertical distance between the bottom of the false mansard and the top of the
window line below is less than 18 inches.
      a.   Location.
         i.   False mansard signs shall be placed flat against the false
mansard wall and shall not project from it more than 12 inches.
         ii.   False mansard signs shall not extend above the top or below the
bottom of the false mansard roof.
      b.   Combined sign area. False mansard signs count as building signs for
the purpose of calculating maximum allowable sign area.
      c.   Design. Any gap between the sides or bottom of the sign and the
false mansard wall shall be architecturally enclosed so that the sign appears
to be an integral part of the false mansard roof structure.
   Figure 3-42 False Mansard Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5042.png]
D.   Permanent signs for specific uses of property. This Subsection establishes
additional sign types and standards for specific uses.
   1.    Drive-through establishments. In addition to the signs allowed
pursuant to §§
17.330.035A. (Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use) and C.
(Permanent Sign Standards by Sign Type), businesses with drive-throughs are
allowed freestanding menu board signs. Two freestanding menu board signs are
permitted for each establishment with a drive-through, each not exceeding 40
square feet in area.
      a.   Height. Freestanding menu board signs shall not exceed seven feet in
height except under the following conditions:
         i.   The sign structure is separately constructed from the cabinet or
face of the sign;
         ii.   The portion above the cabinet or face does not contain any copy;
and
         iii.   The extension adds architectural embellishments to the sign.
      b.   Copy. Signs are allowed changeable copy (electronic or manual
message).
      c.   Orientation and location. Freestanding menu board signs shall not be
located at the corners of driveway or drive-through entrances or exits and
shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way.
   2.   Vehicle dealerships - new or used. In addition to the signs allowed
pursuant to §§
17.330.035A. (Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use) and C.
(Permanent Sign Standards by Permanent Sign Type), vehicle dealerships are
allowed the following sign types, sizes, and Locations.
      a.   Monument signs. For sites of five or more acres, the maximum height
of a monument sign shall be ten feet.
         i.   Banners, flags, and pennants. Banners and pennants, and flags for
either commercial or noncommercial messages, for vehicle dealerships may only
be allowed if approved through a master sign program pursuant to §
17.330.025C.1. (Master Sign Program). The location of such signs shall be
limited to light poles or other similar devices as specified on a site plan.
   3.    Fueling stations. In addition to the signs allowed pursuant to §§
17.330.035A. (Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use) and C.
(Permanent Sign Standards by Sign Type), fueling stations are allowed the
following sign types, sizes, and locations.
      a.     Monument/pylon sign - location. For fueling stations on corner
properties, the distancing requirement of §§
17.330.035C.3.a.i( 4) and (5) (Permanent Signs - Permanent Sign Standards by
Sign Type- Monument Signs- Location- Nonresidential Uses) and §
17.330.035C.4.a.iii. (Pylon Signs- Location) shall not apply.
      b.   Fuel price sign.
         i.   One double-sided fuel price sign, not exceeding 20 square feet
per face, shall be allowed per site, except that an additional and/or larger
fuel price sign may be permitted if the applicant establishes that it is
necessary to the meet the minimum requirements established by local, State, or
Federal law.
         ii.   The fuel price sign shall be incorporated into the permanent
monument sign for the business, if one is provided; however, the area of the
fuel price sign shall not be counted towards the maximum allowable sign area of
the monument sign.
         iii.   No information other than as required or allowed by local,
state or federal law shall be displayed.
         iv.   Fuel price signs are allowed changeable copy, including
electronic message.
      c.   Fueling island signs. Fueling islands are allowed up to a maximum of
two signs each, with each sign not exceeding four square feet, in addition to
one video sign integrated into each fueling station not to exceed two square
feet in area.
      d.   Fueling station canopy signs.
         i.   Number and location. Three fueling station canopy signs area
permitted on fueling station canopy facades oriented toward a parking lot,
street, or driveway, with only one sign permitted on each facade. Fueling
station canopy signs shall not extend above the eave line of the canopy.
Electronic message signs are prohibited.
         ii.   Sign area. Sign area shall not exceed 25% of the surface area of
the canopy facade on which it is located.
   Figure 3-43 Fueling Station Canopy Sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5044.png]
 
      e.   §§ 13470 and 13530 of the California Business and Professions Code
shall also apply to fueling stations.
   4.   Theater marquee and theater above roof identification signs.
      a.   Theater above-roof identification signs. Theater above-roof
identification signs are encouraged through approval of a master sign program
pursuant to §§
17.330.025C.1. (Master Sign Program).
      b.   Theater marquee signs.
         i.   Number. Theaters shall be permitted one theater marquee sign per
street frontage, exclusive of freeways.
         ii.   Location.
            (1)   No marquee sign shall cover, wholly or partially, any wall
opening.
            (2)   Marquee signs shall not extend above the eave line.
            (3)   Marquee signs shall project no more than seven feet from the
face of the building wall upon which the sign is mounted.
            (4)   A minimum vertical clearance of at least eight feet from the
bottom of a theater marquee sign to the highest finished adjacent grade shall
be maintained.
            (5)   Any encroachment into City right-of-way is subject to City
Engineer/Director approval in accordance with §
9.08.110.
         iii.   Sign area. Signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in sign area.
         iv.   Height. Signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
         v.   Illumination. Internal and/or external illumination shall be
approved by the Director as part of a sign permit.
         vi.   Copy. Theater marquee signs are allowed changeable copy,
including electronic message.
      c.   Product display cabinets. When encased within glass-faced cabinets
built into the ground floor exterior building walls facing a street, plaza,
courtyard, or other similar pedestrian-oriented space, current or coming
program information shall not be considered signs as regulated by this Chapter.
      d.   Pylon signs. Pylon signs are allowed consistent with §§
17.330.035A.2. (Permanent Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use) and
17.330.035C.4. (Permanent Sign Standards by Sign Type - Pylon Signs).
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.040 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
A.   General Standards for All Temporary Signs.
   1.   Sign area. The number and area of temporary signs shall be in addition
to the allowed permanent signs.
   2.   Duration and removal of temporary signs. An allowed temporary sign
shall be posted for no more than 30 consecutive days and no more than 60
cumulative days within a calendar year, unless otherwise specified in this
Chapter.
B.   Temporary Sign Standards by Zoning District/Use. All temporary signs,
unless otherwise exempt pursuant to §
17.330.025B. (Sign Permits - Sign Permit for Temporary Signs), shall comply
with the standards of this Chapter. In addition to temporary sign standards in
§
17.330.040D. (Temporary Signs - Temporary Sign Standards by Sign Type),
Table 3-14 identifies the sign type, number of signs, sign area, and sign
height allowed for all permitted temporary signs.
 
TABLE 3-14
TEMPORARY SIGN STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS, NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN MIXED-USE AND SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING
DISTRICTS, AND NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT WHERE
NOT REGULATED BY A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
            Maximum  Maximum Maximum
Sign Type   Number   Sign    Sign    Additional Requirements
                     Area    Height
                                     -See §§
                                     17.330.040D.1. and
                                     17.330.040C.
                                     -For temporary and special events: maximum
                                     of 30 consecutive days of display and not
            1 per    30              more than 6 times per calendar year.
Banner      business square  N/A     -Banner signs for new business are allowed
signs       frontage feet            for a maximum of 90 days or until a
                                     permanent sign is installed, whichever is
                                     less.
                                     -Banner signs for future occupancy are
                                     allowed for a maximum of 45 days and shall
                                     be removed upon first occupancy of the
                                     site.
            1 per 50
            feet of
            street                   -Permitted for temporary or special events
            frontage                 only with an associated Temporary Use,
Feather     and no   12              Special Event, or Temporary Permits (
signs       more     square  10 feet Chapter 17.520),
            than 2   feet            -See §§
            signs                    17.330.040C. and
            per                      17.330.040D.2.
            street
            frontage
                                     -See Subsections
            1 per    6               17.330.040(C) and
Pennants    business square  N/A     17.330.040(D)(3).
            frontage feet            -Maximum of 30 consecutive days of display
                                     and not more than 4 times per calendar
                                     year for temporary or special events.
                                     -See §§
                     10 feet         17.330.040C. and
                     wide            17.330.040D.4.
Inflatable/          with a          -Permitted only for a temporary or special
balloon     1 per    total   10 feet event only with Temporary Use, Special
signs       business 100             Even, or Temporary Even Permits (
                     square          Chapter 17.520).
                     feet            -Maximum of 30 consecutive days of display
                                     and not more than 2 times per calendar
                                     year.
                                     -Shall require approval of a real estate
                                     open house temporary sign permit per §§
                                     17.330.040B. and
                                     17.330.040D.5. which shall include, if
                                     signs are in the public right-of-way
Real estate          5               (ROW), an encroachment permit into the
open house  N/A      square  3 feet  public right-of-way in accordance with §
signs                feet            9.08.11.
                     each            -See §
                                     17.330.040D.5.
                                     -Signs shall only be displayed on weekends
                                     and Tuesdays from no more than one hour
                                     before the event begins to no later than
                                     one hour after the event ends.
 
C.   Sign Allowance - Temporary Signs. No more than one type of temporary sign
as provided in Subsection
17.330.040D. (Temporary Sign Standards by Sign Types) per business may be
displayed at any given time on a site unless authorized in conjunction with a
Temporary Use, Special Event, or Temporary Permits pursuant to
Chapter 17.520 or unless otherwise provided in this Chapter. The maximum
allowed number of each sign, sign area, sign location, and other sign standards
apply as provided in this Chapter.
D.   Temporary Sign Standards by Sign Types.
   1.   Banner signs. Businesses and institutions may exhibit banner signs
advertising an activity or event having a specific duration, or the end of
which is related to a specific action.
      a.   Installation. Banner signs shall be affixed to a permanent structure
below the edge of the roof and shall be securely affixed at all corners and
other points as necessary.
      b.   Projection. Banner signs shall not project above the edge of a roof.
      c.   Materials and maintenance. Banner signs shall be professionally
crafted and well maintained. Acceptable materials for banner signs include
vinyl, nylon reinforced vinyl, mesh, PVC film, polypropylene, polyethylene or
polyester-like materials, or similar materials.
   2.   Feather signs. Businesses and institutions may exhibit feather signs
related to an activity or event having a specific duration, or the end of which
is related to a specific action.
      a.   Location and setback. Feather signs shall not interfere with either
pedestrian or vehicular sight distance, any view corridor, or obstruct views to
any existing business or existing permanent sign. Feather signs shall be set
back a minimum of five feet from any property line.
      b.   Duration. The display of feather signs shall be permitted only
during the hours a business is open for business and one-half hour before
opening and after closing.
      c.   Materials and maintenance. Feather signs shall be professionally
crafted and well maintained. Acceptable materials for feather signs include
vinyl, nylon reinforced vinyl, mesh, PVC film, polypropylene, polyethylene or
polyester-like materials, or similar materials.
   3.   Pennants. Businesses and institutions may exhibit pennants advertising
an activity or event having a specific duration, or the end of which is related
to a specific action.
      a.   Installation. Pennants shall be affixed to a permanent structure
below the edge of the roof or on a light pole and shall be securely affixed at
all corners and other points as necessary.
      b.   Projection. Pennants shall not project above the edge of a roof.
      c.   Materials and maintenance. Pennants shall be professionally crafted
and well maintained. Acceptable materials for pennant signs include vinyl,
nylon reinforced vinyl, mesh, PVC film, polypropylene, polyethylene or
polyester-like materials, or similar materials.
   4.   Inflatable/balloon signs. Businesses and institutions may exhibit
inflatable/balloon signs advertising an activity or event having a specific
duration, or the end of which is related to a specific action.
      a.   Installation and location. Inflatable/balloon signs shall not
interfere with either pedestrian or vehicular sight distance, any view
corridor, or obstruct views to any existing business or existing permanent
sign. Ground-mounted inflatable/balloon signs shall be securely affixed to the
ground, shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any property line. Roof-
mounted inflatable/balloon signs shall be securely affixed to the structure at
all corners and other points as necessary.
      b.   Materials and maintenance. Inflatable/balloon signs shall be
professionally crafted and well maintained.
   5.   Real estate open house signs. Real estate offices may exhibit temporary
signs advertising open house events on public right-of-way parkways and
sidewalks.
      a.   Location and setback. Real estate open house signs shall not
interfere with either pedestrian or vehicular sight distance, any view
corridor, or obstruct views to any existing business or existing permanent
sign. Signs shall be set back a minimum of two feet from any public right-of-
way curb or travel lane.
      b.   Duration. The display of the signs shall be permitted only on
weekends and Tuesdays during the hours of the real estate open house and one
hour before and after the open house event.
      c.   The City shall have the authority to remove any such sign at any
time for reasons of public safety or violation of the requirements of this
Subsection.
      d.   Materials and maintenance. Signs shall be prepared by a sign
professional and maintained in a safe, clean, and well-constructed condition.
      e.   A temporary sign permit for locating real estate open house signs in
the public right-of-way sidewalk and/or parkway shall be obtained by the real
estate office operator or agent consistent with §
17.330.025B. (Sign Permits - Sign Permit for Temporary Signs) and shall be
valid for a period of one year.
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
 § 17.330.045 HISTORICAL SIGNS.
Signs added to or modified on culturally designated buildings or structures,
and signs approved as cultural resource designations, shall be regulated
pursuant to
Chapter 15.05 (Historic Preservation Program).
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.050 SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
The authorizations, prohibitions, and restrictions of this Section shall apply
to all publicly and privately owned or controlled signs on public property.
A.   Privately owned or controlled temporary or permanent signs shall be
prohibited on or over public property, except as otherwise authorized pursuant
to this Chapter, Title or other duly enacted legislation of the City. This
Section also shall not apply to signs in any portion of the public property
that is temporarily or permanently in use for private commercial or non-
commercial purposes, other than transportation purposes, pursuant to a lease,
license, permit, or other entitlement issued by the City, provided that such
signs, if any, fully comply with the applicable lease, license, permit, or
other City entitlement.
B.   Temporary or permanent signs placed by the City or other authorized
government agency (as specified in §
17.330.050.B.9., (Signs on Public Property), or their respective agents, for
public purposes shall be allowed on public property. This Section shall not be
interpreted to impose an obligation on the City to place any signs on public
property, except as required by law. Allowable signs may include signs relating
to any of the following.
   1.   Regulation of traffic and traffic safety, including pedestrian and
bicycle traffic, and parking.
   2.   Identification or directions to streets; public buildings and
facilities; public or private medical, lodging, transportation, educational,
sanitation, or other facilities or services; public or private places or events
of public interest; and scenic or historical resources, or other destinations
or points of interest.
   3.   Access to public services or facilities.
   4.   Safety and emergencies, including identification and warning signs
concerning potential hazards or hazardous conditions, utility installations,
flood hazards or flood control facilities, emergency conditions or services and
crime and accident scene control.
   5.   Flags or emblems of the United States, California or of another
government, governmental agency or public institution.
   6.   Statements concerning any policy of the City.
   7.   Promotion of civic events and activities.
      a.   Signs allowed by this Subsection shall be limited to signs, banners,
pennants or other displays placed by the City relating to any civic event or
activity organized or sponsored by the City.
      b.   For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall
apply:
         i.   Civic event or activity. Any event or activity organized or
sponsored by the City, including but not limited to: (a) any public program or
educational activity; and (b) the commemoration or celebration of any
historical date, event or person, holiday or persons or events of local,
State,. or national significance.
         ii.   Sponsored. Means that the City is: (a) participating in an
official capacity in the planning, preparation or promotion of the event or
activity; and (b) contributing 25 percent of the total estimated costs of the
civic event or activity, or at least $1,000, whichever is less. This
contribution may take the form of funds, labor, staff time, materials, a waiver
of fees, or any combination of the foregoing.
   8.   Way-finding kiosks pursuant to an agreement with the City.
   9.   Any other signs posted by a public agency exercising its legal
authority or performing governmental functions within the City's public right-
of-way.
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.055 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
A.   Applicability. This Section applies to any permanent sign, including its
physical structure and supporting elements, which was lawfully erected and
maintained in compliance with all applicable laws in effect at the time of
original installation, but which does not currently comply with the provisions
of this Chapter.
B.   Continuation of nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign may be continued
and shall be maintained in good condition as required by this Chapter, unless
otherwise provided in this Chapter.
C.   Permitted modifications and maintenance to nonconforming signs.
   1.   Sign copy and face changes and nonstructural maintenance (e.g.,
cleaning, painting, and rust removal) of nonconforming signs for new or
existing businesses are allowed, provided the sign or sign face is not
increased. Any such change shall not require other nonconforming signs onsite
to be brought into compliance.
   2.   The physical structure or support elements for any one nonconforming
sign for an existing business may be changed, provided the total combined
maximum amount of allowable sign and sign face area is not exceeded. Any such
change shall not require other nonconforming signs onsite to be brought into
compliance.
D.   Prohibited Modifications to Nonconforming Signs.
   1.   Increasing the height of the sign structure.
   2.   Increasing the size of the sign face(s).
   3.   Moving or replacing the sign, unless required to accommodate street
widening or other City projects.
E.   Damage. A nonconforming sign that sustains less than 50% damage to its
structure shall be repaired or replaced as soon as possible, but not more than
180 days after the date of the damage. If the damage is more than 50%, the sign
shall be removed or modified to meet the provisions of this Chapter within 180
days of the date of the damage.
F.   Intensification of Use. All nonconforming signs for a business premises
shall be made to conform to this Chapter under either of the following
conditions:
   1.   A new business requires an Administrative Site Plan Review, Site Plan
Review, or a similar discretionary review as set forth in this Title.
   2.   A remodel or expansion of an existing business results in the doubling
or more of the gross square footage of an existing building, or exceeds 10,000
square feet, whichever is less.
G.   Facade Remodel. Remodel of the front facade of a building shall require
that all nonconforming signs located on the front facade or affected by the
facade remodel be brought into compliance with this Chapter. For the purposes
of this Subsection, facade remodel shall mean the change to an existing
building exterior for purposes of updating its appearance, including but not
limited to modifying materials, design elements and some structural elements,
but which does not include regular maintenance activities.
H.   Relocation. A nonconforming sign proposed to be relocated shall be made
conforming at the time of relocation, except where the relocation occurs due to
a City public improvement project.
I.   Traffic Hazard or Unsafe Condition. A nonconforming sign that constitutes
a traffic hazard or creates any other unsafe condition shall be subject to
immediate removal or modification to eliminate the hazardous or unsafe
condition.
J.   Abandonment. A nonconforming sign that is no longer in active use because
the businesses has ceased operating on the premises where the sign is located
shall be removed within 180 days of cessation of the business.
K.   Nonconforming Sign Removal. Any nonconforming sign may be removed without
requiring other nonconforming signs to be simultaneously removed.
L.   Agreement. An existing nonconforming sign that is subject to an agreement
between the City and the sign owner may remain in accordance with the
provisions of that agreement.
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.330.060 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
A.   Regulatory Interpretations. The Director shall have the authority for
regulatory interpretations. All regulatory interpretations of this Chapter are
to be exercised consistent with the City's message content neutrality policy.
B.   Sign Permit and Comprehensive Sign Program Applications. Applications for
sign permits for permanent signs and temporary signs, and applications for
master sign programs and multiple-business sign programs shall be made on the
application forms prepared by, and on file at, the Planning and Development
Department and shall include all submittal items identified on the application
forms as well as payment of required application fees.
C.   Responsibility and Reviewing Authority.
   1.   It is the responsibility of the Director to enforce all provisions of
this Chapter.
   2.   The Director shall be the reviewing authority for all sign-related
decisions, including applications for sign permits, sign programs,
modifications, repair and removal orders, abatement orders, requests for
interpretations, enforcement, and all other sign-related matters requiring
decision by the City. The decision of the Director shall be made as an
administrative matter, with no public hearing required.
   3.   If the Director finds that any application for a sign permit or sign
program is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing not more than
30 days after the application is received. The notice shall detail all known
points of incompleteness. Within 30 business days following the receipt of an
amended application or supplemental information, the Director shall again
determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures
set forth above. Evaluation and notification shall occur, as provided above,
until such time as the application is found to be complete. A decision on
whether to approve or deny an application shall be rendered within ten days of
determining an application complete.
D.   Permit Expiration.
   1.   Permanent sign. Each approved permit or entitlement for a permanent
sign shall expire and may receive an extension of time consistent with §
17.595.030 (Time Limits and Extensions) of this Code.
   2.   Temporary sign. Each approved permit or entitlement for a temporary
sign shall expire three months from the date of approval, if the use has not
been exercised, unless otherwise specified in the permit or entitlement or
permitted by State law.
E.   Revocation of Sign Permit or Sign Program. A sign permit or sign program
may be revoked by the Director on the following grounds:
   1.   Noncompliance with any condition of the sign permit or sign program.
   2.   Uncorrected violations of this Chapter.
   3.   The sign is being operated in a manner that constitutes a public
nuisance or is a threat to the public health and safety.
F.   Appeals. The decision of the Director on a sign permit or sign program may
be appealed in accordance with
Chapter 17.640 (Appeals), provided that the appeal must be submitted in writing
within seven calendar days of the decision of the Director, and the appeal
hearing shall be set no later than 30 calendar days after the appeal is
received by the City. When a final decision is issued by the Planning
Commission or City Council, the time for a challenge to the decision in a court
of law shall be governed by Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8. Notice of the
reviewing body's decision shall include citation to Code of Civil Procedures §
1094.8.
G.   Violations. Violations of any provision of this Chapter shall be addressed
as set forth in §§
1.01.035 through
1.01.045 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
ARTICLE 4: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
      Chapter
         
17.400   STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
CHAPTER 17.400: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
Section
   
17.400.005   Purpose
   
17.400.010   Applicability
   
17.400.015   Alcoholic Beverage Sales
   
17.400.020   Animal Boarding, Pet Day Care, Veterinary Clinics and Animal
Hospitals
   
17.400.025   Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs)
   
17.400.030   Check-Cashing Businesses
   
17.400.035   [Reserved]
   
17.400.040   [Reserved]
   
17.400.045   Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities
   
17.400.046   Emergency Shelters
   
17.400.048   Event Centers
   
17.400.050   Firearms Sales
   
17.400.055   Home Occupations
   
17.400.060   Live/Work Development Standards
   
17.400.065   Low Barrier Navigation Centers
   
17.400.070   Outdoor Dining
   
17.400.075   Outdoor Retail Sales and Displays
   
17.400.080   Outdoor Storage
   
17.400.085   Pawnshops
   
17.400.090   Recycling Facilities
   
17.400.095   Residential Uses - Accessory Dwelling Units
   
17.400.100   Residential Uses - Accessory Residential Structures
   
17.400.105   Secondhand Stores
   
17.400.106   Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units
   
17.400.110   Telecommunications Facilities
   
17.400.115   Temporary Storage Containers
   
17.400.120   Vehicle Fueling and Electrical Vehicle (EV) Charging Stations
   
17.400.125   Vehicle Repair Shops
  § 17.400.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides site planning and development standards for land uses
that are allowed by Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-
Specific Standards) in individual or multiple zoning districts, and for
activities that require special standards to mitigate their potential adverse
impacts.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.010 APPLICABILITY.
Land uses and activities covered by this Chapter shall comply with the
provisions applicable to the specific use, in addition to all other applicable
provisions of this Title.
A.   Where Allowed.  The uses that are subject to the standards in this Chapter
shall be in compliance with the requirements of
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards).
B.   Land Use Permit Requirements.  The uses that are subject to the standards
in this Chapter shall be authorized by the land use permit required by
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards),
except where a land use permit requirement is established by this Chapter for a
specific use.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.015 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES.
This Section provides location and operating standards for the establishment of
alcoholic beverage sales facilities (for off-site or on-site consumption) in
compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards).
A.   Permit Requirement. Establishments offering the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages are subject to all of the restrictions of the applicable zoning
district, and shall only be allowed as identified in Table 4-1 (Permit
Requirements for Alcoholic Beverage Sales), which may require an Administrative
Use Permit (AUP) or a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) in compliance with
Chapter 17.530 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits).
   Table 4-1
   Permit Requirements for Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Zoning District(s): Type of Establishment Permit Requirement
Zoning District(s): Type of Establishment                                       Permit
                                                                                Requirement
MU-N Zoning District:                                                              
1.   Alcoholic beverage sales incidental to a restaurant or retail use       AUP
MU-1, MU-2, MU-M, MU-DT, MU-H, MU-I, and S Zoning Districts:
1. Alcoholic beverage sales if established:
   a.   Within 300 feet of residentially zoned property or an elementary/ AUP
secondary school.
   b.   More than 300 feet from a residentially zoned property or an      No use
elementary/secondary school.                                                    permit
                                                                                required
   c.   As an ancillary beverage tasting facility or artisanal alcohol
production exceeding 20% gross floor area of the primary use but no greater     AUP
than 30% gross floor area of the primary use.
2.   Alcoholic beverage sales with the concurrent retailing of motor vehicle CUP
fuel.
 
B.   Considerations for Approval of a Use Permit. In making the findings
required for the approval of an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use
Permit, the following issues shall also be considered.
   1.   Whether the proposed use will result in an undue concentration of
establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages.
   2.   Whether the proposed use will result in any adverse impact on any
adjacent or nearby residential uses, religious facilities, schools, libraries,
public parks and playgrounds, and other similar uses.
C.   Vehicle Fueling Stations Selling Alcoholic Beverages. In addition to the
other requirements of this section, vehicle fueling stations selling alcoholic
beverages shall be subject to the following
   1.   No advertisement of alcoholic beverages shall be displayed at motor
vehicle fuel islands.
   2.   No illuminated advertising for alcoholic beverages shall be located on
buildings, windows, doors, or freestanding signs.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2018-011 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.020 ANIMAL BOARDING, PET DAY CARE, VETERINARY CLINICS AND ANIMAL
HOSPITALS.
This Section provides operational standards for kennels, pet day care
facilities, veterinary clinics and animal hospitals in compliance with Article
2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Operational Standards.
   1.   All operations must be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
   2.   Outdoor dog runs and training activities are permitted only within the
MU-I Zone, and when the facility is located at least 200 feet from a
residential zone.
   3.   The areas within the building where animals are boarded shall be
sufficiently soundproofed to prevent a disturbance or become a nuisance to
surrounding properties, as determined by the Director.
   4.   The areas of the building where animals are boarded shall have a
minimum of ten air changes per hour.
   5.   Animal isolation areas shall have 100% fresh air, with all air
exhausted and none returned to the ventilation system.
   6.   Public access areas shall be provided with a separate ventilation
system from the animal boarding and treatment areas.
   7.   The areas used for animal boarding, isolation, and treatment shall be
constructed of easily-cleaned materials.
   8.   All areas where animals are present shall be cleaned a minimum of twice
daily in order to provide appropriate odor control and sanitation.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.025 AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINES (ATMS).
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for
automatic teller machines (ATMs) in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards).
A.   Location Requirements. ATMs proposed on the exterior of structures shall
be (see
Figure 4-1):
   1.   Setback from an adjacent street curb or alley by a minimum of seven
feet.
   2.   A privacy area immediately in front of each ATM, measuring at least
five-feet-wide by four-feet- deep, shall be provided. Methods for defining the
privacy area shall be approved by the Director.
   3.   Located to not eliminate or substantially reduce any landscaped areas.
   4.   Located to not allow drive-through access from a vehicle.
   5.   Located to ensure the safety and security of patrons.
   Figure 4-1 ATM Location Requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-34.jpg]
 
B.   Design. All construction and modifications to the exterior of the
structure pertaining to the installation of the ATMs shall be completed in a
manner consistent with the architectural design of the structure, and in
conformance with all applicable City architectural standards and guidelines.
C.   Lighting. Each exterior ATM shall be provided with security lighting in
compliance with §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting) or State law, whichever is more restrictive.
D.   Maintenance. Each ATM shall be provided with receptacles sufficient in
size and number to accommodate trash and smoking materials generated by users
of the ATM.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.030 CHECK-CASHING BUSINESSES.
This Section provides location and operating standards for check-cashing
business in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Distance Separation. A minimum linear distance of 1,000 feet shall be
required to separate all check-cashing businesses from another existing check-
cashing or pawnshop business, parks, playground, primary and/or secondary
schools, and single-family zoned property.
B.   Plans Required. Development plans shall be submitted with the application
for the required Conditional Use Permit, clearly illustrating the details of
the proposed exterior (e.g., elevations, lighting, signs, and the like),
interior (e.g., layout and design, lighting, window display, and the like),
days and hours of operation, and customer queuing in order to ensure that the
use shall be developed and operated in a manner that would be compatible with
an attractive, stable, and thriving commercial district conducive to retail
shopping.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-002 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.035 [RESERVED].
§ 17.400.040 [RESERVED].
§ 17.400.045 DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.
This Section provides standards for the location, development, and operation of
drive-in and drive-through facilities in compliance with Article 2 (Zoning
Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development Standards), which
shall be designed and operated to effectively mitigate problems of congestion,
excessive pavement, litter, noise, traffic, and unsightliness.
A.   Development Standards for Drive-In/Drive-Through Facilities.
   1.   Drive aisle length.  The drive-through aisle shall provide a minimum of
140 feet of queuing length, of which at least 60 feet shall be provided before
an on-site menu board. The drive aisle shall be measured along the centerline,
from the entry or beginning of a drive-aisle to the center of the farthest
service window area.
   2.   Drive aisle width. Drive aisles shall have a minimum ten-foot interior
radius at curves, and a minimum 12-foot width.
   3.   Drive aisle separation.  Each drive aisle shall be separated by curbing
and landscaping from the circulation routes necessary for ingress or egress
from the property, or access to any off-street parking spaces.
   4.   Drive aisle entrance. Each entrance to a drive aisle and the direction
of traffic flow shall be clearly designated by signs and/or pavement markings,
as deemed necessary by the Director.
   5.   Walkways. To the extent possible, pedestrian walkways should not
intersect the drive aisles. Where they do, they shall have clear visibility and
be emphasized by enhanced paving or markings, as deemed necessary by the
Director.
   6.   Screening. Each drive aisle shall be appropriately screened with a
combination of landscaping, low walls, and/or berms to prevent headlight glare
from impacting adjoining land uses, public rights-of-way, and parking lots, as
deemed necessary by the Director.
   7.   Decorative wall. A six-foot-high, solid decorative masonry wall shall
be constructed on each property line that adjoins a residential developed
parcel. The design of the wall and the proposed construction materials shall be
subject to the approval of the Director.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.046 EMERGENCY SHELTERS.
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for
emergency shelters in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards):
A.   Location and Permit Requirements. Emergency shelters located within the
MU-2 zoning district and the area identified in
Map 4.05 shall be permitted after approval of a Zoning Clearance in compliance
with
Chapter 17.510 (Zoning Clearances). Emergency Shelters located in the MU-1 and
MU-MD zoning districts shall be permitted subject to approval of a Conditional
Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 17.530 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits).
B.   Lot Size. Emergency shelters shall be limited to lots that have a minimum
lot area of 10,000 square feet.
C.   Number of Beds. Emergency shelters located within the MU-2 zoning district
shall not have more than 30 beds. Maximum number of beds for emergency shelters
located in zoning districts where emergency shelters are conditionally
permitted shall be established as part of the Conditional Use Permit.
D.   Length of Stay. Emergency shelters shall be available to residents for no
more than 180 days in any 12-month period.
E.   Hours of Operation. Emergency shelters shall establish and maintain set
hours for the client intake/discharge, which shall be prominently posted on-
site.
F.   Proximity to Other Emergency Shelters. An emergency shelter shall not be
located within 300 feet of another Emergency Shelter unless located within the
MU-2 zoning district and the area identified in
Map 4.05, in which case no separation shall be required.
G.   On-Site Waiting and Client Intake Area. All on-site waiting and client
intake areas shall be located indoors and shall have a minimum area of 100
square feet.
H.   Lighting. Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security
purposes as determined by the Director. Exterior lighting shall comply with the
requirements of §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting).
I.   Laundry Facilities. On-site laundry facilities or services adequate for
the number of residents shall be provided.
J.   Personal Property. Secured areas for personal property shall be provided.
K.   Common Facilities. The development may provide one or more of the
following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents and
staff:
   1.   Kitchen and outdoor dining areas.
   2.   Recreation room.
   3.   Counseling center.
   4.   Child care facilities.
   5.   Other support services as necessary.
L.   Outdoor Activity. Outdoor activities may only be conducted between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
M.   Refuse. A refuse storage area completely enclosed with a masonry wall not
less than five-feet-high with a solid gated opening, and large enough to
accommodate standard sized commercial trash bins shall be provided.
N.   Emergency Shelter Provider. All Emergency shelters shall comply with the
following requirements:
   1.   Shelters shall provide services to one or more population groups and
shall provide segregated sleeping areas for each separate population group,
unless individual units are provided.
   2.   At least one facility manager shall be on-site at all hours the
facility is open. Additional staff shall be provided, as necessary, to ensure
that at least one staff member is provided in all segregated sleeping areas as
appropriate.
   3.   Services shall be provided to assist residents in obtaining permanent
shelter.
   4.   The provider shall submit to the Current Planning Division for review
and approval as part of the zoning clearance or conditional use permit process
a written operational plan including, as applicable, provisions for staff
training neighborhood outreach security, screening of residents to ensure
compatibility with services provided noise and loitering control and for
training, counseling and treatment programs for residents.
   Map 4.05 Emergency Shelter Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.png]
 
(Ord. No. 2013-008 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-002 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.048 EVENT CENTERS.
A.   Event Centers, as defined and permitted by this Title, shall comply with
the following standards, in addition to those identified in §
17.520.035.A. and §
17.520.030 (Conditions of Approval):
   1.   Conformance with all applicable Building and Fire Code requirements for
assembly uses including, but not limited to, egress, seismic retrofitting, and
restrooms.
   2.   Provision of off-street parking in accordance with
Chapter 17.320 of this Title.
   3.   Conformance with the following public health, safety and welfare
standards:
      a.   When abutting residential uses or zoning, delivery and retrieval of
event materials/props and set-up and take-down operations and activities shall
occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday
and 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.
      b.   Event staff shall monitor vehicle parking and retrieval to ensure
there is no excessive noise before, during, or after events.
      c.   Event staff shall instruct event attendees to remain respectful of
nearby residential areas and signage shall be clearly and conspicuously posted
and maintained in parking areas with the following wording: "Event Guests and
Event Staff, please remain respectful of nearby residential and commercial
neighbors and refrain from making loud noises, playing music at high volumes,
and accelerating vehicle engines. Thank you for your cooperation."
      d.   Event staff shall utilize at least one three-yard plastic recycle
bin, one three-yard plastic refuse bin, and one green waste bin sized to Public
Works Environmental Programs and Operation Division standard, which must be
located and filled within the interior of the event center building. After each
event, all bins must be located on the outside of the event center building for
City trash pick-up operations.
      e.   All events and event-related activities shall occur within the
interior of the event center building. No event-related activities or storage
of event materials/props shall be permitted exterior of the event center
building.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.050 FIREARMS SALES.
This Section provides location and operating standards for firearms sales in
compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Distance Separation.  A minimum linear distance of 1,000 feet shall be
required to separate all establishments that offer firearms for sale from all
other establishments that offer firearms for sale, and from parks, playgrounds,
and primary and/or secondary schools.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.055 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
This Section provides standards for home occupations in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards). It is the intent of the City to allow a home occupation within a
dwelling unit, provided the home occupation is deemed incidental to, and
compatible with, surrounding residential uses:
A.   Allowed Home Occupations. The following are deemed appropriate business
activities when conducted by the occupants of a dwelling in a manner accessory
to, and compatible with, the residential characteristics of the surrounding
neighborhood. Allowable home occupations shall be limited to the following
activities.
   1.   One-on-one art, music and similar fine-art related lessons, and
academic tutoring, which do not generate more than six additional vehicle trips
(i.e. three car visits) to the dwelling each day.
   2.   Office-type uses, including an office for an accountant, architect,
attorney, consultant, insurance agent, licensed therapist, musician, planner,
technical advisor, or writer, which do not generate more than six additional
vehicle trips (i.e. three car visits) to the dwelling each day.
   3.   Office/information uses that involve the use of a computer, telephone,
and other electronic equipment, which do not generate more than six additional
vehicle trips (i.e. three car visits) to the dwelling each day.
   4.   Art and craft work (ceramics, painting, photography, sculpture, and the
like).
   5.   Sewing (e.g., dressmaking, millinery) and small handcrafts.
   6.   Other uses the Director deems to be of the same general character as
those listed above, and not detrimental to the applicable residential zoning
district and surrounding neighborhood.
B.   Prohibited Home Occupations. The following list presents examples of
commercial uses that are not incidental to or compatible with residential
activities, are suitable only in non-residential zoning districts, and are
therefore prohibited:
   1.   Adult business activities or businesses.
   2.   Businesses that involve the breeding, grooming, harboring, raising, or
training of dogs, cats, or other animals on the premises.
   3.   Carpentry and cabinet making (does not prohibit a normal wood-working
hobby operation).
   4.   Dance club or night club.
   5.   Fortune telling (psychic).
   6.   Hair, nail, facial, and similar personal care.
   7.   Manufacturing and/or assembly.
   8.   Massage therapy.
   9.   Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories.
   10.   Personal self-storage (mini-storage).
   11.   Plant nursery.
   12.   Retail sales (e.g., stock on hand and customers coming to the home are
not allowed).
   13.   Vehicle repair (body or mechanical), upholstery, automobile detailing
(e.g., washing, waxing, and the like) and painting. (This does not prohibit
mobile minor repair or detailing at the customer's location).
   14.   Welding and machining.
   15.   Other uses determined by the Director not to be incidental to, or
compatible with, residential activities.
C.   Operating Standards.  Home occupations are an accessory use to the primary
residential use of the site, and shall comply with all of the following
operating standards.
   1.   Accessory use.  The home occupation shall be clearly secondary to the
full-time use of the property as a residence, and shall not alter the
appearance of the dwelling.
   2.   Limitations on clients.  No customer or client visits to the site of a
home occupation shall be permitted, except for the activities identified in §
17.400.055.A.1. and §
17.400.055.A.2. A physically or mentally impaired individual who is prevented,
by the nature of the impairment, from independent travel, may invite clientele,
customers, or patrons to the premises to conduct business that do not exceed
more than six additional vehicle trips (i.e. three car visits) to the dwelling
each day.
   3.   Visibility.  The use shall not require any modification not customarily
found in a dwelling, nor shall the home occupation activity or storage of
materials be visible from the adjoining public right-of-way, or from
neighboring residential properties.
   4.   Display, sales or storage.  Outdoor display, indoor or outdoor sales,
or outdoor storage of materials shall not be allowed on the premises.
   5.   Advertising. Advertising signs on or off the site shall not be allowed.
   6.   Parking. The use shall not significantly impact the on-street parking
in the neighborhood.
   7.   Safety, occupancy classification.  Activities conducted and equipment
or material used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications
of the premises. The use shall not employ the storage of flammable, explosive,
or hazardous materials.
   8.   Off-site effects. No home occupation activity shall create dust,
electrical interference, fumes, gas, glare, light, noise, odor, smoke, toxic/
hazardous materials, vibration, or other hazards or nuisances, nor any other
negative effect that may be felt, heard, or otherwise sensed on adjoining
parcels, as determined by the Director.
   9.   Employees.  A home occupation shall have no employees working on the
site of the home occupation other than full-time residents of the dwelling.
   10.   Deliveries. The frequency of deliveries shall not exceed that normally
and reasonably occurring for a residence, nor shall the types of vehicles.
   11.   Motor vehicles. There shall be no motor vehicles used or kept on the
premises, except residents' passenger vehicles, and one commercially-licensed
automobile, pickup truck, or van.
   12.   Equipment. The use of power equipment not normally associated with a
residence shall not be allowed as part of a home occupation, nor shall any
other mechanical equipment.
   13.   Utility services modifications.  The home occupation use shall not
have utility service modifications, other than those required for normal
residential use, that would be classified as commercial or industrial in load
or design.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.060 LIVE/WORK DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A.   Purpose. This Section provides location, development, and performance
standards for live/work developments in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
B.   Applicability.
   1.   The provisions in this Section shall regulate the conversion and new
construction of live/work uses, where allowed by the applicable zoning
districts.
   2.   Except as specifically provided in this Section, live/work projects
shall be in compliance with the regulations of
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
   3.   Where an Owner-Participation Agreement, Disposition and Development
Agreement, or Development Agreement with the City and/or Redevelopment Agency
applies to a land parcel, and the provisions of such agreement differ from the
Live/Work Development Standards, the provisions of the agreement shall prevail.
C.   Use Regulations.
   1.   Permitted uses/occupations. The following uses/occupations are
permitted in live/work units:
      a.   Accountant;
      b.   Architect;
      c.   Artist and artisan;
      d.   Attorney;
      e.   Computer software- and multimedia-related professional;
      f.   Engineer;
      g.   Fashion, graphic, interior and other designer;
      h.   Insurance, real estate and travel agent;
      i.   Photographer;
      j.   Psychologist/psychiatrist;
      k.   Other similar uses/occupations, as determined by the Director, may
be permitted, provided that the allowed uses/occupations are permitted by the
underlying zone.
   2.   Occupancy and Employees.
      a.   At least one of the full-time employees of the live/work unit must
be a full-time resident of the live/work unit and shall possess a valid
Business Tax Certificate.
      b.   Only one residential component per live/work unit shall be allowed.
      c.   The residential component shall not be rented separately from the
working space.
      d.   No more than one employee, other than the resident(s) of the live/
work unit, shall be permitted on site at any given time in units that are less
than or equal to 1,499 square feet.
      e.   No more than two employees, other than the resident(s) of the live/
work unit, shall be permitted on site at any given time in units that are
greater than or equal to 1,500 square feet.
   3.   Business activity. None of the uses permitted shall be operated in an
objectionable manner, due to fumes, odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or
vibrations that are or may be detrimental to properties and occupants in the
neighborhood and/or to any other uses and occupants on the same property.
   4.   Special and/or temporary events. Special and/or temporary events in
live/work units shall be required to follow the permit process for special and/
or temporary events contained in
Chapter 17.520 (Temporary Use and Special Event Permits).
   5.   Covenant.  A City-approved covenant shall be executed by the owner of
each live/work unit and shall include statements that the occupant(s)
understand(s) and accept(s) he/she is living in a live/work unit and must
operate a business from said unit. The covenant shall also set forth the
required use conditions as described in this Section.
      a.   The residential component shall be contiguous with, and integral to,
the working space, with direct access between the two areas, and not as a
separate stand-alone dwelling unit.
      b.   Only one residential component per live/work unit shall be allowed.
The residential component space and the business component space shall only be
used as one contiguous habitable space and, if rented, shall only be rented
together as one tenant space.
      c.   Any lease between the owner and a tenant, or between a tenant and a
subtenant, shall refer to the fact that the live/work unit is subject to the
above-referenced covenant.
      d.   A resident in any live/work unit shall operate a business from the
unit and shall possess a Culver City Business Tax Certificate in good standing
for business activities conducted within the unit.
D.   Development Standards.
   1.   Unit size and dimension. The minimum square footage of a live/work unit
shall be 700 square feet.
   2.   Floor plans.  A live/work unit may include a single level floor plan or
a multiple-level floor plan. See Figures 4-2 and 4-3 on the next page.
   Figure 4-2 Typical Live/Work Layout 1       Figure 4-3 Typical Live/Work
Layout 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-38.jpg]
 
   3.   Building setbacks.  Same as those required by the underlying zone.
   4.   Building heights. Same as those required by the underlying zone.
   5.   Parking standards. Live/work developments shall comply with all
requirements contained in
Chapter 17.320 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).
   6.   Density. The density of a live/work project shall comply with the
density of the base zone per
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
   7.   Open space.
      a.   Each unit shall have a minimum of 50 square feet of common and/or
private open space.
      b.   Common open space areas shall have a minimum dimension of 15 feet,
which may include a combination of open space and adjacent setback area.
      c.   Private open space areas shall be at least 30 square feet and five
feet in any direction, to the extent feasible.
      d.   Private and common open space requirements may be satisfied by a
selection or combination of the following: atriums, balconies, courtyards,
decks, gardens, gyms/exercise rooms, patios, playgrounds/tot lots, rooftop
decks, patios and gardens, and swimming pools. The Director may approve similar
amenities not listed above.
   8.   Signage. Signage for live/work units shall be limited to the following.
      a.   Window signs.
         i.   One window sign with a maximum dimension of one-foot by two-feet
shall be permitted.
         ii.   No sign permit shall be required for the one permitted window
sign.
         iii.   A glass door sign shall be considered a window sign.
         iv.   Window signs shall be limited to individual letters and logos
placed on the surface of the window or glass door.
         v.   No window sign on the outside of the window shall extend onto or
over the perimeter window frames, mullions or building facade divisions of the
window on which it is displayed.
      b.   Projecting/hanging signs.
         i.   One projecting/hanging sign with a maximum dimension of one-foot
by two-feet shall be permitted.
         ii.   A sign permit shall be required for the one permitted
projecting/hanging sign.
         iii.   Projecting/hanging signs shall be displayed perpendicular to
the wall to which it is affixed.
         iv.   The maximum distance between the wall and the outer edge of the
sign shall be three feet, or if a paved sidewalk is below, 50% of the width of
the sidewalk, whichever is less.
         v.   The minimum vertical clearance from the bottom of the sign to
grade or to the sidewalk below, if applicable, shall be eight feet, unless a
greater clearance is required by the Building Official.
         vi.   The maximum height of the sign shall be 15 feet above grade or
from the sidewalk below, if applicable.
E.   Performance Standards.
   1.   Light and ventilation.  Adequate light and ventilation shall be
provided for and meet the California Building Code regulations in effect at the
time of conversion or construction, as determined by the Building Official.
   2.   Sound transmission.  Common walls and ceilings of live/work units shall
be constructed or upgraded, using techniques to limit sound transmission as
specified for residential uses by the California Building Code for new
construction or equivalent in effect at the time of conversion or construction,
as determined by the Building Official.
   3.   Minimum facilities. Each live/work unit shall have adequate kitchen
facilities (sink, stove, and refrigerator hook-ups) and bathroom facilities
(shower or bathtub, sink, and toilet).
   4.   Fire suppression and fire ratings for occupancy separations.
      a.   Permanently wired smoke detectors shall be installed as required per
the California Building Code or equivalent in effect at the time of conversion
or construction.
      b.   Additional fire suppression equipment (e.g., alarm systems,
sprinklers, extinguishers) shall also be provided, as required by the Building
Official and the Culver City Fire Department.
      c.   There shall be a two-hour occupancy separation between units.
   5.   Hazardous materials.
      a.   Flammable liquids, welding, open flame work, or similar hazardous
operations shall not be permitted in live/work units without specific written
approval by the Culver City Fire Department.
      b.   Storage of hazardous materials necessary for work activities in
live/work spaces may be stored in control areas per the California Building and
Fire Codes or equivalent in effect at the time of conversion or construction,
as determined by the Building Official and the Culver City Fire Department.
      c.   Exterior signage announcing said materials shall be installed and
maintained per the California Building and Fire Codes or equivalent in effect
at the time of conversion or construction, as determined by the Building
Official and the Culver City Fire Department.
      d.   The control areas shall be approved as to construction and location
by the Culver City Fire Department.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2005-008 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.065 LOW BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTERS.
A.   Purpose. This section provides location, development, and permitting
standards for low barrier navigation centers in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards) and Cal. Gov’t Code § 65660.
B.   Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words and phrases are
defined as follows.
   1.   Coordinated Entry System. A centralized or coordinated assessment
system developed pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Code of Federal
Regulations as specified in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65662, and any related
requirements, designed to coordinate program participant intake, assessment,
and referrals.
   2.   Low Barrier. Best practices to reduce barriers to entry, and may
include, but is not limited to, the following:
      a.   The presence of partners if it is not a population-specific site,
such as for survivors of domestic violence or sexual assault, women, or youth;
      b.   Pets;
      c.   The storage of possessions; or
      d.   Privacy, such as partitions around beds in a dormitory setting or in
larger rooms containing more than two beds, or private rooms.
   3.   Low Barrier Navigation Center. A Housing First, low barrier, service-
enriched shelter focused on moving people into permanent housing that provides
temporary living facilities while case managers connect individuals
experiencing homelessness to income, public benefits, health services, shelter,
and housing.
C.   Development and Operational Standards. All low barrier navigation centers
shall comply with the following requirements:
   1.   Connected Services. The low barrier navigation center shall offer
services to connect people to permanent housing through a services plan that
identifies services staffing.
   2.   Coordinated Entry System. The low barrier navigation center shall be
linked to a coordinated entry system, so that staff in the interim facility or
staff who co-locate in the facility may conduct assessments and provide
services to connect people to permanent housing.
   3.   Code Compliant. The low barrier navigation center shall comply with
Chapter 6.5 (commencing with § 8255) of Division 8 of the Cal. Welfare and
Institutions Code.
   4.   Homeless Management Information System. The low barrier navigation
center shall have a system for entering information regarding client stays,
client demographics, client income, and exit destination through the local
homeless management information system, as defined by § 578.3 of Title 24 of
the Code of Federal Regulations.
D.   Permit Requirements. Low barrier navigation centers are allowed in all
mixed use zones per
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards) subject to the requirements of this Section and all restrictions of
the applicable zoning district. An Administrative Site Plan review is required
prior to establishment of any low-barrier navigation center project. Within 30
days of receipt of an application for a low-barrier navigation center
development, the City shall notify the developer whether the application is
complete pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65943. Within 60 days of receipt of a
completed application for a low-barrier navigation center development, the City
shall act upon its review of the application.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.070 OUTDOOR DINING.
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for
outdoor dining facilities in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Definition.  As used in this Section, an Outdoor Dining Area is a place on
the public sidewalk or private property where patrons may consume food and/or
beverages provided by an adjacent food service establishment. The
establishments may either provide table service in the outdoor dining area or
sell take-out items consumed in the outdoor dining area.
B.   Outdoor Dining (Public Right-of-way).
   1.   Standards and procedures. All standards and procedures for the
operation of outdoor dining areas in the public right-of-way are contained in
City Council Resolution No. 96-R008, or as may be amended, and in §
9.08.035 (Use of Sidewalks for Outdoor Dining) of the CCMC.
   2.   Agreement required. Outdoor dining on the public sidewalk may only
occur subject to an Outdoor Dining License Agreement, approved by the City
Engineer in compliance with §
9.08.035 (Use of Sidewalks for Outdoor Dining) of the CCMC.
   3.   Sale of alcoholic beverages. Establishments serving alcoholic beverages
that apply for an Outdoor Dining License Agreement shall meet the additional
requirements of the State Alcohol Beverage Control Board. Sale of the alcoholic
beverages in outdoor dining areas shall comply with §
17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales).
C.   Outdoor Dining (Private Property).
   1.   Review requirement. An outdoor dining or seating area 250 square feet
or less in size and more than 300 feet from a residential zone shall be allowed
by right. Any outdoor dining or seating area over 250 square feet in size and/
or less than 300 feet from a residential zone shall require the approval of an
Administrative Use Permit and shall be developed in compliance with an approved
site plan, which indicates the areas dedicated for outdoor dining, and the
maximum seating capacity for the outdoor dining area.
   2.   Location requirements.
      a.   The outdoor dining area shall be located directly adjacent to the
food service establishment it serves.
      b.   When located immediately adjacent to a residential use, provisions
shall be made to minimize noise, light, and odor impacts on the residential
use.
   3.   Operating requirements.
      a.   Outdoor cooking. Cooking within an outdoor dining area may occur
only with Administrative Use Permit approval.
      b.   Placement of tables. Tables shall be placed only in the locations
shown on the approved site plan.
      c.   Hours of operation.  The hours and days of operation on the outdoor
dining area shall be identified in the approved Administrative Use Permit.
      d.   Clean-up and maintenance.  Outdoor dining areas shall be kept in a
clean condition, and free of litter and food items constituting a nuisance to
public health, safety and welfare.
   4.   Lighting. Illumination for outdoor dining areas shall be installed to
prevent glare onto, or direct illumination of, any residential property or use,
in compliance with §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting).
   5.   Landscaping.  All outdoor dining areas shall include some landscaping.
A landscape plan for the outdoor dining area may include the use of planter
boxes and permanent vegetation, which shall comply with
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
   6.   Sale of alcoholic beverages. Outdoor dining areas serving alcoholic
beverages shall meet, and be in compliance with, the requirements of the State
Alcohol Beverage Control Board and §
17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales).
   7.   Design compatibility.
      a.   Outdoor dining areas and associated structural elements, awnings,
covers, furniture, umbrellas, or other physical elements shall be compatible
with the overall design of the main structures.
      b.   The use of awnings, plants, umbrellas, and other human-scale
elements is encouraged to enhance the pedestrian experience, if applicable.
      c.   The relationship of outdoor dining areas to churches, hospitals,
public schools, and residential uses shall be considered by the Director.
Mitigation measures should be utilized to eliminate potential impacts related
to glare, light, loitering, and noise.
      d.   Outdoor dining areas shall not inhibit vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow.
   8.   Additional standards. At the discretion of the Director, the following
additional standards may apply to outdoor dining areas. The applicability of
these standards shall be specified in the permit approving the outdoor dining
area.
      a.   Amplified sound and music may be prohibited within the outdoor
dining area.
      b.   A sound-buffering, acoustic wall may be required along property
lines adjacent to the outdoor dining area. The design and height of the wall
shall be approved by the Director.
      c.   Separation by a physical barrier to define the limits of the outdoor
dining space may be required, with the design to be approved by the Director.
D.   Conformance with Chapter 9.11: Smoking Regulations. Outdoor dining shall
conform to all standards and regulations pertaining to Outdoor Dining Areas, as
set forth in §§
9.11.100 et seq. of
Chapter 9.11: Smoking Regulations of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008;
Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.075 OUTDOOR RETAIL SALES AND DISPLAY.
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for
outdoor retail sales and display on privately-owned property, in compliance
with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Accessory Outdoor Display.  Outdoor displays incidental and complementary
to an allowed use on commercially zoned parcels shall be subject to the
approval of an Administrative Use Permit approved by the Director, and all of
the following standards.
   1.   Outdoor displays shall be:
      a.   Approved and kept within a defined and fixed location that does not
disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation, and does not
encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, or parking spaces. Displays shall
not obstruct traffic safety sight areas or otherwise create hazards for vehicle
or pedestrian traffic.
      b.   Directly related to a business occupying a permanent structure on
the same site and shall display only goods of the primary business on the same
site.
      c.   Limited to the hours of operation of the business, and portable and
removed from public view at the close of each business day.
      d.   Managed so that display structures and goods are maintained at all
times in a clean and neat condition, and in good repair.
      e.   Placed to avoid obstruction of structure entrances and on-site
driveways.
   2.   Outdoor displays shall not be:
      a.   Placed within 100 feet of any residential dwelling, except for mixed
use projects.
      b.   Placed so as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of the
store front windows for display purposes.
      c.   Counted toward the gross floor area in determining the parking
requirement for the use.
      d.   Permitted to include signage graphics, balloons, banners, flags,
streamers, wind-activated devices, or other similar devices within the display
area, except for building or freestanding signs, pursuant to
Chapter 17.330 (Signs).
B.   Conformance with Chapter 9.11: Smoking Regulations. Outdoor Retail Sales
and Display shall conform to all standards and regulations pertaining to
Outdoor Dining Areas, as set forth in §§
9.11.100 et seq. of
Chapter 9.11: Smoking Regulations of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.080 OUTDOOR STORAGE.
This Section provides location and operating standards for the establishment of
outdoor or open storage of materials in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Location.  The storage shall:
   1.   Be ancillary to the primary use of the main structure;
   2.   Not comprise more than 25% of the total gross land area of the subject
parcel;
   3.   Be paved in compliance with City standards;
   4.   Not be located within a required off-street loading area.
B.   Enclosure Required.  An outdoor area used for storage shall be completely
enclosed by a solid masonry wall and a solid gate. The Director may allow the
substitution of a solid fence, after determining that the substitution would
adequately comply with the provisions of this Section.
   1.   The required wall or fence shall:
      a.   Not be less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height.
      b.   Incorporate design elements to prohibit or prevent easy climbing and
access by unauthorized persons.
      c.   Be subject to the approval of the Director.
   2.   Walls abutting a right-of-way shall comply with §
17.300.030 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).
C.   Operations. All raw materials, equipment, or finished products stored
shall:
   1.   Be stored in a manner that they cannot be blown by wind from the
enclosed storage area.
   2.   Not be stored above the height of the enclosing wall or fence within
ten feet of the wall or fence.
   3.   Not be placed outside the enclosed storage area.
   4.   If abutting a residential zoning district, only be accessed between 8:
00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., to avoid being a nuisance to neighbors.
D.   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be installed, wherever possible, to lessen
the visual impact of the outdoor storage area. The design, installation, and
maintenance of the landscaping shall comply with
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.085 PAWNSHOPS.
This Section provides location and operating standards for pawnshops in
compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Distance Separation. A minimum linear distance of 1,000 feet shall be
required to separate all pawnshops from another existing pawnshop, check-
cashing business, park, playground, primary and/or secondary school, and
single-family zoned property.
B.   Plans Required. Development plans shall be submitted with the application
for the Conditional Use Permit required for pawnshops, clearly illustrating the
details of the proposed exterior (e.g., elevations, lighting, signs, and the
like), interior (e.g., layout and design, lighting, window display, and the
like), days and hours of operation, and customer queuing in order to ensure
that the use shall be developed and operated in a manner compatible with an
attractive, stable, and thriving commercial district conducive to retail
shopping.
C.   Prohibited Hours of Operation.  Pawnshops shall be prohibited from public
operations between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.090 RECYCLING FACILITIES.
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for
various types and sizes of recycling facilities, in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Permit Requirements. Recycling facilities are subject to permit review/
approval, in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses, and Zone-Specific Standards),
provided that the development standards established in this Section are met.
B.   Definitions.  The following words and phrases as used in this Title are
defined as follows.
   1.   Recycling Facilities. Facilities open to the public for the collection
or processing of recyclable material, subject to certification under the
California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act, which include
the following types of facilities.
      a.   Incidental Small Collection Recycling Facility.  A use incidental to
a primary use of property, established for the acceptance of recyclable
materials from the public, and occupying less than 500 square feet. Incidental
small collection recycling facilities may include the following as defined in
this Chapter:
         i.   One or more single reverse vending machines, in a grouping that
includes separate containers adjacent to each machine.
         ii.   Recyclable material containers that do not utilize power-driven
processing equipment.
      b.   Small Collection Recycling Facility.  A use subordinate to and
different from the main use of property, established for the acceptance of
recyclable materials from the public, occupying an area no larger than 1,200
square feet, and involving no permanent structures. A small collection facility
may include the following:
         i.   One or more bulk reverse vending machines.
         ii.   A mobile recycling unit.
         iii.   Kiosk-type units.
      c.   Large Collection Recycling Facility.  A collection facility larger
than 1,200 square feet that is the main use of the property and may include
permanent structures. For the purposes of this definition, the area shall be
composed of the cumulative total of all permitted recycling facilities on a
site, lot or parcel. The use is established for the acceptance and storage of
recyclable materials from the public.
   2.   Recyclable Material.  Aluminum, glass, plastic, paper and other items
intended for remanufacture or reconstitution, for the purpose of reuse in an
altered or renewed form. Refuse or materials deemed hazardous by the Culver
City Fire Chief are expressly excluded from this definition.
   3.   Reverse Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device that accepts
one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or a
redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption
value, as determined by State law. These vending machines may accept aluminum
cans, glass and plastic bottles, and other containers.
   4.   A Bulk Reverse Vending Machine is a reverse vending machine that is
larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a
time, and issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container.
   5.   Mobile Recycling Unit. An automobile, truck, trailer, or van used for
the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other
containers.
   6.   Recycling Facility, Processing.  A building or enclosed space used for
the collection and processing of recyclable materials for efficient shipment,
or to an end user's specifications, through baling, briquetting, compacting,
flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning,
remanufacturing and other methods.
C.   Standards for Specific Types of Recycling Facilities.
   1.   Reverse vending machines. Reverse vending machines shall comply with
the following standards.
      a.   Accessory use only.  The machines shall be installed as an accessory
use in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Title and shall not
require additional parking.
      b.   Location requirements.  If located outside of a structure, the
machines shall be located within 30 feet of a building entrance and shall be
constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof materials.
      c.   Maximum size. When located outdoors, the area occupied by the
machines shall not exceed 50 square feet, including any protective enclosure,
nor eight feet in height.
      d.   Signs. Signs shall not exceed a maximum of four square feet on each
machine, exclusive of operating instructions.
      e.   Hours of operation.  The machines shall have the same operating
hours as those of the primary use.
      f.   Lighting. The machines shall be illuminated when needed to ensure
comfortable and safe operation, as determined by the Director.
   2.   Small collection facilities. Small collection facilities shall comply
with the following standards.
      a.   Location requirements.  Small collection facilities shall:
         i.   Not be located within 100 feet of any residentially zoned parcel.
         ii.   Be set back at least ten feet from any public right-of-way, and
not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian circulation.
      b.   Maximum size. A small collection facility shall not occupy more than
1,200 square feet, not including space that would be periodically needed for
the removal of materials or exchange of containers.
      c.   Appearance of facility. Collection containers and any site fencing
shall be of a color and design that is compatible and harmonious with the
surrounding uses and neighborhoods.
      d.   Operating standards.  Small collection facilities shall:
         i.   Not use power-driven processing equipment, except for reverse
vending machines.
         ii.   Accept only glass, metal or plastic containers, paper, clothing,
and reusable items.
         iii.   Use containers constructed with durable waterproof and
rustproof materials, secured from unauthorized removal of material, and shall
be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the
collection schedule.
         iv.   Not exceed noise levels of 50 dBA, as measured at the property
line of the nearest residentially zoned or occupied property, and in no event
more than 60 dBA.
         v.   Collection of recyclable materials and normal maintenance of the
facility shall only be performed during the following hours.
            a.)   Mondays through Fridays, from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
            b.)   Saturdays, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
            c.)   Sundays, from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
            d.)   If emergency maintenance or repairs must be performed during
other hours, the Culver City Police Department shall be notified prior to
performing the maintenance or repairs.
         vi.   Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials shall be at
least 100 feet from any residentially zoned property, unless there is a
recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and
the residential use.
         vii.   Shall be free of litter and any other undesirable materials,
and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of
each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day.
      e.   Signs.  Notwithstanding any other CCMC provision, the following
information shall be displayed for each facility, on one or more signs that
collectively do not exceed 16 square feet.
         i.   Identification of the types of material to be deposited.
         ii.   Operating instructions.
         iii.   Hours of operation.
         iv.   Telephone number of the operator, responsible person or company.
      f.   Lighting. The collection facilities shall be illuminated when needed
to ensure comfortable and safe operation, as determined by the Director.
      g.   Planters.  The facility should, wherever feasible, be located
adjacent to an existing planter area, if pedestrian or vehicular circulation
will not be obstructed or screened with additional landscaping, as determined
by the Director.
      h.   Storage of materials.  All recyclable materials shall be stored in
containers. Outdoor storage of materials is prohibited.
      i.   Parking requirements. No additional parking space shall be required
for customers of a small collection facility located in the established parking
lot of the main use. One space shall be provided for the attendant, if needed.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.095 RESIDENTIAL USES - ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.
For Accessory Dwelling Units compliant with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66323, see
Subsection A. Subsections B. through K. establish the standards for the
development of an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) not covered by Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 66323 and Subsection M. establishes the standards for the development of a
Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JADU), in compliance with Article 2 (Zoning
Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards). Cal. Gov’t Code §§
66310 through 66342 shall supersede any conflicting portions of this ordinance.
A.   Statewide Exemption ADU (Cal. Gov’t Code § 66323). The following ADUs are
not required to comply with lot coverage, front setbacks. and design standards
and are not subject to other State or local Code requirements except for
building code and health and safety requirements for dwellings:
   1.   One ADU and one JADU per lot within the proposed space of a single-
family home or the existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory
structure which may include an expansion of not more than 150 square feet
beyond the same physical dimensions of the existing accessory structure. An
expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the existing accessory structure
shall be limited to accommodating ingress and egress. The ADU must have
exterior access from the proposed or existing single family dwelling. The JADU
must comply with the requirements of section
17.400.095.M.
   2.   One detached, new construction, ADU that does not exceed four-foot side
and rear yard setbacks for a lot with a proposed or existing single-family
dwelling. The ADU can be no more than 800 square feet and not taller than the
heights provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66321(b)(4)(A), (B), or (C), as
applicable.
   3.   ADUs within portions of existing multi-family dwellings as described in
Section
17.400.095.E.2.a.
   4.   Detached ADUs on a lot with existing multi-family dwellings. as
described in Section
17.400.095.E.2.b.
   5.   Detached ADUs on a lot with a proposed multi-family dwelling as
described in Section
17.400.095.E.2.b.
B.   Maximum Unit Size.
   1.   The maximum permitted unit size of an attached ADU shall not exceed 850
square feet for a one-bedroom unit or 1,200 for a two or more-bedroom unit, or
50% of the gross square footage of the primary dwelling unit on the lot,
whichever is less.
   2.   There is no maximum unit size for an ADU located entirely within a
proposed or existing primary dwelling unit.
   3.   The maximum permitted size of a detached ADU shall not exceed 850
square feet for a one-bedroom unit or 1,200 square feet for a two or more-
bedroom unit.
   4.   Maximum permitted unit size shall include any living area as defined in
the California building code confined from exterior wall to exterior wall.
C.   Minimum Unit Size. The minimum unit size of an attached or detached ADU
shall be at least 150 square feet, including a kitchen and at least one three-
quarter bathroom.
D.   Zones in which ADUs may be Constructed. The construction, use, and
maintenance of ADUs shall be permitted in areas zoned to allow single-family or
multiple-family dwelling residential use. For purposes of this §
17.400.095, a multiple-family dwelling unit is two or more attached dwelling
units on a single property.
E.   ADU Density and Development Standards.
   1.   Single-family Dwellings. ADUs are allowed on a property containing
single-family dwellings under the following circumstances:
      a.   No more than one ADU within the proposed or existing square footage
of a single-family dwelling or existing square footage of an accessory
structure that meets specific requirements such as exterior access and setbacks
for fire and safety.
      b.   No more than one detached new construction ADU.
      c.   No more than one JADU within the proposed or existing space of a
single-family dwelling that meets specific requirements such as exterior access
and setbacks for fire and safety as described in Subsection L.
   2.   Multiple-family Dwellings. As described in Section
17.400.095.A, ADUs are allowed on a property containing multiple-family
dwellings or mixed-use structures on a lot containing multiple-family dwelling
units under the following conditions:
      a.   Converted Units.
         i.   The number of ADUs shall not exceed 25% of the number of existing
units, minimum one unit.
         ii.   The ADUs shall only be located within areas that are not used as
livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms,
passageways, attics, basements, or attached garages.
      b.   New Construction Units.
         i.   The maximum height shall be 30 feet for a detached ADU on a lot
with an existing or proposed multiple-family, multistory dwelling.
         ii.   A maximum of eight detached, ADUs shall be allowed on a property
with existing multiple-family dwelling units, but not to exceed the number of
existing primary dwelling units on the lot.
         iii.   A maximum of two ADUs shall be allowed on a property with
proposed multiple-family dwellings.
F.   Height. For subject properties located in the Rl or R2 Zoning District,
the maximum height for ADUs shall be as established for residential structures
in Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific
Standards). For subject properties in all other zones. the maximum height for
ADUs shall be 30 feet.
   1.   As established by Cal. Gov’t Code § 66321, development standards in
this Title shall apply to the extent they do not prohibit the construction of
an ADU of up to 18 feet in height if detached or 25 feet in height if attached.
Development standards in this Title shall also permit a detached ADU on a lot
with an existing or proposed single-family or multifamily dwelling unit that is
within one-half mile walking distance of a major transit stop or a high-quality
commercial corridor an additional two feet in building height to accommodate a
roof pitch on the ADU that is aligned with the roof pitch of the primary
dwelling unit.
G.   Minimum Room Dimensions. Minimum room dimensions, including ceiling
heights, floor area and width, shall meet the Uniform Building Code regulations
in effect at the time of construction, except for ADUs constructed before
January 1, 2020 that are seeking legalization, which are only subject to Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 17920.3 (Cal. Gov’t Code § 66332).
H.   Location.
   1.   ADUs may be within, attached to, or detached from and on the same lot
as, a proposed or existing single-family dwelling, or within or detached from a
multiple-family dwelling, and subject to compliance with front, side, and rear
yard setback standards of the underlying zone except as allowed by Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66314(d)(7).
   2.   ADUs may be located entirely within a proposed or existing primary
dwelling unit or existing accessory structure; provided, the ADU has
independent exterior access from the existing primary dwelling or accessory
structure.
I.   Parking. Parking for an ADU and replacement parking is not required.
J.   Habitability. ADUs are fully habitable and shall include independent
kitchen and bathroom facilities. ADUs shall be independent from the main
dwelling without internal access.
K.   Occupancy Restrictions. ADUs shall not be sold separately from the primary
residence and shall not be used for rentals of terms of 30 days or less unless
established as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66340 and 66341. Owner occupancy
is not required for ADUs.
L.   Setbacks.
   1.   An ADU shall have side and rear yard setbacks of at least two feet from
lot lines abutting a special purpose or mixed use zone, street, or alley and at
least four feet from lot lines when abutting a residential zone. An ADU shall
abide by the front yard setback requirements of the zone in which it is
located, unless otherwise permitted by Cal. Gov’t Code § 66323.
   2.   An ADU constructed entirely within a proposed or existing primary
dwelling unit or an existing accessory structure, which has side and rear
setbacks that are sufficient for fire safety, as determined by the Culver City
Fire Department, shall not be subject to setback standards for new development.
   3.   An ADU constructed above, or as a second story to, a garage or other
accessory structure shall be setback a minimum of two feet from side and rear
lot lines abutting a special purpose and mixed use zone, street, or alley and a
minimum of four feet from side and rear lot lines when abutting a residential
zone. An ADU constructed above, or as a second story to, a garage or other
accessory structure shall abide by the front yard setback requirements of the
zone in which it is located.
   4.   Through Lots. An ADU constructed on a through lot is permitted to have
a reduced setback of at least two feet from one front lot line along the
property line that is of greater distance from the primary residence and/or the
property line separating the parcel from the street of a higher classification
or designation. In case of irregular lots, the Director shall determine which
one front lot line is eligible for reduced setback except as allowed by Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66323.
M.   Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. In addition to an ADU as provided in this
Section, JADUs are permitted within an existing or proposed single-family
residence, consistent with state law. The following establishes standards for
junior accessory dwelling units.
   1.   Maximum Unit Size. A JADU may be up to 500 square feet.
      a.   Maximum permitted unit size shall include any livable space from
exterior wall to exterior wall.
   2.   Density. No more than one JADU is allowed on a property.
   3.   Location. A JADU shall be located entirely within a proposed or
existing primary dwelling unit, subject to the following:
      a.   A JADU may be in an attached garage but may not be in a detached
accessory structure.
      b.   A JADU shall have separate exterior access independent from the
proposed or existing primary dwelling unit.
      c.   A JADU must share significant interior connection to the primary
dwelling if they are sharing a bathroom facility.
   4.   Parking. Parking for a JADU and replacement parking is not required.
   5.   Habitability. A JADU shall include an efficiency kitchen which shall
include a cooking facility with appliances, a food preparation counter, and
storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the
junior accessory dwelling unit.
   6.   Occupancy Restrictions. Owner occupancy is required in either the
remaining portion of the primary residence, another dwelling unit on the same
lot, or the newly created JADU. Owner-occupancy shall not be required if the
owner is another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.
These occupancy restrictions shall be enforced through recordation of deed
restrictions or covenant agreement recorded against the property per Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66333(c).
   7.   Conveyance. JADUs shall not be sold separately from the primary
dwelling unit and shall not be used for rentals of terms of 30 days or less.
N.   Other Development Standards.
   1.   Unless stated in this Section, all other development standards for ADUs
and JADUs shall apply according to the zone in which the subject property is
located; including but not limited to, setbacks, building height, and distance
between structures. This does not apply to units allowed pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66323.
   2.   ADUs and JADUs do not need to comply with the Objective Design
Standards described in Section
17.300.010.
O.   Application Process. The following is the ministerial application process
for accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units.
   1.   Applicant shall submit complete plan sets to the Building Safety
Division. In order to be deemed complete, plans shall comply with all current
applicable development standards. The Division shall approve or deny the
application as established for ADUs in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66316 and 66317 and
for JADUs in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66355(a), (b) and (c). If the permit application
to create or serve an ADU or a JADU is submitted with a permit application to
create a new single-family or multifamily dwelling on the lot, no permit for
the ADU or the JADU shall be issued until the permit application to create the
new single-family or multifamily dwelling has been adjudicated, but the
application to create or serve the ADU or JADU shall be considered without
discretionary review or hearing. If the project is denied, the applicant will
receive a full list of comments with remedies to correct any Code deficiencies.
   2.   Prior to Building Permit issuance, applicant for an ADU shall submit an
Address Assignment Request Fee and Application to the Current Planning
Division. An applicant for a JADU may, but is not required to, submit an
Address Assignment Request Fee and Application.
   3.   Prior to Building Permit issuance, projects resulting in the creation
of an ADU of 750 square feet or larger or the addition to an existing accessory
structure to create an ADU of 750 square feet or larger shall pay all impact
fees including the Mobility Improvement Fee pursuant to §
15.06.515 (Calculation and Payment of Fees) and the In-Lieu Parkland Dedication
Fees pursuant to §
15.06.300 (Park and Dedication or Payment of Fees) of this Code, except that
any impact fees charged for an ADU of 750 square feet or more shall be charged
proportionately in relation to the square footage of the primary dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2017-007 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-017
§ 2; Ord. No. 2018-015 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2020-001 § 2; Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3
(part); Ord. No. 2023-005 § 2; Ord. No. 2024- 006; Ord. No. 2025-006, Exhibit
A)
§ 17.400.100 RESIDENTIAL USES - ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
This Section provides standards for accessory structures allowed in residential
and mixed-use zoning districts in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards):
A.   General Requirements for Accessory Structures in Residential and Mixed-Use
Zoning Districts.
   1.   Relationship of accessory use to the main use. Accessory uses and
structures shall be incidental to, and not alter, the residential character of
the site. A covenant may be required to be executed and recorded to ensure the
accessory use and structure is identified and maintained consistent with the
City's approval, in accordance with §
17.595.045 (Covenants).
   2.   Allowable heights. The maximum allowable heights of accessory
structures are specified in Table 4-4 (Maximum Heights for Accessory Structures
in Residential Zoning Districts) below.
   Table 4-4
   Maximum Heights for Accessory Structures in Residential and Mixed Use Zoning
Districts
 
Applicable Zoning District                                Maximum Height
Single-Family Residential (R1) and Two-Family Residential 2 stories and 26 feet
(R2) Zoning Districts.
Low Density Multiple-Residential (RLD), Medium Density
Multiple-Residential (RMD) and High Density Multiple-     2 stories and 30 feet
Residential (RHD) Zoning Districts.
All Mixed Use Zoning Districts
 
   3.   Allowable setbacks.
      a.   The accessory structure shall have a setback of at least two feet
from every side or rear property line abutting all mixed use and special
purpose zones, street, or alley and shall have a setback of at least four feet
from every side or rear property line when the setback is adjacent to a
residential zone, except that the setback shall be the same as that required
for the primary dwelling in the zoning district in which the accessory
structure is located, whenever the accessory structure exceeds 12 feet in
height.
      b.   A single story, ground-level accessory residential structure
containing a second story accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to setback
regulations for accessory dwelling units. Any portion of an accessory
residential structure that exceeds 12 feet in height, located on the second
floor, or is within a setback facing a public street right-of-way shall comply
with the same setbacks required for the primary dwelling in the corresponding
zoning district.
      c.   If the accessory structure is a carport or garage, it shall be set
back from a public street right-of-way as necessary to conform with the
requirements of
17.320.035.P. (Special Parking Requirements for Residential Uses).
      d.   Partial reconstruction and additions to existing legal non-
conforming accessory residential structures on through lots with frontages on
both Charles Avenue and Milton Avenue shall be subject to provisions of §
17.610.020A.3.c. (Alterations or Additions).
      e.   Exceptions. The following structures are exempt from the accessory
structure setback requirements, with a cumulative limit of two maximum of any
combination of such accessory structures on one property.
         i.   Movable structures not exceeding 12 feet in height, including
children's play equipment, pet shelters, and similar structures, may be placed
within a required side or rear setback without limitation on location.
         ii.   Portable storage sheds which are prefabricated, do not exceed
eight feet in height if flat roofed, nor 12 feet in height with eaves at a
maximum of eight feet for slope roofed, and are up to 120 square feet in area,
may be placed within a required side or rear setback without limitation on
location, except that they shall comply with Subsection A.4. (Site Coverage)
and A.5. (Allowable Floor Area) as specified below.
         iii.   Trash enclosures may be placed within a required rear or side
setback without limitation on location.
      f.   Two-story accessory residential structures will not be permitted
unless:
         i.   Only one story is the accessory residential structure and the
other story is a garage and/or accessory dwelling unit.
         ii.   The second story satisfies the same setback requirements that
would be applicable to a primary dwelling in the applicable zoning district,
unless the second story is an accessory dwelling unit only.
   4.   Site coverage.  Roofed accessory structures shall not occupy more than
50% of the required rear or side setbacks, provided that the Director may
approve additional coverage where a replacement open area equivalent to the
additional coverage over 50% is substituted elsewhere on the site, provided
that:
      a.   The Director determines that the usability and location of the
substitute area is equally satisfactory.
      b.   The substitute area does not exceed a slope of 10% and has no
dimension less than 15 feet.
   5.   Allowable Floor Area. The cumulative floor area for all accessory
structures, including portable storage sheds, on a lot in a residential zone
shall not exceed 800 square feet. The floor area of garages shall be included
in such calculation; however, the floor area of other non-habitable accessory
structures (including carports) shall not.
   6.   Additional Standards. The following additional standards shall apply to
accessory structures:
      a.   No more than one three-quarter bathroom shall be permitted in any
accessory structure, except for garages which are restricted as noted below.
      b.   Wet bars are prohibited in accessory structures.
      c.   Kitchens, including efficiency kitchens, and any appliances that can
be used for preparing and/or cooking meals, are prohibited in accessory
structures.
      d.   Only a sink and drain (wash basin) are permitted in garages;
bathrooms are not permitted within, nor accessible from garages.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-005 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-012
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2021- 012 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2023-002, Exhibit A (part);
Ord. No. 2024-001, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2024- 006; Ord. No. 2025-008,
Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.400.105 SECONDHAND STORES.
   This Section provides development and operating standards for secondhand
stores in compliance with Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and
Zone-Specific Development Standards).
   A.   Indoor Uses Only. As specified in §
17.200.020 (Zoning District Regulations) all activities, including donation
drop-offs, sorting. and the like. shall be conducted entirely within the
enclosed structure(s) within which the secondhand store is located.
   B.   Deliveries and Donations.
      1.   All goods shall be directly delivered into the building in which the
secondhand store is located and must be received by an employee of the
secondhand store.
      2.   No deliveries, donations, or deposits of goods shall occur outside
of the regular business hours of the secondhand store.
   C.   Interior areas dedicated to the collection, receipt, processing,
sorting, or disposal of used and donated goods shall be limited to no more than
30% of the total floor area of the secondhand store.
   D.   Employees of the secondhand store shall be responsible for daily
cleaning of the exterior premises of the secondhand stores, including removal
of any goods/donations abandoned anywhere at the exterior of the building.
(Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.400.106 SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO) UNITS.
This Section provides density, development, and operating standards for single
room occupancy units in compliance with Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable
Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development Standards):
A.   Location. Single Room Occupancy (SRO) units shall only be located in Mixed
Use Zones and shall be subject to all applicable provision of
Chapter 17.220 (Mixed Use Zoning Districts).
B.   Density. SRO residential density shall not exceed the density standards as
may be permitted in
Chapter 17.220 (Mixed Use Zoning Districts) and in no case shall the number of
SRO units exceed more than 25% of a mixed use project's total number of
residential units.
C.   Unit Size. The minimum size of an SRO unit shall be 200 square feet and
the maximum size shall be 350 square feet.
D.   Kitchen Facilities. Each SRO unit shall be equipped with a kitchen sink
with a garbage disposal and a counter top measuring a minimum of 48 inches wide
by 24 inches deep; and shall be provided with a minimum of a refrigerator and a
microwave oven.
E.   Bathroom Facilities. Each SRO unit shall include a bathroom with a toilet
and a shower stall in an enclosed compartment with a door. The bathroom shall
be a minimum of 25 square feet in area.
F.   Open Space. Each SRO unit shall be provided with open space in compliance
with
Chapter 17.220 (Mixed Use Zoning Districts).
G.   Occupancy. SRO units shall be occupied by no more than two persons and
shall be offered on a monthly rental basis or longer.
(Ord. No. 2013-008 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2020-013 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008;
Ord. No. 2024-006)
   § 17.400.110 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
A.   Purpose. This Section provides location, development, and operating
standards for telecommunications facilities (e.g., dish antenna and cellular
mobile radio telephone utility facilities), in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards), and in accordance with CCMC §§
15.02.600 through
15.02.625.
B.   Definitions.  As used in this Section, the following words and phrases are
defined as follows.
   Antenna. Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar
devices used for the transmission and/or reception of electromagnetic radiation
waves, including devices with active elements extending in any direction, and
directional parasitic arrays with elements attached to a generally horizontal
boom that may be mounted on a vertical support structure.
   Building or Roof-mounted Antenna. An antenna mounted on the side or top of a
building or another structure (e.g., water tank, billboard, church steeple,
freestanding sign, and the like), where the entire weight of the antenna is
supported by the building, through the use of an approved framework or other
structural system attached to one or more structural members of the roof or
walls of the building.
   Cellular.  An analog or digital wireless communication technology based on a
system of interconnected neighboring cell sites, each of which contains
antennas.
   Cellular Mobile Radio Telephone Utility Facility. A type of remote
communication installation that includes a grouping or series of antennas that
transmit, relay, and receive radio waves, together with equipment functionally
integrated into a communication system, located on a cell site that is part of
a network for transmission of telephone service.
   Co-location. The locating of wireless communications equipment from more
than one provider on a single ground-mounted, roof-mounted, or structure-
mounted facility.
   Dish Antenna. A parabolic, dish-like antenna that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic waves by line of sight.
   Ground-mounted Antenna. An antenna, the entire weight of which is supported
by a manufacturer- and/or installer-specified and City-approved platform,
framework, pole or other structural system; which system is freestanding,
affixed directly on or in the ground by a foundation, excluding lateral bracing
to a building.
   Height.  The vertical distance between the highest point of a dish antenna,
when actuated to its most vertical position and the grade below for a ground-
mounted dish antenna, and to the roof below for a roof-mounted dish antenna.
   Monopole. A structure composed of a single spire used to support antennas
and related equipment.
   Primary Dish Antenna Facility.  A facility that is the primary use of a site
consisting of one or more dish antennas, the ancillary structures and
electronic equipment necessary to support or operate the antennas, and offices
for the business selling transmission services.
   Reasonable Functional Use.  The positioning of a dish antenna that permits
substantially unobstructed line of sight with geosynchronous orbiting
satellites, or microwave dish antennas, from or to which the dish antenna
receives or transmits electromagnetic waves.
   Satellite Dish Antenna. An antenna for the home, business or institutional
reception of television, data, and other telecommunications broadcasts from
orbiting satellites.
C.   Dish Antenna Regulations.
   1.   Small satellite dish antennas. Satellite dish antennas with a maximum
diameter of 24 inches for residential installations, up to a maximum of two per
dwelling unit, and 78 inches for commercial installations, are regulated by
Federal law and exempt from the requirements of this Section. When placed on an
historic building, designated "landmark" or "significant" per
Chapter 15.05, satellite antennas shall comply with the U.S. Secretary of the
Interior standards. Compliance with those standards is met if the satellite
antenna is placed so that it has no public visibility and does not permanently
alter any design feature or element of an historic building designated
"landmark" or "significant." If compliance with the U.S. Secretary of the
Interior standards cannot be met, alternate locations that still allow
reasonable, functional use of the satellite antenna shall be examined, and an
Administrative Certificate of Appropriateness may be required.
   2.   Quantity and permit requirements.
Table 4-5 (Dish Antenna Quality and Permit Requirements) below, outlines the
quantity and permit requirements for dish antennas, other than satellite dish
antennas exempted above. All dish antennas shall be installed, modified and
maintained in accordance with
Chapter 15.02 of the CCMC, and the design provisions set forth in Subsection
C.4. (Plans and permits) below.
   Table 4-5
   Dish Antenna Quantity and Permit Requirements
 
Location        Size            Quantity       Permit Required Notes
                                1 per lot or 1                 No transmitting
                Larger than 24  per multiple-                  dish antenna
All Residential inches in       family         Building permit shall be
Zones           diameter        residential    only            permitted in a
                                complex                        residential
                                                               zone.
                                                               Receiving and/or
                Less than 6.5                  Building permit transmitting
Mixed Use Zones feet in         3              only            permitted. Must
                diameter                                       be ancillary to
                                                               a primary use.
                6.5 feet in                                    Receiving and/or
                diameter to 12                                 transmitting
Mixed Use Zones feet in         3              AUP             permitted. Must
                diameter                                       be ancillary to
                                                               a primary use.
                                                               Receiving and/or
                Greater than 12                                transmitting
Mixed Use Zones feet in         3              CUP             permitted. Must
                diameter                                       be ancillary to
                                                               a primary use.
                                                               Receiving and/or
                Primary dish    As determined                  transmitting
Mixed Use Zones antenna         by CUP         CUP             permitted. Must
                facility                                       be a primary
                                                               use.
                                               AUP, if         Receiving and/or
                Larger than 24                 completely      transmitting
Special Purpose inches in       4 or more      screened (1).   permitted. Must
Zones           diameter                       CUP, if not     be ancillary to
                                               completely      a primary use.
                                               screened (2).
 
   Notes:  
      (1)   Completely Screened shall mean that the tallest portion of the
antenna(s) structure(s) is/are at or below the tallest portion of the screening
or parapet wall.
      (2)   Not Completely Screened shall mean that some, or all, of the
antenna(s) structure(s) is/are visible from adjoining properties and/or public
rights-of-way.
   3.   Design standards. Every dish antenna shall be installed, modified and
maintained in compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 15.02 of the CCMC, and with the following standards.
      a.   Installation requirements.
         i.   All dish antennas larger than 24 inches in diameter shall be
ground-mounted, unless the City determines, after considering all applicable
regulations of this Chapter and the particular characteristics of the site and
improvements whereon a dish antenna is proposed, that a ground-mounted
installation is not reasonably feasible, or that a roof-mounted installation
would better enable screening of the antenna, as required in Subsection C.3.f.
below. The Director may determine that a ground-mounted installation may not be
reasonably feasible when:
            a.)   The ground-mounted installation would not provide reasonable
functional use, when installed at the maximum height and maximum diameter
anywhere on the parcel, as permitted by this Section;
            b.)   The ground-mounted installation is precluded from location
anywhere on the parcel by other requirements of this Chapter; or
            c.)   The ground-mounted installation impedes on vehicular or
pedestrian circulation and access.
         ii.   The City may require a roof-mounted installation if the City
determines that a roof-mounted installation is superior to a ground-mounted
installation for purposes of screening.
      b.   Location, height and setbacks. Every dish antenna shall comply with
the location, height and setback regulations of this Title, except that:
         i.   No dish antenna shall be installed at a height greater than that
approved by the City. In determining the maximum allowable height, the City
shall consider the manufacturer's and/or installer's recommended specifications
and the heights, and potential line-of-sight obstructions resulting from nearby
terrain, structures, landscaping and other features having mass impenetrable by
electromagnetic waves; and
         ii.   A roof-mounted dish antenna may be permitted to exceed the
maximum allowable building height, but in no case by more than ten feet. The
dish antenna shall be mounted above the roof no higher than is absolutely
necessary to safely clear the roof when actuated to its most vertical position.
      c.   Actuation. A dish antenna may be actuated, provided applicable
height and screening regulations of this Section are met with the dish antenna
in its most vertical position, and provided applicable setback regulations of
this Section are met with the dish antenna in its most horizontal position.
      d.   Color. No dish antenna shall be of a bright, shiny or glare
reflective finish. Every dish antenna shall be finished in colors to
compatibility with the site and the surrounding area, as determined by the
Director.
      e.   Graphics and signs. No dish antenna shall be used to display a sign
or any other graphic. For purposes of this Section, a Graphic shall include any
display or arrangement of two or more colors, patterns, dots, lines or other
symbols or characters, the primary use or purpose of which, as determined by
the Director, is to attract attention to the dish antenna, its manufacturer or
its user. A manufacturer's identification label and/or any government-required
identification or safety labels may be affixed to the backside of the dish or
the structural support for the antenna.
      f.   Screening.
         i.   Every dish antenna larger than 24 inches in diameter shall be
screened to the City's satisfaction. In determining acceptability of screening,
the City shall take into account:
            a.)   All existing and/or proposed improvements on and adjacent to
the site, including landscaping, walls, fences or other specifically designed
devices that preclude or minimize the visibility of the antenna;
            b.)   The grade of the site on which the dish antenna is proposed,
as related to surrounding, nearby grades of properties and public street
rights-of-way;
            c.)   The height of the building(s) on and adjacent to the site
above or on which the dish antenna is proposed to be mounted;
            d.)   The configuration of roofline(s) of the building(s) on and
adjacent to the site;
            e.)   The general, existing aesthetic composition and character of
the surrounding neighborhood; and
            f.)   Any other circumstances the City considers relevant.
         ii.   No dish antenna greater than 24 inches in diameter shall be
permitted on or above that part of a pitched roof sloping towards and having
visibility from a street-facing property line.
         iii.   Where, based on the foregoing considerations, the City
determines full four-sided screening is not reasonably feasible, the emphasis
for screening shall be placed from the following prioritized views:
            a.)   From all adjoining public streets;
            b.)   From all adjoining residentially zoned properties;
            c.)   From nearby public streets;
            d.)   From nearby residentially zoned properties; and
            e.)   From adjoining and nearby non-residentially zoned properties.
         iv.   Approval of screening may include reasonable conditions deemed
by the City necessary to minimize the visual impact of a dish antenna.
      g.   Security.  Every ground-mounted dish antenna shall be secured from
access to the general public by fencing, or another deterring device or means
as the City may approve or require, so that the antenna is not an attractive
nuisance.
      h.   Material.  The City may require a dish antenna to consist of solid
or mesh material, as determined most effective in minimizing the appearance of
the dish, if it is not fully screened.
   4.   Plans and permits.
      a.   In addition to the procedures established in §
17.400.110.C.2. (Quantity and permit requirements), no dish antenna shall be
installed or modified except in accordance with plans and a building permit
approved by the City. In addition to complying with the structural and
electrical requirements of
Chapter 15.02 of the CCMC, the plans filed with the building permit application
shall include a site plan, drawn to scale and by dimension, showing all dish
antenna and site-specific information, and details necessary for the City to
determine compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter. The City
may require supplemental information to be filed with the building permit
application and basic site plan pursuant to this Subsection.
      b.   In addition to the above, plans filed for a transmitting dish
antenna shall include microwave interference and radiation data and
specifications, all other information required to be filed with the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) in support of the required application for an
FCC license, and any other plans and information the City deems relevant.
      c.   Once a building permit for a dish antenna has been issued by the
City, and installation pursuant thereto has started, all work and improvements
per the approved plans and permit shall be completed within six months. Failure
to complete the work and improvements within six months shall be grounds for
the City to revoke the permit and require removal of the dish antenna.
      d.   The City may condition any building permit for a dish antenna,
issued pursuant to this Section, upon the removal or modification of any other
antennas on the site that are nonconforming with applicable Code requirements.
   5.   Exceptions. The provisions of this Section may be modified or waived by
the City in the following cases:
      a.   National defense or security dish antenna installations; and
      b.   Any receiving dish antenna located in such a manner as to be
invisible from any off-site view.
   6.   Exemptions. The provisions of this Section do not apply to the
following.
      a.   Temporary installations for testing for telecommunications purposes
only, not to exceed three days duration on any one lot or parcel for each such
purpose;
      b.   Portable dish antennas not to exceed six feet in diameter and 35
pounds in weight, when set freestanding on the ground in a side yard or rear
yard area, which is screened from view from any adjoining public street right-
of-way, as would be required for a permanent installation.
D.   Cellular Mobile Radio Telephone Utility Facilities.
   1.   Site selection, order of preference. An application for the approval of
a cellular wireless communication facility shall include written documentation
provided by the applicant, which demonstrates a good faith effort in locating
facilities in compliance with this Subsection. Cellular wireless communication
facilities shall be located in the following order of preference.
      a.   On existing buildings (e.g., a rooftop, church steeple, rooftop
stairwell or equipment enclosures, and the like).
      b.   Co-location facilities.
      c.   In locations where the existing topography, vegetation, or other
structures provide the greatest amount of screening.
      d.   On parcels which will not require significant visual mitigation.
   2.   Design standards.  Every facility shall be designed, installed,
modified, and maintained in compliance with following standards.
      a.   Location, height and setbacks.
         i.   More than one facility shall be allowed on a site, at the
Director's discretion.
         ii.   The facility shall comply with the height and setback
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
         iii.   The facility shall not be located in a maneuvering, or
vehicular/pedestrian circulation area.
      b.   Screening. The facility shall be screened from adjacent and nearby
public rights-of-way and properties. Screening shall be accomplished through
the following specific or equivalent measures, as applicable and as determined
by the Director.
         i.   The antennas shall be located in or on existing building features
or other site improvements wherever possible, as opposed to creating new
building features, site improvements, or monopoles for the support of the
antennas.
         ii.   If new building features or other site improvements are
necessary for the support of the antennas, they shall be minimized in scale or
be designed to architecturally match or compatibly blend with the structure and
site to which they are added, and shall not be higher than 13 and one-half feet
above the roof.
         iii.   If monopoles are necessary for the support of the antennas,
they shall be located near existing utility poles, trees, or other similar
objects; consist of colors and materials (e.g., metal or creosote wood) that
best blend with their background; and have no individual antennas on the poles
other than those approved with the subject Administrative Use Permit.
         iv.   Unless otherwise expressly approved, all cables for a facility
shall be fully concealed from view and placed underground or inside of the
screening or monopole structure supporting the antennas.
         v.   The facility shall comply with all additional measures deemed
necessary to mitigate the visual impact of the facility, as determined by the
Director.
      c.   Signs.  Except for required or allowed safety-oriented signs, no
facility shall display signs. The telephone numbers to contact in an emergency
shall be posted on each facility.
      d.   Security. Every facility shall be secured from access to the general
public by fencing, or other deterring device or means as the City may approve
or require, so that the antenna is not an attractive nuisance.
      e.   Colors. The antennas, equipment, and supporting structure that are
not completely screened shall be painted a single neutral, non-glossy color
(e.g., earth tones, black, gray, and the like) to match or be compatible with
the site and surrounding area, as determined by the Director.
   3.   Plans and permits.
      a.   All facilities shall be installed in accordance with the plans and
building permit approved by the City. In addition to complying with the
structural and electrical requirements of
Chapter 15.02 of the CCMC, the plans filed with the building permit application
shall include a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of all
antennas, equipment and supporting structures, and site-specific information
and details necessary for the City to determine compliance with all applicable
provisions of this Chapter. The City may require supplemental information to be
filed with the building permit application and basic site plan pursuant to this
Subsection.
      b.   In addition to the above, plans filed for a facility shall include
microwave interference and radiation data and specifications; all other
information required to be filed with the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) in support of the required application for an FCC license, and any other
plans and information the City deems relevant.
      c.   Once a building permit for a facility has been issued by the City,
and installation pursuant thereto has started, all work and improvements per
the approved plans and permit shall be completed within six months. Failure to
complete the work and improvements within six months shall be grounds for the
City to revoke the permit and require removal of the facility.
      d.   The City may condition any building permit for a facility, issued
pursuant to this Section, upon the removal or modification of any other
antennas on the site that are nonconforming with applicable Code requirements.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.115 TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS.
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for
temporary storage containers in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Approval by the Director. Temporary storage containers shall be allowed,
subject to approval of a Temporary Storage Container application or Temporary
Use Permit as required in
Chapter 17.520.
B.   Applicability. Temporary storage containers may be allowed if unusual
circumstances exist that require the use of a temporary storage container, as
determined by the Director. Unusual circumstances include, but are not limited
to, construction, business relocation, natural disasters, and residential
rehabilitation activities.
C.   Development Standards for Temporary Storage Containers.
   1.   A temporary storage container shall:
      a.   Not be located in a parking area unless a Temporary Use Permit is
obtained;
         i.   In Residential Zones (R1, R2, RLD, RMD, RHD), Temporary Storage
Containers are permitted on existing driveways with the approval of a Temporary
Storage Container application, subject to all other applicable standards of
this Code.
      b.   Not be located in a landscaped area; unless a Temporary Use Permit
is obtained;
      c.   Be located on-site not more than 180 days during any consecutive 12-
month period;
      d.   Require the submittal of a Temporary Use Permit with the Planning
Division, in accordance with
Chapter 17.520, if proposed for more than 180 days during any consecutive 12-
month period.
   2.   Fences, walls, and/or landscaping, or other methods approved by the
Director shall be required to properly screen the temporary storage container
from a public street, right-of-way, or adjacent residential zoning districts,
if determined necessary by the Director.
   3.   No signs, other than the operating company identification, shall be
allowed on a temporary storage container.
   4.   The use of a temporary storage container for seasonal storage shall be
prohibited.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2017-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008;
Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.400.120 VEHICLE FUELING AND ELECTRICAL VEHICLE (EV) CHARGING STATIONS.
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for
vehicle fueling and/or EV charging stations in compliance with Article 2
(Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards):
A.   Allowable Uses. Vehicle fueling or EV charging stations shall be limited
to selling vehicle fuels, other fuels and other supplying goods necessary for
electric vehicles or zero emission vehicles, and supplying goods and services
required in the operation and maintenance of motor and/or electric vehicles.
These shall include the following.
   1.   Automotive retail sales. The retail sale of batteries, motor fuels,
tires, lubricants, and oils.
   2.   Repairs.  Incidental minor repairs, including brake, lubrication, tire,
and tune up service, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure,
in compliance with the standards in §
17.400.125 (Vehicle Repair Shops) and where allowed by
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards), subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
   3.   Convenience store. A new or existing vehicle fueling or EV charging
station may include an on site convenience store as an accessory use, where
allowed by Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific
Development Standards).
B.   Prohibited Uses. The following uses and services are prohibited at vehicle
fueling or EV charging stations.
   1.   Autobody and fender repair, painting, upholstery work, and dismantling.
   2.   Tire recapping, machine work or welding.
   3.   Overhauling, replacement, or repairing of differentials, engines, front
suspension, and transmissions.
C.   Operational Standards. All vehicle fueling or EV charging stations shall
comply with the following operational standards.
   1.   Location and display of accessories, batteries, and tires for sale
shall be on or within three feet of the pump island or the main structure's
exterior;
   2.   No vehicle rental activities shall be conducted on the vehicle fueling
or EV charging station site; and
   3.   All outdoor/open storage of materials shall be limited to a maximum
area of 150 square feet, and shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high, solid
decorative masonry wall, subject to the approval of the Director.
   4.   All EV charging systems shall meet the requirements of the California
Electrical Code, the California Building Code, the California Green Building
Standards Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association, accredited testing laboratories, and rules of the
Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.
D.   Development Standards. All vehicle fueling or EV charging stations shall
comply with the following development standards.
   1.   If a vehicle fueling or EV charging station adjoins a residential or
mixed use zoning district, a six-foot-high, solid decorative masonry wall, in
compliance with §
17.300.030 (Fences, Hedges and Walls), shall be installed along the property
line that adjoins the residential or mixed use zoning district.
   2.   A three-foot-wide planting strip shall be located on the station site
along the entire length of the wall separating the vehicle fueling or EV
charging station from adjacent residentially or mixed use zoned property and
public street rights-of-way, except for driveway openings. All unpaved areas
shall be landscaped in compliance with
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
   3.   A planter area of not less than 100 square feet shall be provided at
the corner of two intersecting streets, in compliance with
Chapter 17.310 (Landscaping).
   4.   Additional landscaping may be required by the Director to screen the
vehicle fueling or EV charging station from adjacent residential properties.
   5.   All exterior light sources, including canopy, flood, and perimeter,
shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed within the roof
canopy, to ensure that all light, including glare or reflections, is directed
away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way, in compliance with §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting).
E.   Site Maintenance. All vehicle fueling or EV charging stations shall comply
with the following maintenance standards.
   1.   Used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or permanently
disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles, shall not be located outside of the main
structure.
   2.   A refuse storage area, completely enclosed with a masonry wall not less
than five-feet-high, with a solid gated opening, and large enough to
accommodate standard-sized commercial trash bins, shall be located to be
accessible to refuse collection vehicles.
   3.   Driveways and service areas shall be maintained and kept free of oil,
grease, and other petroleum products, in addition to litter. These areas shall
be periodically cleaned with equipment that dissolves spilled oil, grease, and
other petroleum products without washing them into the drainage, gutter, and
sewer system.
F.   Additional Conditions.  Additional conditions (e.g., hours of operation,
sign regulations, structure materials and design) may be imposed by the
applicable review authority as deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.400.125 VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS.
This Section provides location, development, and operating standards for
vehicle repair shops in compliance with
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Development
Standards).
A.   Operational Standards. All vehicle repair shops shall comply with the
following operational standards.
   1.   All work shall be performed within a fully enclosed structure.
   2.   All structures shall be sufficiently soundproofed to prevent a
disturbance or a nuisance to the surrounding properties, in compliance with
Chapter 9.07 (Noise Regulations) of the CCMC.
   3.   Dismantling of vehicles for purposes other than repair is prohibited.
   4.   Vehicle parking or loading and unloading shall only occur on site and
not in adjoining public streets or alleys.
   5.   Vehicles shall not be stored at the site for purposes of sale (unless
the use is also approved as a vehicle sales lot).
   6.   Damaged or wrecked vehicles shall not be stored for purposes other than
repair.
   7.   Location and display of accessories, batteries, and tires for sale
shall be on or within three feet of the main structure's exterior.
   8.   No vehicle rental activities shall be conducted on the vehicle repair
shop (unless the use is also approved as a vehicle rental lot).
   9.   All outdoor/open storage of materials shall be limited to a maximum
area of 150 square feet and shall be enclosed by a 6-foot-high, solid
decorative masonry wall, subject to the approval of the Director.
B.   Development Standards. All vehicle repair shops shall comply with the
following development standards.
   1.   All exterior light sources, including canopy, flood, and perimeter
shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed, to ensure that
all light, including glare or reflections, is directed away from adjoining
properties and public rights-of-way, in compliance with §
17.300.040 (Outdoor Lighting).
   2.   All body-damaged or wrecked vehicles awaiting repair shall be
effectively screened so as not to be visible from surrounding properties of the
same elevation, as determined by the Director.
C.   Site Maintenance.  All vehicle fueling stations shall comply with the
following maintenance standards.
   1.   Used or discarded automotive parts or equipment shall not be located
outside of the main structure, unless located within an approved outdoor
storage area.
   2.   A refuse storage area, completely enclosed with a masonry wall not less
than five feet high, with a solid gated opening, and large enough to
accommodate standard-sized commercial trash bins, shall be located to be
accessible to refuse collection vehicles.
   3.   Driveways and service areas shall be maintained and kept free of oil,
grease, and other petroleum products, in addition to litter. These areas shall
be periodically cleaned with equipment that dissolves spilled oil, grease, and
other petroleum products without washing them into the drainage, gutter, and
sewer system.
D.   Additional Conditions. Additional conditions (e.g., hours of operation,
sign regulations, structure materials and design) may be imposed by the
applicable review authority as deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
ARTICLE 5: LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES
      Chapter
         
17.500   APPLICATIONS, PROCESSING, AND FEES
         
17.510   ZONING CLEARANCES
         
17.520   TEMPORARY USE, SPECIAL EVENT, AND TEMPORARY EVENT PERMITS
         
17.530   ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
         
17.540   ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN REVIEW AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
         
17.550   VARIANCES, ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATIONS AND REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS
         
17.560   COMPREHENSIVE PLANS
         
17.570   SPECIFIC PLANS
         
17.580   DENSITY BONUSES AND OTHER BONUS INCENTIVES
         
17.590   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
         
17.595   PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS, AND EXTENSIONS
CHAPTER 17.500: APPLICATIONS, PROCESSING, AND FEES
Section
   
17.500.005   Purpose
   
17.500.010   Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions
   
17.500.015   Application Preparation and Filing
   
17.500.020   Application Fees
   
17.500.025   Initial Application Review
   
17.500.030   Environmental Assessment
§ 17.500.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing,
and initial processing of applications for the land use permits required by
this Title.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.500.010 AUTHORITY FOR LAND USE AND ZONING DECISIONS.
Table 5-1 (Review Authority) identifies the City official or body responsible
for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application, land use permit
and other approvals required by this Title. The Director may defer action on
permit applications and refer the item(s) to the Commission for the final
decision.
Role of Review Authority. "Recommend" means that the review authority makes a
recommendation to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the
review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that
the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an
earlier decision-making body, in compliance with
Chapter 17.640 (Appeals).
    Table 5-1
   Review Authority
Type of Permit Procedure is in Role of Review Authority
or Decision    Chapter         Director Board of Zoning Planning   City Council
                                        Adjustment      Commission
Type of Permit  Procedure is Role of Review Authority
or Decision     in Chapter   Director Board of Zoning Planning   City Council
                                      Adjustment      Commission
Administrative and Amendments
General Plan    17.620                                Recommend  Decision
Amendments
Interpretations 17.120       Decision Appeal          Appeal     Appeal
Time Extensions 17.595       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Zoning Map      17.620                                Recommend  Decision
Amendments
Zoning Text     17.620                                Recommend  Decision
Amendments
Land Use Permits/Development Approvals
Administrative  17.530       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Use Permits
Administrative
Site Plan       17.540       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Review
Administrative  17.550       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Modifications
Comprehensive   17.560                                Recommend  Decision
Plans
Conditional Use 17.530                                Decision   Appeal
Permits
Density Bonus
and Other       17.580       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Incentives
Development     17.590                                Recommend  Decision
Agreements
Master Sign     17.330       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Program
Reasonable      17.550       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Accommodations
Site Plan       17.540                                Decision   Appeal
Review
Specific Plans  17.570                                Recommend  Decision
Special Event/
Temporary Event 17.520       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Permits
Temporary Use   17.520       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Permits
Tentative       15.10                                 Decision
Parcel Map
Tentative Tract 15.10                                 Recommend  Decision
Map
Variances       17.550                                Decision   Appeal
Zoning          17.510       Decision                 Appeal     Appeal
Clearances
 
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.500.015 APPLICATION PREPARATION AND FILING.
The preparation and filing of applications for land use permits, entitlements,
amendments (e.g., General Plan, Zoning Map, and Zoning Code), and other matters
pertaining to this Title, shall comply with the following requirements.
A.   Preliminary Project Review.
   1.   Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary project review is to inform the
applicant of City requirements as they apply to the proposed development
project, review the procedures outlined in this Title, explore possible
alternatives or modifications, and identify necessary technical studies and
required information relating to future environmental review.
   2.   Applicability.  Except as allowed by State law for Housing Development
Projects, a prospective applicant or agent is required to submit a preliminary
project review request with the Division before formal submittal of a project
application.
   3.   Procedure. Upon submittal of a preliminary project review request, the
item shall be scheduled for a Project Review Committee (PRC) meeting in
accordance with the PRC meeting schedule established by the Division. The
applicant shall be invited to attend the PRC meeting, where opportunities for
discussion about the project and exchange of information on potential issues
between City staff and the applicant takes place. Neither the preliminary
project review nor the provision of information and/or pertinent policies shall
be construed as a recommendation or an official determination for approval or
disapproval of the application or project.
B.   Application Contents. Applications shall be filed with the Division on the
appropriate City forms, together with all necessary fees and/or deposits,
exhibits, maps, materials, plans, reports, and other information specified in
the application form and any applicable Division handout; and any additional
information required by the Director, in order to describe clearly and
accurately the proposed project, its potential environmental impact, its effect
on existing improvements, and to conduct a thorough review of the proposed
project.
C.   Eligibility for Filing.  All zoning approval and other applications
required by this Title shall be filed with the Division. Applications may be
made by:
   1.   The owner of the subject property.
   2.   Any agent or representative, with the written consent of the property
owner.
D.   Filing Date. The filing date of any application shall be the date on which
the application is deemed complete by the Division.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.500.020 APPLICATION FEES.
A.   Filing Fees Required.  The Council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule
of fees for permits, entitlements, amendments, and other matters pertaining to
this Title (hereafter referred to as the "City Council Fee Resolution"). The
City Council Fee Resolution may be obtained from the Division, and may be
changed or modified only by resolution of the Council. The City's processing
fees are cumulative. For example, if an application for a Site Plan Review also
requires a Variance, both fees will be charged. Also, specified projects may be
subject to a deposit and an hourly rate, rather than a flat application fee(s),
in compliance with the City Council Fee Resolution. Processing shall not
commence on an application until all required fees/deposits have been paid.
Without the application fee, or a deposit if applicable, the application will
not be deemed complete.
B.   Refunds and Withdrawals.
   1.   Recognizing that filing fees are utilized to cover City costs of public
hearings, mailing, posting, transcripts, and staff time involved in processing
applications, no refunds shall be issued due to a disapproval of an
application.
   2.   In the case of an application withdrawal, the Director may authorize a
partial refund, based upon the costs incurred to-date and determination of the
status of the application at the time of withdrawal.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.500.025 INITIAL APPLICATION REVIEW.
Except as required by State law, each application filed with the Division shall
be initially processed as follows.
A.   Completeness Review. The Division shall review an application for
completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being complete and
officially filed. The Division will consider an application complete when:
   1.   All necessary application forms, documentation, exhibits, materials,
maps, plans, reports and other information specified in the application form,
any applicable Division handout, and any additional information required by the
Director have been provided and accepted as adequate.
   2.   All necessary fees and deposits have been paid and accepted.
B.   Notification of Applicant. The applicant shall receive written
notification, within 30 days of submittal, that the application is complete and
has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and
that additional information, specified in the written notification, must be
provided.
C.   Expiration of Application.  If a pending application is not deemed
complete within six months after the first filing with the Division, the
application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn, and any remaining deposit
amount shall be refunded, subject to administrative processing fees.
D.   Extension of Application. The Director may grant one six-month extension,
upon written request of the applicant. After expiration of the application, and
extension, if granted, a new application, including fees, plans, exhibits and
other materials, will be required to commence processing of a new project
application on the same property.
E.   Additional Information.  After the application has been accepted as
complete, the Director may require the applicant to submit additional
information needed for the environmental review of the project, in compliance
with §
17.500.030 (Environmental Assessment).
F.   Referral of Application. At the discretion of the Director, or where
otherwise required by this Title, State, or Federal law, an application filed
in compliance with this Title may be referred to any public agency that may be
affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use activity.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.500.030 ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT.
After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed in
compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), to determine
whether the proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA, or is not
a project as defined by CEQA, whether a negative declaration or a mitigated
negative declaration may be issued, or whether an environmental impact report
(EIR) shall be required. When these determinations are required, the
preparation of EIRs shall be in compliance with the City's CEQA Guidelines.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  CHAPTER 17.510: ZONING CLEARANCES
Section
   
17.510.005   Purpose
   
17.510.010   Applicability
   
17.510.015   Criteria for Clearance
§ 17.510.005 PURPOSE.
A Zoning Clearance is a ministerial permit that is used by the Division to
verify that a proposed structure or land use activity complies with the list of
permitted activities allowed in the applicable zoning district, the development
standards applicable to each type of use, and any conditions of approval of
permits previously issued for the subject site.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.510.010 APPLICABILITY.
A.   Zoning Clearance shall be required in conjunction with Division review of
the following activities:
   1.   Change or intensification.  An intensification of the use or a change
to a use that is not similar to the previous use, as determined by the
Director.
   2.   Building or Grading Permits. Any building or grading permit.
   3.   Business Tax Certificate. Any business tax certificate or business
license.
   4.   Other. Any other authorization required by the CCMC or this Title for
any new use or change of use.
B.   Where no other authorization is required, Zoning Clearance shall be
obtained from the Division before the commencement of any business or land use
activity.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.510.015 CRITERIA FOR CLEARANCE.
The Director shall grant Zoning Clearance after determining:
A.   The request complies with all of the applicable standards and provisions
for the category of use in the zoning district of the subject parcel, in full
compliance with this Title; and
B.   The request complies with the City's Comprehensive Standard Conditions of
Approval for Discretionary Land Use Permits as adopted by the Commission.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.520: TEMPORARY USE, SPECIAL EVENT, AND TEMPORARY EVENT PERMITS
Section
   
17.520.005   Purpose
   
17.520.010   Applicability
   
17.520.015   Allowed Temporary Uses, Special Events, and Temporary Events
   
17.520.020   Review Authority
   
17.520.025   Application Filing and Processing
   
17.520.030   Conditions of Approval
   
17.520.035   Development and Operating Standards
   
17.520.040   Post-Approval Procedures
§ 17.520.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides a process for reviewing proposed temporary uses, special
events and temporary events to ensure that basic health, safety, and community
welfare standards are met, while approving suitable temporary uses and special
events, with the minimum necessary conditions or limitations consistent with
the temporary nature of the activity. A Temporary Use Permit, Special Event
Permit, or Temporary Event Permit allows short-term activities that might not
meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district
but may be considered acceptable because of their temporary nature. These
activities are regulated to avoid incompatibility between the proposed activity
and surrounding areas.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.520.010 APPLICABILITY.
A.   Permit Requirement. A Temporary Use, Special Event Permit, or Temporary
Event Permit approved by the applicable review authority shall be required for
all uses identified in §
17.520.015 (Allowed Temporary Uses, Special Events, and Temporary Events), and
shall be issued before the commencement of the activity.
B.   Exempt Activities. The following temporary uses and events are exempt from
the requirement for a Temporary Use, Special Event Permit, Temporary Event
Permit, and other city approval. Uses other than the following shall comply
with §
17.520.015 (Allowed Temporary Uses, Special Events, and Temporary Events).
   1.   On-site contractor's construction yards, in conjunction with an
approved construction project. The activity shall cease upon completion of the
construction project, or the expiration of the companion building permit
authorizing the construction project.
   2.   Temporary storage containers less than 180 days, subject to approval of
a Temporary Storage Container application as provided in §
17.400.115.
   3.   Events occurring in meeting halls, theaters, or other permanent indoor
or outdoor public assembly facilities subject to all applicable regulations of
the CCMC.
   4.   Promotional activities related to the primary product lines of a retail
business, and similar activities (e.g., book readings and signings at
bookstores, opening receptions at art galleries).
   5.   Emergency public health and safety activities.
   6.   Events held in event centers as defined in this Title and approved by
the Current Planning Division.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2017-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-003
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.520.015 ALLOWED TEMPORARY USES, SPECIAL EVENTS, AND TEMPORARY EVENTS.
The following temporary uses, special events or temporary events may be
allowed, subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use, Special Event Permit, or
Temporary Event Permit by the applicable review authority. Uses other than the
following shall comply with the use and development regulations and permit
requirements that otherwise apply to the property, except uses that are exempt
from the provisions of this Chapter in compliance with §
17.520.010 (Applicability).
A.   Allowed Temporary Uses.
   1.   Construction yards.  Off-site contractor construction yards, in
conjunction with an approved construction project. The permit shall expire upon
completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion
building permit authorizing the construction project.
   2.   Residence.  A mobile home as a temporary residence of the property
owner when a valid building permit for a new single-family dwelling is in
force. The Temporary Use Permit may be approved for up to one year, or upon
expiration of the building permit, whichever occurs first.
   3.   Seasonal sales lots.  Seasonal sales activities (for example,
Halloween, Christmas), including temporary residence or security trailers, on
non-residential properties. The sales activity may be approved for a maximum of
30 days or a length of time determined to be appropriate by the applicable
review authority.
   4.   Storage. Enclosed temporary storage, unrelated to a construction
project, or exceeding 180 days, but in no case exceeding a maximum of one year.
See §
17.400.115 (Temporary Storage Containers) for specific standards.
   5.   Temporary real estate sales offices.  A temporary real estate sales
office may be established within the area of an approved development project,
solely for the first sale of homes. A permit for a temporary real estate office
may be approved for a maximum of one year.
   6.   Temporary structures. A temporary classroom, office, or similar
structure, including a manufactured or mobile unit, may be approved, for a
maximum time period of 18 months from the date of approval, as an accessory use
or as the first phase of a development project.
   7.   Temporary work trailers. A trailer or mobile home as a temporary work
site for employees of a business may be allowed:
      a.   During construction or remodeling of a permanent commercial or
manufacturing structure, when a valid building permit is in force; or
      b.   Upon demonstration by the applicant that this temporary work site is
a short-term necessity, while a permanent work site is being obtained.
      The permit for a temporary trailer may be granted for up to one year.
   8.   Temporary Entertainment and Exhibit Uses. Indoor or outdoor temporary
entertainment and exhibit uses related or not related to the primary use of the
property and compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land uses.
These temporary uses may include, but are not limited to, art exhibits and
installations, museums, live or motion picture theatres, circuses and
carnivals, and interactive or immersive attractions, and may be permitted for
more than 12 days but not more than six consecutive months.
   9.   Similar temporary uses.  Similar temporary uses that, in the opinion of
the Director, are compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land
uses.
B.   Allowed Special Events and Temporary Events.
   1.   Special events.  The following special events may be allowed:
      a.   Entertainment and assembly events.  Outdoor and/or indoor
entertainment and assembly events, including carnivals, circuses, concerts,
fairs, farmers' markets, festivals, flea markets, food events, fund-raisers,
live entertainment, parades, outdoor sporting events, public relations
activities, rummage sales, secondhand sales, swap meets, and other similar
events designed to attract large crowds, and which are held on private or
public property, for up to 12 days per calendar year or as determined
appropriate by the applicable Review Authority.
      b.   Display or exhibit events.  Outdoor and/or indoor display or exhibit
events, including art, cultural, and educational displays, and arts and crafts
exhibits on non-residential properties, when not a part of the established
primary use of the site, for up to 12 days per calendar year.
      c.   Outdoor sales events.  Special events related to an existing
business, with temporary outdoor sale of merchandise, in any commercial zoning
district, in compliance with the following provisions:
         i.   There shall be no more than four sales in any calendar year.
         ii.   Each sale shall be limited to three consecutive days.
         iii.   The merchandise displayed shall be that customarily sold on the
site.
         iv.   The site is utilized for a permanently established business
holding a valid business tax certificate as required.
   2.   Similar special events. Similar special events and temporary events,
either indoor or outdoor, that, in the opinion of the Director, are compatible
with the zoning district and surrounding land uses, for up to 12 days per
calendar year or as determined appropriate by the applicable Review Authority.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2017-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-003
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A
(part))
§ 17.520.020 REVIEW AUTHORITY.
A.   Director Review. The Director shall be responsible for the review and
approval of all permits for temporary uses, special events, and temporary
events, identified in §
17.520.015 (Allowed Temporary Uses, Special Events, and Temporary Events), and
the extension of these permits.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2017-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.520.025 APPLICATION FILING AND PROCESSING.
An application for a Temporary Use Permit, Special Event Permit, or Temporary
Event Permit shall be filed with the Division and processed as follows.
A.   Application Contents.  The application shall be made on forms furnished by
the Division and shall be accompanied by the information identified in any
applicable City handouts and permit applications.
B.   Time for Filing.  A temporary use, special event or temporary event permit
application shall be filed as follows.
   1.   Temporary use permit. A temporary use permit application shall be filed
at least 14 days in advance of the proposed commencement of the use.
   2.   Special event and temporary event permit.  A special event or temporary
event permit application shall be filed at least seven days in advance of a
proposed minor event, and 14 days in advance of a proposed major event. The
Director shall determine whether a proposed special event or temporary event is
minor or major, based on the characteristics of, and activities associated
with, the event, and the likely impacts on the surrounding community.
   3.   Additional permits required. Temporary uses, special events and
temporary events may be subject to additional permits and other city approvals,
licenses, and inspections required by applicable laws or regulations.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.520.030 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
In approving a Temporary Use Permit, Special Event Permit, or Temporary Event
Permit, the review authority may impose reasonable and necessary specific
design, locational, and operational conditions to ensure that:
A.   The use or event is limited to a duration that is no more than the maximum
allowed duration, as determined appropriate by the review authority.
B.   The site is physically adequate for the type, density, and intensity of
use being proposed, including provision of services (e.g., sanitation and
water), public access, and the absence of physical constraints.
C.   The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed
use are compatible with the existing land uses on-site and in the vicinity of
the subject property.
D.   The temporary use or activity will be removed and the site restored as
necessary to ensure that no changes to the site will limit the range of
possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this Title.
E.   The use or event will comply with all applicable provision of local, State
and Federal laws or regulations.
F.   Any other pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary use
or special event will be addressed, including the following, to ensure the
orderly and efficient operation of the proposed use or event, in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this Chapter.
   1.   Conditions may require the provision of:
      a.   Sanitary and medical facilities.
      b.   Security and safety measures.
      c.   Solid waste collection and disposal.
   2.   Conditions may regulate:
      a.   Nuisance factors, including the prevention of glare or direct
illumination of adjacent properties, dirt, dust, gasses, heat, noise, odors,
smoke, or vibrations.
      b.   Operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of
the use or event to a shorter time period than that requested.
      c.   Temporary signs.
      d.   Temporary structures and facilities, including height, placement,
and size, and the location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas
and other yards.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.520.035 DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATING STANDARDS.
A.   General Standards.  Standards for floor areas, heights, landscaping areas,
off-street parking, setbacks, and other structure and property development
standards, which apply to the category of use or the zoning district of the
subject parcel, shall be used as a guide for determining the appropriate
development standards for temporary uses and special events. However, the
review authority may authorize an adjustment from the specific requirements as
deemed necessary and appropriate.
B.   Standards for Specific Temporary Activities. Specific temporary land use
activities shall comply with the development standards identified in
Chapter 17.300 (General Property Development and Use Standards), as applicable
to the use, in addition to those identified in §
17.520.035.A. above, and §
17.520.030 (Conditions of Approval).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2019-003 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.520.040 POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
The approval or denial of a Temporary Use Permit, Special Event Permit, or
Temporary Event Permit may be appealed in compliance with
Chapter 17.640 (Appeals). The procedures of
Chapter 17.595 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions) shall apply
after the approval of the permit.
A.   Condition of the Site Following a Temporary Use or Special Event. Each
site occupied by a temporary use or special event shall be cleaned of debris,
litter or any other evidence of the temporary activity, on completion or
removal of the activity, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the
provisions of this Title.
B.   Revocation.  A Temporary Use, Special Event Permit, or Temporary Use
Permit may be revoked or modified, with only a 24-hour notice, in compliance
with
Chapter 17.660 (Revocations and Modifications).
C.   Extension of the Permit.
   1.   Temporary Uses. The Director may extend the operational length of a
temporary use or special event if the delay is beyond the control of, and was
not the result of actions by, the permittee.
D.   Expiration of Permit.  A Temporary Use, Special Event Permit, or Temporary
Event Permit shall be considered to have expired when the approved use has
ceased or been suspended.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.530: ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Section
   
17.530.005   Purpose
   
17.530.010   Applicability
   
17.530.015   Application Filing, Processing, and Review
   
17.530.020   Findings and Decision
   
17.530.025   Conditions of Approval
   
17.530.030   Post-Approval Procedures
§ 17.530.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures for reviewing Administrative Use Permit and
Conditional Use Permit applications intended to allow for specified activities
and uses, as identified in the various zoning districts, whose effect on the
surrounding area cannot be determined before being proposed for a particular
location. Applications for Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use
Permits shall be reviewed for compatibility, configuration, design, location,
and potential impacts of the proposed use, and suitability of the use to the
site and surrounding area.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.530.010 APPLICABILITY.
An application for an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit shall
be required for a specified land use listed in
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards)
as being subject to approval of an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use
Permit.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.530.015 APPLICATION FILING, PROCESSING, AND REVIEW.
A.   Filing. An application for an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use
Permit shall be completed, filed, and processed in compliance with
Chapter 17.500 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). The application package
shall include all information specified in the application, any applicable
Division handout, and any additional information required by the Director in
order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the
findings required by §
17.530.020 (Findings and Decision) below.
B.   Required Community Meetings.  Notice and hearings regarding an application
for a Conditional Use Permit or a major modification to an approved Conditional
Use Permit, shall be provided in compliance with
Chapter 17.625 (Required Community Meetings).
C.   Notice, Hearings, and Administrative Review. Notice, hearings and
administrative review regarding an application for an Administrative Use Permit
or Conditional Use Permit shall be provided in compliance with
Chapter 17.630 (Public Hearings and Administrative Review), and as follows.
   1.   Administrative Use Permits.  The Director shall conduct an
administrative review of an application for an Administrative Use Permit.
   2.   Conditional Use Permits. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing
on an application for a Conditional Use Permit.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.530.020 FINDINGS AND DECISION.
Following an administrative review or public hearing, the appropriate review
authority shall record the decision in writing with the findings on which the
decision is based. The Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit may
be approved, with or without conditions, only after first making all of the
following findings, and any additional findings required for the approval of
specific land uses in Article 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses).
A.   The proposed use is allowed within the subject zoning district with the
approval of an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit and complies
with all other applicable provisions of this Title and the CCMC.
B.   The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable
Specific Plan.
C.   The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed
use are compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity of
the subject site.
D.   The subject site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of use
being proposed, including access, compatibility with adjoining land uses,
shape, size, provision of utilities, and the absence of physical constraints.
E.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the proposed use will not
be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, or general welfare, or
injurious to persons, property, or improvements in the vicinity and zoning
district in which the property is located.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.530.025 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
In approving an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit, the review
authority may impose reasonable and necessary specific design, locational, and
operational conditions that may include, but are not limited to, the City's
Comprehensive Standard Conditions of Approval for Discretionary Land Use
Permits as adopted by the Commission to ensure that the approval will be in
compliance with the findings required by §
17.530.020 (Findings and Decision), above.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.530.030 POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
A.   General Procedures. Procedures relating to appeals, revocations and
modifications, as identified in Article 6 (Zoning Code Administration), in
addition to those identified in
Chapter 17.595 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall
apply following the approval of an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use
Permit application.
B.   Permit Validity.  An Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit
granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter that is valid and in effect,
shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of
ownership of the site or structure that was the subject of the use permit
application. However, should the activity approved by the use permit be
discontinued for a consecutive period of one year, the use permit shall be
deemed to be expired and shall become null and void. Upon expiration, further
continuation of the activity on-site will require approval of a new
Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit application.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.540: ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN REVIEW AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
Section
   
17.540.005   Purpose
   
17.540.010   Applicability
   
17.540.015   Application Filing, Processing and Review
   
17.540.020   Findings and Decision
   
17.540.025   Conditions of Approval
   
17.540.030   Post-Approval Procedures
§ 17.540.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures and standards for the comprehensive review of
proposed development projects to: ensure compliance with the required
standards, design guidelines, and ordinances of the City; minimize potential
adverse effects on surrounding properties and the environment; and protect the
integrity and character of the residential, commercial and public areas of the
City. The specific purposes of this Chapter are as follows.
A.   Develop property in a manner that respects the physical and environmental
characteristics of each site, and will complement surrounding properties and
the City in general;
B.   Ensure that each new development is designed to best comply with the
purpose and intent of the zoning district in which the property is located, and
does not have an adverse effect on the aesthetic, architectural, health, and
safety-related qualities of adjoining properties or upon the City in general;
C.   Ensure access to each property and a circulation pattern that is safe and
convenient for both pedestrians and vehicles;
D.   Ensure the orderly and harmonious appearance of structures with associated
site improvements (e.g., landscaping, parking areas, signs, and the like); and
E.   Implement and promote the goals and policies of the General Plan.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.540.010 APPLICABILITY.
A.   Administrative Site Plan Review - Subject to Review. Administrative Site
Plan Review shall be required for:
   1.   Residential. The construction of a new residential project of three to
25 units, or the addition of three or more units to an existing residential
project that would result in no more than 25 units.
   2.   Non-residential. Construction of a new building of between 5,000 to
15,000 gross square feet; or the addition of between 5,000 to 15,000 net square
feet to an existing building within a one-year period.
   3.   Mixed use. The construction of a mixed use project that meets the
thresholds above for residential and/or non-residential uses.
   4.   Low barrier navigation centers.
B.   Site Plan Review - Subject to Review.  Site Plan Review shall be required
for:
   1.   Residential. The construction of a new residential project of 26 or
more units, or the addition to an existing residential project that would
result in 26 or more units.
   2.   Non-residential. Construction of a new building of more than 15,000
gross square feet or more; or the addition of more than 15,000 net square feet
or more to an existing building within a one-year period.
   3.   Mixed use. The construction of a mixed use project that meets the
thresholds above for residential or non-residential uses.
C.   Exempt from Review. Activities and structures identified in §
17.110.010 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.540.015 APPLICATION FILING, PROCESSING, AND REVIEW.
A.   Filing. An application for an Administrative Site Plan Review or Site Plan
Review shall be completed, filed, and processed in compliance with
Chapter 17.500 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). The application package
shall include all information specified in the application, any applicable
Division handout, and any additional information required by the Director in
order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the
findings required by §
17.540.020 (Findings and Decision) below.
B.   Notice, Hearings, and Administrative Review. Notice, hearings and
administrative review regarding an application for an Administrative Site Plan
Review or a Site Plan Review shall be provided in compliance with
Chapter 17.630 (Public Hearings and Administrative Review).
C.   Designated Review Authority. The Director shall be the designated review
authority on each Administrative Site Plan Review application. The Commission
shall be the designated review authority on each Site Plan Review application.
D.   Referral to the Planning Commission. If the Director determines that there
are unusual circumstances or special conditions related to an application, the
Director may defer action and refer such application to the Commission for
final decision.
E.   Project Review Procedures.  An Administrative Site Plan Review or a Site
Plan Review shall be conducted by comparing the proposed project to applicable
General Plan policies, any applicable specific plan, adopted development and
objective design standards, design guidelines, and other applicable City
ordinances. In conducting an Administrative Site Plan or Site Plan Review for a
particular project, the reviewing authority may also consider the location,
design, site plan configuration, and the overall effect of the proposed project
upon surrounding properties and the City in general per §
17.540.020 (Findings and Decision).
F.   Required Community Meetings.  Notice and hearings regarding an application
for an Administrative Site Plan Review or Site Plan Review shall be provided in
compliance with
Chapter 17.625 (Required Community Meetings).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.540.020 FINDINGS AND DECISION.
Following an administrative review or public hearing, the appropriate review
authority shall record the decision in writing, with the findings on which the
decision is based. The Administrative Site Plan Review or Site Plan Review may
be approved, with or without conditions, only after first making specific
findings as outlined below, and any additional findings required for the
approval of specific land uses in Article 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses).
A.   Findings for Approval of Housing Development Projects.
   1.   Project does not have a specific, adverse impact on public health or
safety. A "specific adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions in existence on date application was
deemed complete.
   2.   The project is consistent with the purpose and intent of this Chapter,
the requirements of the zoning district in which the site is located, and with
all applicable development and objective design standards, as existed on the
date the application was deemed complete.
   3.   The proposed project is consistent with the General Plan and any
applicable specific plan.
   4.   The existing or proposed public facilities necessary to accommodate the
proposed project (e.g., fire protection devices, parkways, public utilities,
sewers, sidewalks, storm drains, street lights, traffic control devices, and
the width and pavement of adjoining streets and alleys) will be available to
serve the subject site.
B.   Findings for Denial or Reduced Density of Housing Development Projects.
Housing development projects consistent with the General Plan, Zoning Code and
objective design standards can only be denied if the findings in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65589.5(j)(1) can be made.
C.   Findings for Denial or reduced Density of Housing Development Projects
with 20% Affordability. Housing development projects with 20% affordable units
and consistent with the General Plan, Zoning Code and objective design
standards can only be denied if the findings in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65589.5(d)
can be made.
D.   All Other Projects.
   1.   The general layout of the project, including orientation and location
of buildings, open space, vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation,
parking and loading facilities, building setbacks and heights, and other
improvements on the site, is consistent with the purpose and intent of this
Chapter, the requirements of the zoning district in which the site is located,
and with all applicable development standards and design guidelines.
   2.   The architectural design of the structure(s), and their materials and
colors, are compatible with the scale and character of surrounding development
and other improvements on the site and are consistent with the purpose and
intent of this Chapter, the requirements of the zoning district in which the
site is located, and with all applicable development standards and design
guidelines.
   3.   The landscaping, including the location, type, size, color, texture,
and coverage of plant materials, provisions for irrigation, and protection of
landscape elements has been designed to create visual relief, complement
structures, and provide an attractive environment and is consistent with the
purpose and intent of this Chapter, the requirements of the zoning district in
which the site is located, and with all applicable development and design
standards and design guidelines.
   4.   The design and layout of the proposed project will not interfere with
the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future development, will not
result in vehicular or pedestrian hazards, and will be in the best interest of
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   5.   The existing or proposed public facilities necessary to accommodate the
proposed project (e.g., fire protection devices, parkways, public utilities,
sewers, sidewalks, storm drains, streetlights, traffic control devices, and the
width and pavement of adjoining streets and alleys) will be available to serve
the subject site.
   6.   The proposed project is consistent with the General Plan and any
applicable specific plan.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.540.025 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
The Director may approve or recommend approval of a Site Plan Review for a
proposed project in compliance with §
17.540.020 (Findings and Decision), and may impose conditions upon the project,
including but not limited to, the City's "Comprehensive Standard Conditions of
Approval for Discretionary Land Use Permits," as adopted by the Commission to
ensure that the project will meet all of the required findings. Conditions may
relate to both on- and off-site improvements that are reasonable and necessary
to mitigate project-related impacts, and to carry out the purpose and
requirements of the respective zoning district, and all applicable development
standards and design guidelines.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.540.030 POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
Procedures relating to appeals, notices, revocations and modifications, as
identified in
Article 6 (Zoning Code Administration), in addition to those identified in
Chapter 17.595 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall
apply following the approval of a Site Plan Review.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.550: VARIANCES, ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATIONS AND REASONABLE
ACCOMMODATIONS
Section
   
17.550.005   Purpose
   
17.550.010   Applicability
   
17.550.015   Application Filing, Processing, and Review
   
17.550.020   Findings and Decision
   
17.550.025   Conditions of Approval
   
17.550.030   Post-Approval Procedures
§ 17.550.005 PURPOSE.
The provisions of this Chapter allow for:
A.   Administrative Modification of specific development standards of this
Title, when the strict application of those standards creates an unnecessary,
involuntarily-created hardship, or unreasonable regulation that makes it
impractical to require compliance with the development standards.
B.   Variances from the development standards of this Title only when, because
of special circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape,
size, surroundings, topography, or other conditions, the strict application of
this Title denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property
owners in the vicinity and in identical zoning districts.
C.   Reasonable accommodations from specific development standards of this
Title when the strict application of those standards would make it impractical
for an individual with a disability to have an equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. 2013-008 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.550.010 APPLICABILITY.
A.   Administrative Modification. The Director may grant an Administrative
Modification for only the development standards identified in
Table 5-2 (Administrative Modifications). Except for an Administrative
Modification for a sign, an Administrative Modification may be granted only
once for a specific type of request per parcel. A request exceeding the
limitations identified in
Table 5-2 (Administrative Modifications) shall require the filing of an
application for a Variance. Nonconforming parcels that comply with the criteria
for a legal building site pursuant to CCMC §
17.610.035 shall be eligible for an administrative modification request and may
be granted an administrative modification provided findings pursuant to CCMC §
17.550.020.A. can be made.
Table 5-2
Administrative Modifications
Types of Administrative Modification Allowed Maximum Adjustment
Types of Administrative Modification Allowed                                     Maximum
                                                                                 Adjustment
1.   Fence, walls, or retaining walls. Fences, gates, pilasters, or walls in tNot to
side or rear yards that exceed 6 feet in height.                                 exceed 8
                                                                                 feet
2.   Distances between structures. A decrease in the minimum distance between 10%
detached accessory structure and the main structure
3. Open space. A decrease in the minimum open space requriements.                10%
4.   Parking.  A decrease in the minimum parking lot and loading dimensions   10%
(e.g., aisle, driveway, and space widths).
5.   Projections. An increase in the allowed projections into setbacks in     10%
compliance with § 17.300.020 (Setback Regulations and Exceptions).
6.   Setbacks.  A decrease in the minimum required setbacks.                  10%
7.   Structure height. An increase in the maximum allowable structure height;
proided that the increase complies with the height limitation established by the 10%
1990 City of Culver City initiative.
8.   Sign. An increase in the sign area of the allowed total area of a permane10%
sign, including applicable cumulative sign area.
 
B.   Variance. The Commission may grant a Variance from the requirements of
this Title; except that a Variance shall not allow a use of land not otherwise
allowed in the applicable zoning district by
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards).
C.   Reasonable Accommodation. The Director may grant reasonable accommodations
from the requirements of this Title that may be necessary to ensure equal
access to housing for an individual with a disability.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2019-004
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A
(part))
§ 17.550.015 APPLICATION FILING, PROCESSING, AND REVIEW.
A.   Filing. An application for an Administrative Modification, a Variance or a
Reasonable Accommodation shall be completed, filed, and processed in compliance
with
Chapter 17.500 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). The application package
shall include all information specified in the application, any applicable
Division handout, and any additional information required by the Director in
order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the
findings required by CCMC §
17.550.020 (Findings and Decision) below.
B.   Notice and Hearings. Notice and hearings regarding an application for a
Variance, an Administrative Modification or a Reasonable Accommodation shall be
provided in compliance with
Chapter 17.630 (Public Hearings and Administrative Review), and as follows.
   1.   Administrative Modification.  The Director shall conduct an
administrative review of an application for an Administrative Modification.
   2.   Variance. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on an
application for a Variance.
   3.   Reasonable Accommodation. The Director shall conduct an administrative
review of an application for a Reasonable Accommodation.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.550.020 FINDINGS AND DECISION.
A.   Administrative Modification Findings. The Director shall record the
decision in writing, with the findings on which the decision is based. The
Administrative Modification may be approved, with or without conditions, only
after making all of the following findings.
   1.   The strict application of the applicable development standard creates
an unnecessary, involuntarily-created hardship, or unreasonable regulation that
makes it obviously impractical to require compliance with the development
standards.
   2.   Approval of the Administrative Modification would not be detrimental to
the public health, interest, safety, or general welfare and would not be
detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and in the
same zoning district.
   3.   The project is consistent with the General Plan and complies with all
other applicable provision of this Title.
B.   Variance Findings. The Commission shall record the decision in writing,
with the findings on which the decision is based. The Variance may be approved,
with or without conditions, only after making all of the following findings:
   1.   There are special circumstances applicable to the property (e.g.,
location, shape, size, surroundings, and topography), or to the intended use of
the property, so that the strict application of this Title denies the property
owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under
identical zoning districts.
   2.   The strict application of the applicable development standard creates
an unnecessary, involuntarily-created hardship, or unreasonable regulation that
makes it obviously impractical to require compliance with the development
standards.
   3.   The Variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
substantial property rights, possessed by other property owners in the same
vicinity and zoning district, and denied to the property owner for which the
Variance is sought.
   4.   The project is consistent with the General Plan and complies with all
other applicable provisions of this Title.
   5.   Approval of the Variance would not be detrimental to the public health,
interest, safety, or general welfare, and would not be detrimental or injurious
to property or improvements in the vicinity and in the same zoning district.
C.   Reasonable Accommodation Findings. The Director shall record the decision
in writing with the findings on which the decision is based. The Reasonable
Accommodation may be approved with or without conditions only after making all
of the following findings:
   1.   The dwelling, which is the subject of the request for reasonable
accommodation will be used by an individual with a disability.
   2.   The requested accommodation is necessary to make the dwelling available
to an individual with a disability.
   3.   There is no reasonable alternative accommodation that will comply or
come closer to complying with the development standards of this Title.
   4.   Approval of the reasonable accommodation would not be detrimental to
the public health, interest, safety, or general welfare, and would not be
detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and in the
same zoning district.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.550.025 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
In approving an Administrative Modification, a Variance, or Reasonable
Accommodation the review authority may impose reasonable and necessary specific
design, locational, and operational conditions, which may include, but are not
limited to, the City's Comprehensive Standard Conditions of Approval for
Discretionary Land Use Permits as adopted by the Commission to ensure that the
approval will be in compliance with the findings required by §
17.550.020 (Findings and Decision) above.
A.   Reasonable Accommodation Conditions of Approval. The following shall apply
to the approval of a reasonable accommodation:
   1.   Approval of a reasonable accommodation shall be granted to an
individual and shall not run with the land unless the Director also finds that
the modification is physically integrated into the structure and cannot be
easily removed or altered to comply with the requirements of this Title.
   2.   Prior to the issuance of any permits relative to an approved reasonable
accommodation the Director may require the applicant to record a covenant in
the County Recorder's Office acknowledging and agreeing to comply with the
terms and conditions established in the decision. The covenant shall be
required only if the Director finds that a covenant is necessary to provide
notice to future owners that a reasonable accommodation has been approved and
may not apply to future owners and/or tenants.
B.   Duration of Reasonable Accommodation. A reasonable accommodation shall not
be considered permanent and shall be subject to the following:
   1.   The Reasonable Accommodation may continue to be used and maintained by
the individual with a disability for the duration of his or her tenancy in the
dwelling subject to the findings in §
17.550.020.C.
   2.   Within 60 days of the termination of the tenancy by the individual with
a disability, the Reasonable Accommodation shall be removed unless the Director
has determined that the Reasonable Accommodation may remain as provided in §
17.550.025.A.2.
   3.   A Reasonable Accommodation request shall be null and void if an
individual with a disability fails to take advantage of said approval within
one year or if said individual with a disability terminates tenancy prior to
installing Reasonable Accommodation related structures.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.550.030 POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
Procedures relating to appeals, notices, revocations and modifications, as
identified in Article 6 (Zoning Code Administration), in addition to those
identified in
Chapter 17.595 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall
apply following the approval of an Administrative Modification, a Variance, or
a Reasonable Accommodation application.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.560: COMPREHENSIVE PLANS
Section
   
17.560.005   Purpose
   
17.560.010   Applicability
   
17.560.015   Application Filing, Processing, and Review
   
17.560.020   Findings and Decision
   
17.560.025   Comprehensive Plan Modifications, Major and Minor
   
17.560.030   Conditions of Approval
   
17.560.035   Post-Approval Procedures
§ 17.560.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures for reviewing Comprehensive Plans, which allow
for flexibility in the application of zoning code standards to proposed
development. The purpose is to allow consideration of innovation in site
planning and other aspects of project design, and more effective design
responses to site features, uses on adjoining properties, and other impacts
than the zoning code standards would produce without adjustment.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.560.010 APPLICABILITY.
An application for a Comprehensive Plan shall be filed with the Division, when
required for development in the PD Zone in compliance with
Chapter 17.240 (Planned Development Zoning Districts). Comprehensive Plans
proposed for development within the OS Zone shall comply with §
17.250.030 (Open Space District Requirements), in addition to the requirements
of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.560.015 APPLICATION FILING, PROCESSING, AND REVIEW.
A.   Filing. An application for a Comprehensive Plan shall be completed, filed,
and processed in compliance with
Chapter 17.500 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). The application package
shall include all information specified in the application, any applicable
Division handout, and any additional information required by this Title or the
Director in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the
findings required by §
17.560.020 (Findings and Decision) below; or the findings required by §
17.250.030.E. (Comprehensive Plan Findings) for the OS Zone.
B.   Comprehensive Plan Requirements. All Comprehensive Plans shall be prepared
and endorsed by a professional team, which shall include a licensed landscape
architect, a registered civil engineer and a licensed architect, as applicable,
and shall include, but not be limited to, the following.
   1.   A site plan, showing building(s), various functional use areas, parking
and circulation.
   2.   A description of development standards, which may include, but not be
limited to, building heights, setbacks, parking, and the like.
   3.   Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior
elevations.
   4.   Landscaping plans, including a plant palette.
   5.   Lighting and signage plans.
   6.   Civil engineering plans, including site grading, public rights-of-way
improvements, drainage, trash/recycling areas, and public utility extensions,
as necessary.
   7.   Proposed use and occupancy, construction type, building height and area
of each building or structure, and proposed distances between buildings or
structures, and setbacks to property lines.
   8.   Other information or applicable materials as may be deemed necessary by
the Director.
C.   Notice and Hearings. Notice and hearings regarding an application for a
Comprehensive Plan, or a modification to an approved Comprehensive Plan, shall
be provided in compliance with
Chapter 17.630 (Public Hearings and Administrative Review).
D.   Required Community Meetings. Notice and hearings regarding an application
for a Comprehensive Plan, or a major modification to an approved Comprehensive
Plan, shall be provided in compliance with
Chapter 17.625 (Required Community Meetings).
E.   Review Authority.  A Comprehensive Plan shall be approved by the adoption
of an ordinance or disapproved by a resolution of the Council, after
consideration of the Commission's recommendation.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.560.020 FINDINGS AND DECISION.
The Commission, in conjunction with a public hearing, shall review and make
recommendations to the Council regarding the Comprehensive Plan. The Council,
after a public hearing, may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a
Comprehensive Plan. A Comprehensive Plan may be approved, provided the facts
submitted and evaluated during the review process support the following
findings.
A.   The proposed Comprehensive Plan can be substantially completed within four
years.
B.   The proposed development is capable of creating an environment of
sustained desirability and stability, or adequate assurance will be provided
such objective will be attained.
C.   The proposed uses will not be substantially detrimental to present and
potential surrounding uses but will have a beneficial effect.
D.   The streets and thoroughfares serving the development are suitable and
adequate to carry anticipated traffic, and the development will not generate
traffic that will overload the adjacent street network.
E.   The proposed development is compatible with the surrounding area.
F.   The types and locations of any proposed commercial development can be
economically justified.
G.   The Comprehensive Plan is in conformance with the General Plan, or a
concurrent General Plan amendment is in process.
H.   Any exception from the standards and requirements of this Title is
warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the Comprehensive Plan
and is desired by the Council.
I.   Existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed uses.
J.   The Comprehensive Plan has complied with all applicable City requirements.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.560.025 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MODIFICATIONS, MAJOR AND MINOR.
A.   Major changes or alterations to an approved Comprehensive Plan shall be
considered by the Commission at a public hearing, which shall make
recommendations to the Council. The Council may then approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the proposed changes or alterations, after a public
hearing.
B.   The Director may administratively approve minor changes or alterations to
an approved Comprehensive Plan, subject to appeal pursuant to
Chapter 17.640 (Appeals); provided the Director makes the following findings:
   1.   The proposed changes are consistent with the intent of the approved
Comprehensive Plan;
   2.   The proposed changes will not adversely impact the environment;
   3.   The proposed changes will not be detrimental to the surrounding uses;
   4.   The proposed changes will not significantly increase traffic levels on
existing streets and thoroughfares within and surrounding the development; and
   5.   Any proposed change, which requires exception from standard ordinance
requirements, is warranted by the design and amenities incorporated into the
approved Comprehensive Plan.
C.   If the Director determines the above findings cannot be made, then the
request shall be considered a major change, and referred to the Commission for
review at a public hearing, and to Council for review at a public hearing.
D.   Maintenance, rehabilitation, renovation, and reconstruction of existing
structures, which will not alter the site plan, shall not require a
Comprehensive Plan or any Comprehensive Plan modification, minor or major.
E.   All determinations required by this Subsection are subject to appeal
pursuant to
Chapter 17.640 (Appeals).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.560.030 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
The Council may approve a Comprehensive Plan in compliance with §
17.540.020 (Findings and Decision), and may impose conditions upon the project,
including but not limited to, the City's "Comprehensive Standard Conditions of
Approval for Discretionary Land Use Permits," as adopted by the Commission to
ensure that the project will meet all of the required findings. Conditions may
relate to both on- and off-site improvements that are reasonable and necessary
to mitigate project-related impacts, and to carry out the purpose and
requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and all applicable development standards
and design guidelines.
Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the Commission from recommending, and
the Council from approving, a Comprehensive Plan in concept only, and requiring
subsequent discretionary review of that Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.560.035 POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
Procedures relating to appeals, notices, revocations and modifications, as
identified in
Article 6 (Zoning Code Administration), in addition to those identified in
Chapter 17.595 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall
apply following the approval of a Comprehensive Plan application.
The Council may modify any provisions of this Section after consideration of
the Commission recommendations.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.570: SPECIFIC PLANS
Section
   
17.570.005   Purpose
   
17.570.010   Initiation of Specific Plans.
   
17.570.015   Preparation and Content of Specific Plans.
   
17.570.020   Filing, Processing and Adoption of Specific Plans.
   
17.570.025   Implementation and Amendments.
§ 17.570.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures for preparing, processing, reviewing, adopting
and amending a Specific Plan. A Specific Plan can be used to systematically
implement the General Plan for any part of the City. As a charter city, Culver
City utilizes its own Specific Plan content requirements, which vary from and
are not required to follow standard State content requirements for Specific
Plans, (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65451).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.570.010 INITIATION OF SPECIFIC PLANS.
A Specific Plan may be initiated in the following manner:
A.   City. By a Resolution of Intention adopted by the Council; or
B.   Property Owner.  By an application in compliance with
Chapter 17.500 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). For Specific Plans
proposed by private property owners, the project area may be one parcel under
single ownership, or a combination of adjoining parcels subject to a unified
planning concept, with the full written concurrence of all applicable property
owners.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.570.015 PREPARATION AND CONTENT OF SPECIFIC PLANS.
The initiator shall prepare a draft Specific Plan for review by the City, which
includes detailed information in the form of text and diagrams, organized in
compliance with an outline furnished by the Division. The following information
shall be provided.
A.   Relationship to General Plan. A discussion of the relationship of the
Specific Plan to the objectives, policies, general land uses, and programs of
the General Plan.
B.   Land Uses. The distribution, location, and extent of land uses within the
area covered by the Specific Plan, including open space areas.
C.   Development Standards. Standards, criteria, and guidelines by which
development would proceed, including required improvements to public facilities
such as streets, parks, and other amenities identified in the specific plan
area.
D.   Additional Information.  The Specific Plan shall contain any additional
information determined to be necessary by the Director, based on the
characteristics of the area to be covered by the plan, applicable policies of
the General Plan, or any other issue(s) determined by the Director to be
significant.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.570.020 FILING, PROCESSING AND ADOPTION OF SPECIFIC PLANS.
A.   Filing and Initial Processing. A draft Specific Plan proposed by a
property owner shall be filed with the Current Planning Division and shall be
accompanied by the fee required by the City Council Fee Resolution. A draft
plan proposed by an applicant, or prepared by the City, shall then be processed
in the same manner as required for General Plans by State law (Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 65350 et seq.), and as provided by this Section.
B.   Division Evaluation. After the receipt of a draft Specific Plan, the
Division shall conduct an initial review of the draft Specific Plan, in
compliance with §
17.500.025 (Initial Application Review), to determine whether it complies with
the provisions of this Chapter. If the draft plan is not in compliance, it
shall be returned to the applicant, with a written explanation of why it does
not comply, and with suggested revisions to ensure compliance. When a draft
plan is returned by the applicant to the Division, and the Division determines
it is complete and in compliance with this Chapter, the plan shall be deemed to
be accepted for processing.
C.   Environmental Review.  The draft Specific Plan shall be subject to
environmental review in compliance with the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA), and the City's CEQA Guidelines.
D.   Required Community Meetings. Notice and hearings regarding an application
for a Specific Plan shall be provided in compliance with
Chapter 17.625 (Required Community Meetings).
E.   Public Hearings. A proposed Specific Plan shall be subject to public
hearings before both Commission and Council before its adoption, as follows:
   1.   Commission. The hearing shall receive public notice and be conducted in
compliance with
Chapter 17.630 (Public Hearings and Administrative Review). After the hearing,
the Commission shall forward a written recommendation, with appropriate
findings to the Council; and
   2.   Council.  Upon receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the Council
shall approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the Specific Plan based
on the findings contained in §
17.570.020.F. below. If the Council proposes to adopt a substantial
modification not previously considered by the Commission during its hearings,
the proposed modification may first be referred back to the Commission for its
recommendation. The Specific Plan shall be adopted by ordinance and shall
become effective 30 days following the date the decision is rendered by the
Council.
F.   Conformance with the General Plan.  The Council shall adopt a Specific
Plan only if it finds that the proposed plan is consistent with the objectives,
policies, general land uses, and programs of the General Plan and other adopted
goals and policies of the City.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.570.025 IMPLEMENTATION AND AMENDMENTS.
A.   Development within Specific Plan Area. After the adoption of a Specific
Plan, subsequent projects to implement the Specific Plan may be approved or
adopted within an area covered by a Specific Plan only if first found
consistent with the Specific Plan. The Council may impose a Specific Plan fee
surcharge on development permits within the Specific Plan area, in compliance
with State law (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65456).
B.   Amendments.
   1.   An adopted Specific Plan shall be amended through the same procedure
specified by this chapter for the adoption of a Specific Plan.
   2.   The Specific Plan may be amended as often as deemed necessary by the
Council, in compliance with State law (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65453).
C.   Modifications. Development standards identified in an adopted Specific
Plan may be modified, by either the Director, or Commission, only as specified
in the Specific Plan.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.580: DENSITY BONUSES AND OTHER BONUS INCENTIVES
Section
   
17.580.005   Purpose
   
17.580.010   Definitions
   
17.580.015   Applicability
   
17.580.020   Density Bonus Calculation
   
17.580.025   Tier Density Bonuses
   
17.580.030   Community Benefit Density Bonuses
   
17.580.035   Waivers
   
17.580.040   Concessions
   
17.580.045   Application Filing, Processing, and Review
   
17.580.050   Affordable Housing Plan
   
17.580.055   Affordable Housing Agreement (AHA)
   
17.580.060   Enforcement of Affordable Housing Agreement
   
17.580.065   General Affordable Housing Requirements
   
17.580.070   Replacement of Dwelling Units
   
17.580.075   Findings and Decision
   
17.580.080   Conditions of Approval
   
17.580.085   Post-Approval Procedures
§ 17.580.005 PURPOSE.
A.   This Chapter provides requirements and incentives for the development of
Affordable Housing Units as provided under State law. These provisions are
intended to implement General Plan policies encouraging the production of
affordable housing for all economic groups, and housing for disabled and older
residents, transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, and homeless persons
as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915, as modified from time to time, all of
which is integrated, compatible with and complements adjacent uses, and is
located near public and commercial services.
B.   The incentives and concessions offered in this Article are used by the
City to facilitate housing affordable to all economic groups and to meet its
regional fair share requirements for the construction of housing affordable to
Extremely Low-, Very Low-, Low-, and Moderate-Income Households. Additionally,
this section aims to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the
Housing Element of the City's General Plan to increase the feasibility of
developing affordable housing in Culver City and decrease housing insecurity
within the City.
C.   All references in this Ordinance to the State Density Bonus Law refer to
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65915 et seq.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.010 DEFINITIONS.
Certain words and phrases are defined within this Chapter. Where it appears
from the context of such words, phrases, or provisions that a different meaning
is intended, the definition shall be as determined by the Director.
A.   Affordable Housing Agreement (AHA). An agreement approved by the City
between a commercial Developer and a housing Developer identifying how the
commercial development will provide housing available at affordable ownership
cost or affordable rent. An Affordable Housing Agreement may consist of the
formation of a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity recognized by the state in which the commercial Developer and the
housing Developer are each partners, members, shareholders, or other
participants, or a contract between the commercial Developer and the housing
Developer for the development of both the commercial development and the
Residential Development Project.
B.   Affordable Housing Cost. Is used within this Chapter with the same meaning
as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50052.5.
C.   Affordable Rent. The maximum monthly rent, including all fees for housing
services and a utility allowance as determined by the Los Angeles County
Development Authority, which does not exceed the following, based on Presumed
Occupancy Levels:
   1.   For Extremely Low-Income Households: 30% of Area Median Income
multiplied by 30% and divided by 12.
   2.   For Very Low-Income Households: 50% of Area Median Income multiplied by
30% and divided by 12.
   3.   For Low-Income Households: 60% of Area Median Income multiplied by 30%
and divided by 12.
   4.   For Moderate-Income Households: 120% of Area Median Income multiplied
by 30% and divided by 12.
D.   Affordable Unit. An ownership or rental dwelling unit whose price is set
at an Affordable Housing Cost as defined in this Chapter.
E.   Area Median Income (AMI). The median income for Los Angeles County,
adjusted for household size, as published annually in Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 25, § 6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD).
F.   Base Density Bonus. The additional number of units that a Developer is
entitled to add to a Residential Development Project based on meeting specific
criteria, without combining it with any other bonuses or incentives. It
represents the fundamental density increase granted independently of any
additional bonuses.
G.   Base Unit. Represents a unit of housing, such as an apartment or house, as
defined by zoning regulations or development standards before any additional
density bonuses or incentives are applied. The Base Unit serves as the
foundational unit for calculating potential increases in development capacity
or density.
H.   Community Benefit Bonus. Refers to additional incentives for Residential
Development Projects that provide specific community enhancements pursuant to §
17.580.030 of this Chapter.
I.   Concession. A reduction or modification of development standards or
requirements granted to a project, such as height, setbacks, or parking.
Concessions must result in identifiable cost reductions for the project in
accordance with applicable housing laws, such as the State Density Bonus Law.
Each deviation is considered one concession.
J.   Culver City Transit Priority Area. Culver City Transit Priority Areas are
all parcels which are partially or wholly within one-half mile of the
geographical center of the following transit locations and any future transit
locations, as determined by the City:
   1.   Culver City Metro Station.
   2.   La Cienega Metro Station.
   3.   Sepulveda/Venice Intersection.
   4.   Westfield-Culver City Transit Center.
K.   Density Bonus. A density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable
gross residential density as of the date of application by the applicant to the
City as per Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 and/or the provisions of this Chapter.
L.   Extremely Low-, Very Low-, Low-, and Moderate-Income Households.
Households whose incomes do not exceed the Extremely Low-, Very Low-, Low-, or
Moderate-Income limits, as applicable, established for Los Angeles County and
adjusted for household size that are published annually in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 25, § 6932 (or its successor provision) by HCD.
M.   High-Quality Transit Corridor. Per Cal. Public Resources Code § 21155, a
High-Quality Transit Corridor means a corridor with fixed route bus service
with service intervals no longer than 15 minutes during peak commute hours. A
project shall be considered to be within one-half mile of a High-Quality
Transit Corridor if all parcels within the project have no more than 25% of
their area farther than one-half mile from the corridor and if not more than
10% of the residential units or 100 units, whichever is less, in the project
are farther than one-half mile from the corridor.
N.   Household Income. The gross annual household income, monetary benefits,
and all other sources of household income, before deductions or exemptions, and
includes the income of all members of the household 18 years of age or older.
O.   Marketing Plan. A plan that describes how the applicant will inform the
public, and those within the appropriate income groups, of the availability of
Affordable Housing Units.
P.   Neighborhood-Oriented Commercial Space. Refers to commercial
establishments that primarily cater to the everyday needs and preferences of
local residents. These spaces are meant to enhance the quality of life within
residential neighborhoods by providing convenient access to essential goods,
services, or community enrichment opportunities. Neighborhood-Oriented
Commercial Spaces are limited to uses outlined in § 17.580.030.F.
Q.   Presumed Occupancy Levels. As listed below, these shall be used to
establish affordable ownership cost and affordable rents, unless the
residential development project is financed with federal tax credits, in which
case the applicable federal regulations shall determine the Presumed Occupancy
Levels:
   1.   One person for a studio unit;
   2.   Two people for a one-bedroom unit;
   3.   Three people for a two-bedroom unit; and
   4.   One additional person for each additional bedroom thereafter.
R.   Resale Controls and/or Rent Restrictions. The restrictions, set forth by
the City of Culver City or by state and/or federal law, by which the rents paid
on rental Affordable Housing Units and the sales price for ownership Affordable
Housing Units are limited to ensure that the unit remains affordable to Acutely
Low, Extremely Low, Very Low- or Low-Income households for a term of no less
than 55 years or affordable to Moderate-Income households for a term of no less
than 45 years. With respect to rental units, such rent restrictions shall be in
the form of a regulatory agreement recorded against the applicable property.
With respect to owner-occupied units, such resale controls shall be in the form
of resale restrictions, deeds of trust, and/or other similar documents recorded
against the applicable property. Affordability restrictions and terms shall be
consistent with State Density Bonus Law.
S.   Residential Development Project. Shall have the same definition as Cal.
Gov’t Code § 65589.5(h)(2). Residential Development Projects also includes a
shared housing building development and a residential care facility for the
elderly, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 1569.2.
T.   Tier Density Bonus. Refers to a system of progressively increasing density
incentives for Residential Development Projects based on the proportion of
Affordable Units provided and the project's proximity to transit pursuant to §
17.580.025.
U.   Waiver. An exemption or relinquishment of a specific requirement, rule,
regulation, or any development standard that will have the effect of physically
precluding the construction of a development meeting specified criteria and
affordability thresholds at the densities or with the concessions or incentives
permitted by State law, provided such Waivers meet specific criteria and
reasonable documentation is provided to demonstrate physical infeasibility if
all development standards are applied.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.015 APPLICABILITY.
A.   The provisions of this Chapter apply to Residential Development Projects
consisting of two or more dwelling units.
B.   Projects with special targeting, including foster youth, disabled
veterans, unhoused individuals, or other populations with specific needs, may
be subject to additional requirements or incentives, as outlined in applicable
local, state, or federal regulations.
C.   The density bonus and other bonus incentive provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 65915 shall apply in all zoning districts. Notwithstanding the forgoing
sentence, neither those provisions nor any other provision of this Chapter are
intended to require the City to grant modifications in any zone beyond those
allowed by State law and specifically allowed in this Chapter.
D.   This Chapter implements Cal. Gov’t Code Chapter 4.3, Density Bonuses and
other incentives (§§ 65915-65918). In the event these sections are amended,
those amended provisions shall be incorporated into this Chapter. Should any
inconsistencies exist between the amended state law and the provisions set
forth herein, the amended state law shall prevail.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.020 DENSITY BONUS CALCULATION.
The following method shall be used in determining the total number of units to
be granted, including base density and bonus density as well as the resulting
number of Affordable Units needed for a given density bonus project.
A.   Calculation.
   1.   Compliance with State Law. All density bonuses are designed to be in
conformance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 or the maximum amount allowed by the
City Density Bonus Ordinance. If local density bonuses interact with State law
in a way that reduces the number of income-restricted housing units required by
State law or undermines the goals of the State Density Bonus Law, the State
Density Bonus Law shall take precedence over the local incentives.
   2.   Calculation Order. Density bonuses shall be applied in the following
order:
      a.   Apply the State density bonus to base density.
      b.   Apply the Tier Density Bonuses to base density pursuant to §
17.580.025.
      c.   Apply Community Benefit Bonuses to the base density pursuant §
17.580.030.
   3.   Restriction on Overlapping or Compounding Bonuses. Each bonus, whether
from State, Tier, or Community Benefit categories, shall be applied
individually and sequentially to the project's base density, without overlap or
compounding of incentives.
   4.   Rounding. All calculations are rounded up for any fractional numeric
value in determining the total number of units to be granted, including base
density and bonus density as well as the resulting number of Affordable Units
needed for a given density bonus project.
   5.   Broad Interpretation. The provisions of this section shall be
interpreted broadly to affect the purposes of this Chapter and to prevent
evasion of its terms.
B.   Election to Accept Lesser Density Bonus. The applicant may elect to accept
a lesser percentage of density bonus than the Residential Development Project
is entitled to, or no density bonus, but no reduction will be permitted in the
percentages of required Affordable Units contained in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915,
subdivisions (b), (c), and (f) or as required by Tier Density Bonuses and
Community Benefit Bonuses. Regardless of the number of Affordable Units, no
Residential Development Project shall be entitled to a density bonus of more
than what is authorized under State law and/or as allowed by the City's Density
Bonus Ordinance.
C.   Exclusion of Density Bonus Units in Affordable Unit calculations. The
density bonus units shall not be included in determining the number of
Affordable Units required to qualify a Residential Development Project for a
density bonus pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915R.
D.   Multiple Eligibility Categories. If a Residential Development Project
qualifies for a density bonus under more than one income category, such as
income-based eligibility, Senior Citizen Housing, or housing designated for
transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, unhoused persons, or lower-income
students, the applicant must identify which categories they are using to
qualify for a density bonus. Density bonuses from more than one category can be
combined up to the maximum allowed under Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 or the maximum
amount allowed by the City's Density Bonus Law, whichever allows for a greater
bonus.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.025 TIER DENSITY BONUSES.
A.   Tier Bonuses. Tier Bonuses are intended to incentivize the development of
additional housing in transit-rich areas, thereby mitigating the impacts of
population growth on traffic, vehicle miles traveled, and carbon emissions,
while also reducing the reliance of Low-Income Households on automobile
ownership. The bonuses increase progressively across the tiers, corresponding
to the proportion of Affordable Units required to attain these incentives.
B.   Base Density Increase In Certain Mixed-Use Zones. Projects within MU 1 or
MU 2 zones which qualify for Tiers 1, 2, 3 or 4 Density Bonuses shall
automatically receive a Base Density increase to 65 dwelling units per acre.
All Tier and Community Benefit Bonuses may be applied to this increased Base
Density.
C.   Summary of Tier Bonuses. The four tiers are summarized in
Table 5-3.
 
Table 5-3 Local Tier Density Bonus requirements
                    Transit Proximity  Affordability
Tier Name           Requirement        Threshold to Qualify Local Density Bonus
                                       for Bonus
                                       Must fulfill the
Tier 1: State       None               requirements of      None
Minimums                               California Density
                                       Bonus Law.
                                       Projects must
                                       qualify for a State
                                       Density Bonus and    20% of the minimum
                                       provide additional   percentage required
Tier 2: Enhanced                       Affordable Units     under California
State Minimums      None               equal to at least    Density Bonus Law
                                       50% of the state-    for the applicable
                                       required minimum     affordability
                                       percentage for the   category.
                                       corresponding income
                                       level.
                                       Projects must
                                       qualify for a        State 30% of the
                                       Density Bonus and    minimum percentage
                                       provide additional   required under
Tier 3: High-       Within a half-mile Affordable Units     California Density
Quality Transit     of a High-Quality  equal to at least    Bonus Law for the
Corridors           Transit Corridor   75% of the state-    applicable
                                       required minimum     affordability
                                       percentage for the   category.
                                       corresponding income
                                       level.
                                       Projects must
                                       qualify for a State
                                       Density Bonus and    40% of the minimum
                                       provide additional   percentage required
Tier 4: Culver City Within a Culver    Affordable Units     under California
Transit Priority    City Transit       equal to at least    Density Bonus Law
Area                Priority Area      100% of the state-   for the applicable
                                       required minimum     affordability
                                       percentage for the   category.
                                       corresponding income
                                       level.
D.   Tier 1: State Minimums.
   1.   Residential Development Projects that qualify for a State density bonus
are designated as Tier 1. Tier 1 projects are not eligible for any additional
local bonuses.
E.   Tier 2: Enhanced State Minimums.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements for Tier 2 Projects. Projects must qualify for
a State Density Bonus and provide additional Affordable Units equal to at least
50% of the state-required minimum percentage for the corresponding income
level.
   2.   Local Bonuses for Tier 2 Projects.
      a.   Tier 2 projects that meet the eligibility criteria may receive an
additional local bonus equal to 20% of the minimum percentage required under
California Density Bonus Law for the applicable affordability category.
      b.   Tier 2 projects are eligible for Community Benefit Bonuses.
F.   Tier 3: High-Quality Transit Corridors.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements for Tier 3 Projects. Projects must qualify for
a State Density Bonus and provide additional Affordable Units equal to at least
75% of the state-required minimum percentage for the corresponding income
level.
   2.   Local Bonuses for Tier 3 Projects.
      a.   Tier 3 projects that meet the eligibility criteria may receive an
additional local bonus equal to 30% of the minimum percentage required under
California Density Bonus Law for the applicable affordability category.
      b.   Tier 3 projects are eligible for Community Benefit Bonuses.
G.   Tier 4: Culver City Transit Priority Areas.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements for Tier 4 Projects. Projects must qualify for
a State Density Bonus and provide additional Affordable Units equal to at least
100% of the state-required minimum percentage for the corresponding income
level.
   2.   Local Bonuses for Tier 4 Projects.
      a.   Tier 4 projects that meet the eligibility criteria may receive an
additional local bonus equal to 40% of the minimum percentage required under
California Density Bonus Law for the applicable affordability category.
      b.   Tier 4 projects are eligible for Community Benefit Bonuses.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.030 OMMUNITY BENEFIT DENSITY BONUSES.
A.   Community Benefit Density Bonuses. Community Benefit Density Bonuses are
designed to promote significant enhancements to Residential Development
Projects by incentivizing the provision of additional middle-income housing,
meeting the needs of multi-generational households, and improving overall
quality of life. To ensure that the City goal to facilitate Low-Income Housing
is not compromised, projects are eligible for Community Benefit Density Bonuses
only after meeting the State and Local requirements for affordable housing as
well as the requirements of either Culver City's Tier 2, 3, or 4 Density
Bonuses. Community Benefit Density Bonuses shall conform to requirements of
Table 5-4.
Table 5-4 Community Benefit Density Bonuses
Community Benefit Bonus Requirements Bonus Regulating Section
Table 5-4 Community Benefit Density Bonuses
Community Benefit   Bonus Requirements  Bonus                Regulating Section
                    Projects
                    restricting at
Workforce Housing   least 10% of their  5% base density      Section
Bonus               base units to       bonus.               17.580.030.B
                    households earning
                    between 80% and
                    140% of the AMI.
                                        1% for each
                    Projects that       additional
Three or More       designate at least  percentage above 10% Section
Bedroom Unit Bonus  11% of total units  of the units that    17.580.030.C
                    as three or more    are 3 or more
                    bedrooms.           bedrooms with a
                                        maximum bonus of 5%.
                    Projects that
                    include a           Density bonus equal
Child Day Care      dedicated, fully    to State bonus plus  Section
Facility Bonus      licensed Child Day  the square footage   17.580.030.D
                    Care Facility of at of the Child Day
                    least 500 square    Care Facility.
                    feet.
                    Projects that       One unit per 1,000
Public Open Space   include at least    square feet of       Section
Bonus               3,000 square feet   eligible public open 17.580.030.E
                    of public open      space, up to 10
                    space.              units.
                    Projects that       One unit per 1,000
                    include at least    square feet of
Neighborhood-       1,000 square feet   eligible             Section
Oriented Commercial of Neighborhood-    Neighborhood-        17.580.030.F
Bonus               Oriented Commercial Oriented Commercial
                    space.              Space, up to 5
                                        units.
                    Projects that
                    install a new bus
Bus Stop            shelter or shelters                      Section
Improvement Bonus   or maintain an      2 units maximum      17.580.030.G
                    existing bus
                    shelter or shelters
                    to City standards.
B.   Workforce Housing Bonus.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements.
      a.   The Residential Development Project must meet the requirements for
Density Bonus Tier 2, Tier 3, or Tier 4, as outlined in §
17.580.025, Tier Density Bonuses.
      b.   The project must designate at least 10% of the base units for rental
at rates affordable to households earning between 80% and 140% of the Area
Median Income (AMI); or
      c.   The project must designate at least 10% of the units for sale at
prices affordable to households earning between 120% and 140% of the AMI.
   2.   Bonus Requirements. Residential Development Projects that meet the
above criteria shall receive a 5% base density bonus.
C.   Three or More Bedroom Unit Bonus.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements.
      a.   The Residential Development Project must meet the requirements for
Density Bonus Tier 2, Tier 3, or Tier 4, as outlined in §
17.580.025, Tier Density Bonuses.
      b.   At least 11% of all units within the Residential Development Project
must have three or more bedrooms.
   2.   Bonus. For each additional percentage of units above 10% that have
three or more bedrooms, the Residential Development Project qualifies for an
equivalent base density bonus, up to a maximum of 5%.
D.   Child Day Care Facility Bonus.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements.
      a.   The Residential Development Project must meet the requirements for
Density Bonus Tier 2, Tier 3, or Tier 4, as outlined in §
17.580.025, Tier Density Bonuses.
      b.   The project must include a dedicated space for a Child Day Care
Facility as defined in
Chapter 17, Article 7 of the Culver City Municipal Code and which fulfills the
requirements of State Density Bonus Law. Small Family Day Care Homes or Large
Family Day Care Homes, as defined in §
17.700.010, Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases, are not eligible for
this bonus.
      c.   The Child Day Care must be at least 500 square feet.
      d.   The California State Department of Social Services must fully
license the Child Day Care facility.
   2.   Bonus. The Residential Development Project shall receive the State
bonus plus the square footage of the Child Day Care Facility.
   3.   The Child Day Care facility must operate for at least as long as the
density bonus units are required to remain affordable.
E.   Public Open Space Bonus.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements.
      a.   The Residential Development Project must meet the requirements for
Density Bonus Tier 2, Tier 3, or Tier 4, as outlined in §
17.580.025, Tier Density Bonuses.
      b.   The project must provide at least 2,000 square feet of public open
space that includes one or more of the following: parks for passive or active
use, playgrounds, and outdoor recreational facilities.
   2.   Bonus Requirements.
      a.   The Residential Development Project shall receive a density bonus of
one unit for each 1,000 square feet of public open space provided by the
Developer.
      b.   The maximum unit bonus is ten units.
   3.   Public Open Space Requirements.
      a.   The public open space must be accessible to the public from dawn to
dusk. Private recreation areas, areas requiring admission fees, keycard, or
keyed access, or those necessitating a sign-in or registration process are not
eligible for this bonus.
      b.   The public open space must be open to the sky, although sun
shelters, picnic shelters, or shade structures may be used provided they cover
no more than 30% of the public open space.
      c.   The public open space must be accessible by pedestrians and must
comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
      d.   The public open space must be visible from adjacent roads.
Directional signage must be provided to help pedestrians and micromobility
users locate and access the entrance.
      e.   The public open space must front a public Right of Way for at least
20 feet.
      f.   Landscaping within the public open space shall adhere to the
standards set forth in the California State Model Water Efficient Landscape
Ordinance, ensuring sustainability and water efficiency.
      g.   No more than 50% of the public open space may consist of impervious
surfaces. Sports courts are excluded from these calculations.
      h.   Public Open Space that utilizes this bonus will not count towards
any parkland dedication calculation or credits or required private or common
open space.
   4.   Maintenance. The property owner is responsible for maintaining the
Public Open Space unless a separate agreement is established with the Culver
City Parks, Recreation and Community Services Department.
F.   Neighborhood-Oriented Commercial Bonus.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements.
      a.   The Residential Development Project must be located along a Primary
or Secondary Arterial as designated on the Roadway Network exhibit within the
Culver City General Plan Mobility Element.
      b.   The Residential Development Project must meet the requirements for
Density Bonus Tier 2, Tier 3, or Tier 4, as outlined in §
17.580.025, Tier Density Bonuses.
      c.   The Residential Development Project must provide at least 1,000
square feet of neighborhood-oriented commercial space.
      d.   The neighborhood-oriented commercial space must fulfill criteria
outlined in §
17.580.030.F.3.
   2.   Bonus Requirements.
      a.   The Residential Development Project shall receive a bonus of one
additional unit for each 1,000 square feet of eligible commercial space
provided.
      b.   The maximum bonus is five units.
   3.   Neighborhood-Oriented Commercial Requirements.
      a.   Five-Year Covenant. A covenant shall be required as a Condition of
Approval for a minimum term of five years to reserve the commercial space for
one of the uses listed within this section.
         i.   The duration of the term shall commence upon the issuance of a
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy (TCO) or Certificate of Occupancy (CO) for
the commercial shell of the building.
         ii.   During the covenant period, the property owner or manager shall
make a reasonable, good-faith effort to lease the commercial space to a tenant
with a conforming use. Efforts shall include, but are not limited to,
advertising the availability of the space, maintaining visible signage on-site
with contact information, and engaging a licensed leasing agent. Documentation
of these efforts shall be made available to the City upon request.
         iii.   If a tenant with a conforming use is not secured within the
first five years upon the issuance of a TCO or CO, or if the existing
conforming use fails and a new tenant with a conforming use is not secured
within five years, the City may, at its discretion, waive the covenant.
      b.   Eligible Uses. The following uses are permitted at neighborhood-
oriented commercial spaces.
         i.   Art studios or galleries that feature local artists and/or offer
workshops or community art events.
         ii.   Bakeries offering freshly baked goods and pastries.
         iii.   Bookstores.
         iv.   Cafes and Restaurants less than 3,000 square feet.
         v.   Child Day Care centers and educational tutoring services.
         vi.   Co-working spaces under 10,000 square feet offering flexible
work environments for local freelancers, remote workers, and small businesses.
         vii.   Dry cleaners and laundry services catering to the routine needs
of residents.
         viii.   Fitness centers or yoga studios, and exercise and wellness
services tailored to the community.
         ix.   Grocery stores and small supermarkets which offer fresh produce,
household essentials, and other grocery items.
         x.   Local boutiques and specialty shops sell clothing, accessories,
and unique items.
         xi.   Personal care services, including hair salons, barbershops, and
nail salons.
         xii.   Pet care services such as grooming salons, pet supply stores,
and small veterinary clinics.
         xiii.   Pharmacies offering prescription medications, over-the-counter
drugs, and health-related products.
         xiv.   Other uses which primarily cater to the day-to-day needs
residential neighborhoods by providing convenient access to essential goods or
services, as determined by the Director.
      c.   Ineligible Uses. Uses which are likely to attract additional
regional vehicle traffic, increase noise pollution, and/or otherwise degrade
the quality of life of neighborhood residents are prohibited, including but not
limited to:
         i.   Large-scale retail stores and big-box stores exceeding 10,000
square feet.
         ii.   Bars and nightclubs.
         iii.   Drive-through businesses.
         iv.   Auto and vehicle sales/rental, auto parts sales, auto repair
shops, gas stations, or other vehicle services.
         v.   Uses which consistently generate noise levels detectable from
outside the premises.
         vi.   Warehouses or distribution centers.
         vii.   Commercial parking lots or garages.
         viii.   Offices.
         ix.   Pet shops.
         x.   Hotels and motels.
         xi.   Other uses which do not primarily cater to the day-to-day needs
residential neighborhoods by providing convenient access to essential goods or
services.
      d.   Other Standards. All Neighborhood-Oriented Retail spaces shall
comply with all other applicable standards and regulations within the Culver
City Municipal Code.
G.   Bus Stop Improvement Bonus.
   1.   Eligibility Requirements.
      a.   The Residential Development Project must be located along an
unsheltered or uncovered designated bus stop, as determined by the Culver City
Transportation Department and Mobility and Traffic Engineering Division (MTE);
or
      b.   The project must maintain an existing sheltered or uncovered
designated bus stop (or stops) and bring it into compliance with the
requirements of this section and approved City model/specifications, if it is
not already compliant.
      c.   The Residential Development Project must meet the requirements for
Density Bonus Tier 2, Tier 3, or Tier 4, as outlined in §
17.580.025, Tier Density Bonuses.
      d.   The bus stop furniture must conform to requirements outlined in §
17.580.030 G.3.
   2.   Bonus Requirements.
      a.   Projects meeting all eligibility criteria will receive a bonus of
two units maximum regardless of the number of bus stops that are improved per
project.
   3.   Bus Stop Improvement Requirements including Bus Stop locations.
      a.   Bus stops and their locations must comply with all State, Local, and
City requirements.
      b.   The bus stop shall conform to the City's Bus Stop Standards and
improvements, must be fully covered, protect users from rain, must provide
seating for at least two people, provide a covered area for an accessible
individual who uses a wheelchair and must provide shelters, benches, poles,
real-time information displays, and waste receptacles.
      c.   Shelters shall be constructed per Transportation Department
Specifications.
      d.   Shelters must include adequate lighting for safety, ensuring
visibility during nighttime and low-light conditions. Lighting shall be energy-
efficient and minimize light pollution.
      e.   The property manager is responsible for maintenance of the bus
shelter for at least as long as the density bonus units are required to remain
affordable, unless a separate agreement is established with Culver City.
Maintenance parameters shall be determined by the Transportation Department.
(Ord. 2025-002 Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.035 WAIVERS.
A.   Waivers. Developers may request a Waiver of Development Standards if these
standards physically prevent the construction of a housing development at the
permitted density or with the allowed incentives. The Developer must
demonstrate that the Waiver is necessary to make the project, including
Affordable Units, physically feasible. The number of Waivers is based on
entitlement under State Density Bonus Law, with additional local Waivers
available under this Section. Requested Waivers may include the following:
   1.   An exception to site Development Standards or a modification of zoning
code requirements or architectural design requirements which exceed the minimum
building standards provided in Cal. Health and Safety Code Division 13, Part
2.5 (commencing with § 18901) including but not limited to:
      a.   Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions.
      b.   Reduced minimum lot setbacks.
      c.   Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area.
      d.   Increased maximum lot coverage.
      e.   Increased maximum building height.
      f.   Reduced minimum building separation requirements.
      g.   Reduced street standards, such as reduced minimum street widths.
   2.   Other Waivers proposed by the Developer or the City which result in
identifiable and required physical changes needed for the project to be
constructed.
   3.   Any other Waiver granted under Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915.
B.   Financial Incentives. Nothing in this section requires the provision of
direct financial incentives for the housing development, including, but not
limited to, the provision of financial subsidies, publicly owned land, fee
Waivers, or Waiver of dedication requirements. The City, at its sole
discretion, may choose to provide such direct financial incentives.
C.   City Planning Commission Review. Projects that request five or more
Waivers or reductions of any development standards not on listed in §
17.580.035.A.1. must receive Planning Commission approval of a Site Plan Review
pursuant to
Chapter 17.540.
D.   Findings for Waivers. Waivers requested pursuant to the procedures
described in this Subsection shall be approved by the applicable decision-
making authority unless the decision-making authority makes findings pursuant
to CCMC § 17.580.075.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.040 CONCESSIONS.
A.   Local Concessions. Developers of residential projects qualifying for Tier
2, 3, or 4 Density Bonuses may request Local Concession(s) from development
standards, fees, or other requirements, in addition to concessions granted by
State law.
   1.   Demonstration of Necessity. The Developer is not required to
demonstrate that the Concession is necessary to make the project, including
Affordable Units, economically feasible.
   2.   Number of Local Concessions. The number of Local Concessions available
to the Developer are as follows:
      a.   Tier 2-4 projects may receive one additional concession in addition
to those which are granted by State law.
      b.   100% affordable projects receive two additional concessions in
addition to those which are granted by State law.
B.   Limits. Concessions related to height are restricted to the following:
   1.   Tier 1 eligible projects may have a maximum height increase of up to 11
feet above the Zoning Code maximum height limit per zoning district.
   2.   Tier 2-4 eligible projects may have a maximum height increase of up to
22 feet above the Zoning Code maximum height limit per zoning district.
   3.   100% affordable projects may have a maximum height increase of up to 33
feet above the Zoning Code maximum height limit per zoning district.
C.   Financial Incentives. Nothing in this section requires the provision of
direct financial incentives for the housing development, including, but not
limited to, the provision of financial subsidies, publicly owned land, fee
Waivers, or Waiver of dedication requirements. The City, at its sole
discretion, may choose to provide such direct financial incentives.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.045 APPLICATION FILING, PROCESSING, AND REVIEW.
A.   Filing. A request for density bonus or other incentives pursuant to State
Density Bonus Law shall be processed as part of an application in compliance
with and subject to the provisions and requirements of
Chapter 17.500 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). No additional
discretionary approval shall be required for a request for, or the granting of,
a density bonus or other incentive that is available pursuant to current State
Density Bonus Law. A density bonus request shall include the following:
   1.   Requested Density Bonus.
      a.   Summary table showing the maximum number of dwelling units permitted
by the zoning and general plan excluding any density bonus units, proposed
Affordable Units by income level, proposed bonus percentage, number of density
bonus units proposed, total number of dwelling units proposed on the site, and
resulting density in units per acre.
      b.   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the number and location of all
proposed units, designating the location of proposed Affordable Units and
density bonus units.
      c.   The zoning and general plan designations and assessor's parcel
number(s) of the Residential Development Project site.
      d.   A description of all dwelling units existing on the site in the
five-year period preceding the date of submittal of the application and
identification of any units rented in the five-year period.
         i.   If dwelling units on the site are currently rented, income and
household size of all residents of currently occupied units shall be included
in the description, if known.
         ii.   If any dwelling units on the site were rented in the five-year
period but are not currently rented, the income and household size of residents
occupying dwelling units when the site contained the maximum number of dwelling
units, if known.
      e.   Description of any recorded covenant, ordinance, or law applicable
to the site that restricted rents to levels affordable to Very Low- or Lower-
Income Households in the five-year period preceding the date of submittal of
the application.
         i.   If any units on the site are currently subject to deed
restrictions, the application must include a plan outlining how the project
will meet State requirements for replacing these units.
      f.   A tentative map and/or preliminary site plan, if applicable, drawn
to scale, showing the number and location of all proposed units, designating
the location of proposed Affordable Units and density bonus units.
   2.   Affordable Housing Plan, pursuant to §
17.580.050, below.
   3.   Requested Concession(s) or Incentive(s). In the event an application
proposes concessions or incentives for a Residential Development Project
pursuant to State Density Bonus Law, or, as applicable, the City's Density
Bonus Law, the density bonus report shall include the City's required
development standard and the Applicant's requested development standard
concession or regulatory incentive.
   4.   Requested Waiver(s). In the event an application proposes Waivers of
development standards for a Residential Development Project pursuant to State
Density Bonus Law, the density bonus report shall include the following minimum
information for each Waiver requested, shown on a site plan or elevation if
appropriate:
      a.   The City's required development standard and the requested
development standard Waiver.
      b.   Reasonable documentation that the development standards for which a
Waiver is requested will have the effect of physically precluding the
construction of a development at the densities or with the concessions or
incentives permitted by State Density Bonus Law.
   5.   Child Day Care Facility. If a density bonus or incentive is requested
for a Child Day Care Facility in a Residential or Mixed Use project, reasonable
documentation that all of the requirements included in §
17.580.030.D can be met.
   6.   Neighborhood-Oriented Commercial Bonus. If a Neighborhood-Oriented
Commercial Bonus is requested for a housing project, the application shall
include a plan explaining how the Neighborhood-Oriented Commercial space will
comply with §
17.580.030.F.
B.   Director Finding. If the Director makes any of the findings set forth in
CCMC §
17.580.075, the written finding shall be provided to the Developer, who may
appeal the findings pursuant to
Chapter 17.640 of the Municipal Code.
C.   Public Notice and Hearings. Notices, public hearings, and project
approvals shall be completed consistent with the appropriate approving
authority of the project.
D.   Review Authority. The approval authority is determined by the underlying
entitlement request.
E.   Mixed Use Project. The granting of a density bonus and incentives for a
mixed-use development project shall comply with the provisions of Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 65915 et seq.
F.   Compliance With Other Applicable Zoning Regulations. Notwithstanding any
permitted density bonus or incentive granted pursuant to this section, any
project receiving a density bonus hereunder shall otherwise be consistent with
the applicable zoning and land use regulations and requirements, including
permitted uses.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.050 AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN.
The Applicant shall submit an Affordable Housing Plan (AHP) as part of the
formal entitlement application for a Residential Development Project. The
Director shall determine whether the AHP is complete. The elements of a
complete AHP are described below. If the AHP is incomplete, it will be returned
to the Applicant with a list of the deficiencies, or the information required.
No application for a discretionary or ministerial permit to which this Chapter
applies shall be deemed complete until the AHP is deemed complete by the
Director. At any time during the review process, the Director may require from
the Applicant additional information necessary to clarify and supplement the
application or to determine the consistency of the proposed AHP with the
requirements of this Chapter. The AHP should include, but not be limited to,
the following:
A.   The structure layout (attached, semi-attached, or detached), proposed
tenure (for-sale or rental), and size of the proposed market-rate units,
commercial space, and/or Affordable Housing Units;
B.   A plan indicating the location of the Affordable Units;
C.   The income levels to which each Affordable Housing Unit will be made
affordable;
D.   For phased Residential Development Projects, a comprehensive phasing plan
must be provided. This plan shall clearly outline that each phase of
development includes Affordable Units in the same proportion as the overall
project commitment as required by this Chapter;
E.   A written statement demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this
Chapter;
F.   A preliminary marketing plan that describes how the Applicant intends to
inform the public, and those within the appropriate income groups, of the
availability of Affordable Housing Units; and
G.   Any other information requested by the Director to assist with evaluation
of the AHP under the standards of this Chapter.
H.   No monitoring fee shall be imposed on projects that are 100% affordable
and subject to this section. The City may only impose a monitoring fee for
local programs that establish affordability levels distinct from those tracked
by the State, including but not limited to projects utilizing tax incentives or
workforce housing bonuses.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.055 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT (AHA).
A.   General Requirements. Except where a density bonus, incentive, Waiver, or
commercial development bonus is provided for a market-rate Senior Citizen
Housing Development, the Applicant shall enter into an AHA with the City, in a
form approved by the City Attorney, to be executed by the City Manager, to
ensure that the requirements of this Section are satisfied. The AHA shall
guarantee that the units remain affordable to Very Low- or Low-Income
households for a minimum term of 55 years, or to Moderate-Income households for
a minimum term of 45 years. With respect to rental units, such rent
restrictions shall be in the form of a regulatory agreement recorded against
the applicable property. With respect to owner-occupied units, such resale
controls shall be in the form of resale restrictions, deeds of trust, and/or
other similar documents recorded against the applicable property. Affordability
restrictions and terms shall be consistent with State Density Bonus law. The
AHA shall include the following:
   1.   The number of density bonus dwelling units granted;
   2.   The number and type of affordable dwelling units;
   3.   The unit size(s) (square footage) of affordable dwelling units and the
number of bedrooms per Dwelling Unit;
   4.   The proposed location of the affordable dwelling units;
   5.   Schedule for production and phasing of affordable dwelling units in
relation to the market-rate units as per State Density Bonus Law;
   6.   Incentives or concessions or Waivers provided by the City;
   7.   Where applicable, tenure and conditions governing the initial sale of
the Affordable Units;
   8.   Where applicable, tenure and conditions establishing rules and
procedures for qualifying tenants, setting rental rates, filling vacancies, and
operating and maintaining affordable rental dwelling units;
   9.   Compliance with federal and state laws;
   10.   Prohibition against discrimination;
   11.   Indemnification;
   12.   City's right to inspect units and documents;
   13.   Remedies;
   14.   The duration of the AHA.
B.   Senior Housing Agreement. Where a density bonus, or Waiver is provided for
a market-rate Senior Citizen Housing Development, the Applicant shall enter
into a restrictive covenant with the City, running with the land, in a form
approved by the City Attorney, to be executed by the City Manager, to require
that the Residential Development Project be operated as "housing for older
persons" consistent with state and federal fair housing laws.
C.   Execution. Upon approval of a Community Benefit Density Bonus and/or Tier
Density Bonus, the applicant must enter into a binding agreement with the City,
detailing the specific terms of the bonus, including the provision of the
agreed-upon Low-Income Units and/or Community Benefits. The agreement shall be
recorded against the property and shall be binding on all future owners, heirs,
and assigns. The executed AHA or senior housing agreement shall be recorded
against the land prior to final map approval, or, where a map is not being
processed, prior to issuance of building permits for the Residential
Development Project. The AHA or senior housing agreement shall be binding on
all future owners and successors in interest.
D.   Monitoring. As part of the AHA, all restricted units will be monitored on
an annual basis by the Culver City Housing and Human Services Department. The
monitoring is to ensure all restricted units are occupied by income eligible
households and that the Affordable Units are within the HCD standards of
charging an Affordable Unit based on unit size and household income level.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.060 ENFORCEMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT.
A.   Excess Rents. In the event it is determined that rents in excess of those
allowed by this Chapter have been charged to a tenant residing in a rental
Affordable Housing Unit, the City may take the appropriate legal action, and
the rental unit owner shall be obligated to pay to the tenant (or to the City
in the event the tenant cannot be located) an amount equal to three times the
excess rent charges for the first offense, five times the excess rent charges
for the second offense, and ten times the excess rent charges for the third
offense. In the event of additional repeat violations or severe cases, the
penalty may increase, with the possibility of additional fines or legal
actions.
B.   Excess Sales Prices. In the event it is determined that a sales price in
excess of that allowed by this Chapter has been charged to an income-eligible
household purchasing an ownership Affordable Unit, the City may take the
appropriate legal action to recover funds, and the Affordable Unit seller shall
be obligated to pay to the purchaser (or to the City in the event the purchaser
cannot be located), an amount equal to three times the excess sales costs for
the first offense, five times the excess sales charges for the second offense,
and ten times the excess sales charges for the third offense. In the event of
additional repeat violations or severe cases, the penalty may increase, with
the possibility of additional fines or legal actions.
C.   Enforcement of Bonus Terms.
   1.   Compliance Monitoring and Site Inspections. The City reserves the right
to conduct periodic site inspections to ensure compliance with the terms of the
agreement. Inspections will verify that the Affordable Units and Community
Benefits are being provided and maintained as outlined in the approved plan.
   2.   Remedies for Non-Compliance. If the City determines that the Developer
or property owner is not in compliance with the terms of this Chapter, the
following remedies may be enforced:
      a.   Notice of Violation. The City will issue a written notice of
violation, outlining the specific areas of non-compliance and providing a
timeframe for corrective action.
      b.   Fines and Penalties. If the violation is not corrected within the
specified timeframe, the City may impose fines. The number of fines shall be
determined based on the severity of the violation.
      c.   Revocation of Bonus. The City reserves the right to revoke the
provisions of this Chapter if the Developer or property owner fails to comply
with the agreed-upon terms prior to building permit issuance. Upon revocation,
the property may revert to its original allowable density or use restrictions,
and any additional units or benefits granted under the bonus may be rendered
invalid.
      d.   Legal Action. The City may pursue legal action to enforce compliance
with the terms of the agreement, including seeking injunctive relief or damages
as necessary.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.065 GENERAL AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS.
A.   Affordable Unit Requirements.
   1.   Affordable units shall be located throughout the Residential
Development Project site and not isolated to one specific building.
   2.   Building permits and final inspections or certificates of occupancy
shall be issued concurrently for the market rate units and for any Affordable
Units that qualified the project for a density bonus, incentive, Waiver, or
parking reduction, so that the Affordable Units comprise the required
percentage of total units.
   3.   To comply with fair housing laws, the Affordable Units shall contain
the same proportional mix of bedroom sizes as the market-rate units.
   4.   In mixed-income buildings, the occupants of the Affordable Units shall
have the same access to the common entrances and to the common areas, parking,
and amenities of the project as the occupants of the market-rate housing units,
and the Affordable Units shall be located throughout the building and not
isolated on one floor or to an area on a specific floor.
   5.   Affordable units shall be comparable in exterior appearance and overall
quality of construction to market rate units in the same housing development.
Interior finishes and amenities may differ from those provided in the market
rate units, but neither the workmanship nor the products may be of substandard
or inferior quality as determined by the City.
   6.   Residential Development Projects shall comply with all applicable
Development Standards, except those which may be modified as provided by this
Chapter.
B.   Compliance With Other Applicable Zoning Regulations. Notwithstanding any
permitted density bonus or incentive granted pursuant to this section, any
project receiving a density bonus hereunder shall otherwise be consistent with
the applicable zoning and land use regulations and requirements, including
permitted uses.
C.   Affordable Unit Availability. Affordable Housing Units shall be
constructed concurrently with and made available for qualified occupants at the
same time as market-rate units within the same project, unless both the City
and the Developer agree to an alternative schedule for development.
D.   Effect of Granting Density Bonus. The granting of a density bonus under
this section shall not, in and of itself, be interpreted to require a General
Plan amendment, Zoning Code or Zoning Map amendment, or other discretionary
approval.
E.   First-Time Homebuyers. Owner-occupied Units that implement Tier Density or
Community Benefit Bonuses may be offered for sale only to first-time
homebuyers, who are defined as follows:
   1.   An individual or his or her spouse who has not owned a home during the
three-year period prior to the date of purchase of the unit.
   2.   An individual who is a displaced homemaker or single parent who has
only owned a home with a former spouse while married. A displaced homemaker is
defined as an individual who meet all the following criteria:
      a.   Is an adult;
      b.   Has not worked full-time and full-year in the labor force for two
years but has, during such years, worked primarily without remuneration to care
for the home and family; and
      c.   Is unemployed or underemployed and is experiencing difficulty in
obtaining or upgrading employment.
   3.   An individual shall not be excluded from consideration as a first-time
homebuyer on the basis that the individual owns or owned, as a principal
residence during the three year period, a dwelling unit whose structure is not
permanently affixed to a permanent foundation in accordance with local or other
applicable regulations or is not in compliance with State, local, or model
building codes, or other applicable codes, and cannot be brought into
compliance with the codes for less than the cost of constructing a permanent
structure.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.070 REPLACEMENT OF DWELLING UNITS.
Residential Development Projects utilizing Tier Density Bonuses or Community
Benefit Density Bonuses must comply with the State's Replacement Unit
Requirements, which ensure the replacement of removed or demolished units,
including affordability and tenant protection provisions as applicable.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.075 FINDINGS AND DECISION.
The Director shall review and may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove
a density bonus and other bonus incentives request.
A.   The Director may deny a request for an incentive or concession for which
the findings set forth in this Subsection can be made only if it makes a
written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of one of the following:
   1.   The proposed incentive does not result in identifiable and actual cost
reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 50052.5; or for affordable rents, as defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 50053; or
   2.   The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact upon
public health or safety, or the physical environment, or on any real property
that is listed in the California Register of Historic Resources, and there is
no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse
impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low, very low and
moderate income households. For the purpose of this Subsection, "specific
adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable
impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety
standards, policies, or conditions, as they existed on the date that the
application was deemed complete; or
   3.   The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law.
B.   The Director may deny a request for a Waiver or reduction for which the
findings set forth in Subsection A above can be made only if it makes a written
finding, based upon substantial evidence, of one of the following:
   1.   The modification would have a specific adverse impact upon health,
safety, or the physical environment, and there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering
the development unaffordable to Low, Very Low and Moderate Income Households.
For the purpose of this Subsection, "specific adverse impact" means a
significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective,
identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions
as they existed on the date that the application was deemed complete; or
   2.   The modification would have an adverse impact on any real property that
is listed in the California Register of Historic Resources; or
   3.   The Waiver or reduction would be contrary to state or federal law; or
   4.   The development standard associated with a request for Waiver(s) will
not have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development
meeting the maximum density of the Residential Development Project permitted
under the provisions of this Chapter and State Law.
C.   The Director may deny a density bonus, incentive, or concession that is
based on the provision of childcare facilities and for which the required
findings can be made only if it makes a written finding, based on substantial
evidence, that the City already has adequate childcare facilities.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.080 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
A.   The applicable review authority may approve a density bonus and other
bonus incentives for both ministerial and discretionary projects in compliance
with §
17.580.075 (Findings and Decision), and may impose conditions upon the project,
including but not limited to, the City's Comprehensive Standard Conditions of
Approval for Discretionary Projects as adopted by the Commission to ensure that
the project will meet all of the required findings.
B.   Conditions may relate to both on- and off-site improvements, which are
reasonable and necessary to mitigate project-related impacts, and to carry out
the purpose and requirements of this Chapter and applicable development
standards and objective design standards.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.580.085 POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
Procedures relating to appeals, notices, revocations, and modifications as
identified in
Article 6 (Zoning Code Administration), in addition to those identified in
Chapter 17.595 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall
apply following the approval of a density bonus and other bonus incentives.
(Ord. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part))
CHAPTER 17.590: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Section
   
17.590.005   Purpose
   
17.590.010   Applicability
   
17.590.015   Application Filing, Processing and Review
   
17.590.020   Public Hearings
   
17.590.025   Contents of Development Agreement
   
17.590.030   Execution and Recordation
   
17.590.035   Environmental Review
   
17.590.040   Periodic Review
   
17.590.045   Amendment or Cancellation of Development Agreement
   
17.590.050   Effect of Development Agreement
   
17.590.055   Approved Development Agreements
§ 17.590.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures and requirements for the review and approval
of development agreements consistent with the provisions of State law.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.010 APPLICABILITY.
A.   Initiation.  Consideration of a Development Agreement may be initiated by:
   1.   The Council; or
   2.   Property owner(s) or other person having a legal or equitable interest
in the property proposed to be subject to the agreement.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.590.015 APPLICATION FILING, PROCESSING AND REVIEW.
A.   Owner's Request. An owner of real property may request and apply through
the Division to enter into a Development Agreement, provided that:
   1.   The status of the applicant as property owner or bona fide
representative of the owner is established to the satisfaction of the Director;
   2.   The application is accompanied by all documents, information, and
materials required by the Division.
B.   Director Review. The Director shall receive, review, process, and prepare
recommendations for Commission and Council consideration on all applications
for development agreements.
C.   Concurrent Processing and Public Hearings. All development-related
applications shall be processed and scheduled for public hearing concurrently
with the application for a Development Agreement. The Council shall be the
review authority for the Development Agreement and all associated applications.
D.   Fees. The application for a Development Agreement shall include the
processing fee established by the City Council Fee Resolution. Additionally,
appropriate fees shall be established and collected for periodic reviews
conducted by the Director in compliance with §
17.590.040.A. (Periodic Review).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.020 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
A.   Commission Hearing. Upon finding the application for a Development
Agreement complete, the Director shall set the date for a public hearing before
the Commission, in compliance with
Chapter 17.630 (Public Hearings and Administrative Review). Following
conclusion of a public hearing, the Commission shall adopt a resolution and
make a written recommendation to the Council that it approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the application.
B.   Council Hearing. Upon receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the City
Clerk shall set a date for a public hearing before the Council in compliance
with
Chapter 17.630 (Public Hearings and Administrative Review). Following
conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the application, with appropriate findings in compliance with
§
17.590.020.E. (Required Findings) below.
   If the Council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the
Development Agreement not previously considered by the Commission during its
hearings, the proposed modification shall be first referred back to the
Commission for its recommendation, in compliance with State law (Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65857). Failure of the Commission to report back to the Council within
40 days after the referral, or within a longer time set by the Council, shall
be deemed a recommendation for approval of the proposed modification.
C.   Notice of the Hearings.  Notice of the hearings, outlined in §
17.590.020.A. (Commission Hearing) and §
17.590.020.B. (Council Hearing) above, shall be given in the form of a notice
of intention to consider approval of a development agreement, in compliance
with State law (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65867).
D.   Adopting Ordinance. Should the Council approve or conditionally approve
the application, it shall, as a part of the action of approval, direct the
preparation of a Development Agreement embodying the conditions and terms of
the application as approved or conditionally approved, as well as an ordinance
authorizing execution of the development agreement by the Council, in
compliance with State law (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65867.5).
E.   Required Findings. The ordinance shall contain the following findings, and
the facts supporting them. It is the responsibility of the applicant to
establish the evidence in support of the required findings:
   1.   The Development Agreement is in the best interests of the city,
promoting the public interest and welfare;
   2.   The Development Agreement is consistent with all applicable provisions
of the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, and this Title;
   3.   The Development Agreement is in compliance with the conditions,
requirements, restrictions, and terms of §
17.590.025.A. (Mandatory Contents) and §
17.590.025.B. (Permissive Contents), below.
F.   Referendum. The ordinance is subject to referendum in compliance with
State law (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65867.5).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.025 CONTENTS OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
A.   Mandatory Contents.  A Development Agreement entered into in compliance
with this Chapter shall contain the mandatory provisions (e.g., conditions,
requirements, restrictions, and terms) specified by State law (Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 65865.2 [Agreement Contents]).
B.   Permissive Contents. A Development Agreement entered into in compliance
with this Chapter may contain the permissive provisions (e.g., conditions,
requirements, restrictions, and terms) specified by State law (Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 65865.2 [Agreement Contents]), and any other terms determined to be
appropriate and necessary by the Council, including provisions for the payment
to the city of monetary consideration.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.030 EXECUTION AND RECORDATION.
A.   Effective Date. The city shall not execute any development agreement until
on or after the date on which the ordinance approving the agreement becomes
effective, and until it has been executed by the applicant.
B.   Conditioning Approval. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be
construed to prohibit the Director, Commission or Council from conditioning
approval of a discretionary permit or entitlement on the execution of a
Development Agreement, where the condition is otherwise authorized by law.
C.   Recordation. A Development Agreement shall be recorded with the County
Recorder no later than ten days after it is executed, in compliance with State
law (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65868.5).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.035 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.
The approval or conditional approval of a Development Agreement in compliance
with this chapter shall be deemed a discretionary act for purposes of CEQA.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.040 PERIODIC REVIEW.
A.   Periodic Review. Every Development Agreement approved and executed in
compliance with this Chapter shall be subject to periodic review by the
Director during the full term of the agreement.
   Appropriate fees to cover the city's costs to conduct the periodic reviews
shall be collected from the contracting party, in compliance with §
17.590.015 (Application Filing, Processing and Review) above.
B.   Purpose of Periodic Review. The purpose of the periodic review shall be to
determine whether the contracting party or the successor-in-interest has
complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the Development
Agreement. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant or contracting party
or the successor to demonstrate compliance to the full satisfaction of, and in
a manner prescribed by, the City.
C.   Result of Periodic Review. If, as a result of a periodic review in
compliance with this section, the Director finds and determines, on the basis
of substantial evidence, that the contracting party or the successor-in-
interest has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the
agreement, the Director shall notify the Commission, which may recommend to the
Council that the agreement be terminated or modified.
   The procedures for the termination or modification hearing shall comply with
§
17.590.020 (Public Hearings) above.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.045 AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
A Development Agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by
mutual consent of all parties to the agreement, or their successor-in-interest,
in compliance with State law (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65868), or as set forth in the
agreement. The requested amendment or cancellation shall be processed in the
same manner specified by this Chapter for the adoption of a Development
Agreement.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.050 EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
A.   Rules, Regulations and Policies.  Unless otherwise provided by the
Development Agreement, the rules, regulations, and official policies governing
allowed uses of the land, density, design, improvement and construction
standards and specifications, and Building Code provisions applicable to
development of the property subject to a development agreement, are the rules,
regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the
agreement.
B.   State Law. In compliance with State law (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65866), unless
specifically provided for in the Development Agreement, the agreement does not
prevent the City, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from
applying new rules, regulations, and policies that do not conflict with those
rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property under the
Development Agreement. Further, a Development Agreement does not prevent the
City from conditionally approving or denying any subsequent development project
application, on the basis of existing or new rules, regulations, and policies.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.590.055 APPROVED DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
Development Agreements approved by the Council shall be on file with the City
Clerk.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.595: PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS, AND EXTENSIONS
Section
   
17.595.005   Purpose
   
17.595.010   Conformance to Plans
   
17.595.015   Effective Date of Permits or Entitlements
   
17.595.020   Applications Deemed Approved
   
17.595.025   Performance Guarantees
   
17.595.030   Time Limits and Extensions
   
17.595.035   Changes to an Approved Project
   
17.595.040   Resubmittals
   
17.595.045   Covenants
§ 17.595.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides requirements for the implementation or "exercising" of
the permits or entitlements specified by this Title, including time limits and
procedures for granting extensions of time and changes to an approved project.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.595.010 CONFORMANCE TO PLANS.
A.   Compliance. All work for which project drawings and plans have received
approval by the Director, Commission, or Council shall be performed in
substantial compliance with the approved drawings and plans, any statements
(written or oral) made in support of the application, any conditions of
approval imposed by the review authority, and any minor changes approved by the
Director.
B.   Changes. Any minor changes to or deviations from the approved drawings and
plans that do not change the intent of the original approval may be approved by
the Director. In the case of a discretionary permit, the original review
authority shall review and approve any major changes, in compliance with §
17.595.035 (Changes to an Approved Project).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.595.015 EFFECTIVE DATE OF PERMITS OR ENTITLEMENTS.
A.   Discretionary Decisions by the Director or Commission.  Any Administrative
Use Permit, Conditional Use Permit, Administrative Modification, Variance,
Administrative Site Plan Review, or Site Plan Review shall become effective on
the eleventh working day following the date the decision is rendered by the
appropriate review authority, provided that no appeal of the review authority's
action has been filed in compliance with
Chapter 17.640 (Appeals). A decision shall be considered rendered as follows.
   1.   Decisions made following a public hearing. When a resolution is adopted
without changes or with changes that are read into the record.
   2.   Decisions made by the Director. When a Notice of Decision is signed by
the Director.
B.   Ministerial Permits. Zoning Clearances and other ministerial staff
decisions shall be effective immediately upon being stamped and signed by
staff.
C.   Decisions by Council.  Any Comprehensive Plan, Development Agreement,
Specific Plan, or amendment to the Zoning Map and this Title shall become
effective on the thirtieth day following the date the decision is rendered by
the Council. A General Plan amendment shall become effective immediately upon
adoption of a resolution by the Council.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.595.020 APPLICATIONS DEEMED APPROVED.
A permit application deemed approved shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of this Title, which shall be satisfied by the applicant before a
Building Permit is issued, or a land use not requiring a Building Permit is
established.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.595.025 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval, or by action of
the Director, to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful
performance of any or all conditions of approval imposed by the review
authority. The Director, in concert with the Building Official, shall be
responsible for setting the amount of the required security at a level that is
reasonable in relation to the conditions being guaranteed.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.595.030 TIME LIMITS AND EXTENSIONS.
 A.   Time Limits. To ensure continued compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter, each approved permit or entitlement shall expire two years from the
date of approval, if the use has not been exercised, unless otherwise specified
in the permit or entitlement or permitted by State law. A time extension may be
granted in compliance with §
17.595.030.C. (Project Phasing) and §
17.595.030.D. (Extensions of Time) below, if a written request is submitted by
the applicant and received by the Division prior to expiration of the approval.
   If a permit or entitlement has not been exercised within the established
time frame, and a time extension is not granted, the permit or entitlement
shall deemed void.
B.   Permit Implementation - Exercising the Permit or Entitlement. The zoning
approval shall not be deemed "exercised" until the permittee has commenced
actual construction (after obtaining any required construction permit);
provided that, in all cases, construction shall be diligently pursued until
completion of the subject structure. If no construction is required, the zoning
approval shall be deemed "exercised" when the permittee has actually commenced
the allowed use on the subject site, in compliance with the conditions of
approval.
C.   Project Phasing. If a project is to be developed in approved phases, each
subsequent phase shall be exercised within 12 months from the date that the
previous phases was exercised, unless otherwise specified in the zoning
approval, or the zoning approval shall expire and be deemed void. If the
project also involves the approval of a Tentative Map, the phasing shall be
consistent with the Tentative Map, and the zoning approval shall be exercised
before the expiration of the Tentative Map, or the zoning approval shall expire
and be deemed void.
D.   Extensions of Time.
   1.   An applicant may request an initial extension of time. The applicant
shall file a written request for an initial extension of time with the
Division, accompanied by the required filing fee, prior to expiration of the
approval and shall be granted an automatic two-year extension.
   2.   An applicant may request subsequent extensions of time. The applicant
shall file a written request for an initial extension of time with the
Division, accompanied by the required filing fee, prior to expiration of the
approval. The burden of proof is on the applicant to establish, with
substantial evidence that the zoning approval should be extended. Upon
determination that the applicant has made a good faith effort to establish the
permit, the Director may extend the time to establish an approved permit for up
to an additional 12 months, unless the conditions of approval authorize longer
extensions.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.595.035 CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PROJECT.
An approved development or new land use shall be established only as specified
by the approved land use permit, and subject to any conditions of approval. An
applicant may request, in writing, to amend the approved permit, and shall
furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for
the request.
A.   Minor changes may be approved, modified, or denied by the Director. Major
changes shall be approved, modified or denied by the original review authority.
B.   The Director shall determine whether a proposed change is major or minor.
The determination that the change is major depends on whether the proposal may
result in:
   1.   Significant impacts to the surrounding neighborhood.
   2.   Significant environmental impacts.
   3.   A change to the approved use or a significant change to project design.
   4.   A change to the basis on which the environmental determination for the
project was made.
   5.   A change to the basis upon which the review authority made the findings
for approval of the project.
A major change request shall be processed in the same manner as the original
permit or entitlement.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.595.040 RESUBMITTALS.
For a period of one year following the approval, disapproval or revocation/
modification of a discretionary land use permit or entitlement, no application
for the same or substantially similar discretionary permit or entitlement for
the same site shall be filed. The Director shall determine whether the new
application is for a discretionary land use permit or entitlement that is the
same or substantially similar to one previously approved or disapproved.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.595.045 COVENANTS.
When necessary to achieve the land use goals of the City, the City may require
a property owner(s) to execute and record a Covenant in favor of the City. The
Covenant may be imposed as a condition of approval by the Director, Commission,
or Council. The applicable processing fees shall be specified in the City
Council Fee Resolution, which may be obtained from the Division.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
ARTICLE 6: ZONING CODE ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
17.600   ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY
         
17.610   NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND PARCELS
         
17.620   GENERAL PLAN, ZONING MAP AND ZONING CODE AMENDMENTS
         
17.625.   REQUIRED COMMUNITY MEETINGS
         
17.630   PUBLIC HEARINGS AND ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
         
17.640   APPEALS
         
17.650   ENFORCEMENT
         
17.660   REVOCATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
CHAPTER 17.600: ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY
Section
   
17.600.005   Purpose
   
17.600.010   City Council
   
17.600.015   Planning Commission
   
17.600.020   Board of Zoning Adjustment
   
17.600.025   Planning and Development Director
§ 17.600.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter defines the authority and responsibilities of City staff and
official bodies in the administration of this Title.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.600.010 CITY COUNCIL.
The Council shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this Title,
which include the following:
A.   Review Authority on Specified Planning Matters. Final decisions on
Development Agreements, General Plan Amendments, Specific Plans, Zoning Map/
Code Amendments, and other applicable environmental documents, policy, or
ordinance matters related to the City's planning process; and
B.   Appeals.  The review of any appeal filed from a decision by the
Commission.
The functions listed above shall be performed in compliance with §
17.500.010 (Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions),
Table 5-1 (Review Authority) and the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.600.015 PLANNING COMMISSION.
A.   Appointment. The Commission shall be appointed and serve in compliance
with
Chapter 3.03 (Commissions and Agencies) of the CCMC.
B.   Duties and Authority. The Commission shall perform the duties and
functions prescribed by
Chapter 3.03 (Commissions and Agencies) of the CCMC and this Title, including
the following:
   1.   The review and final decision on development projects and related
environmental documents; and
   2.   The recommendation, to the Council for final decisions, on Development
Agreements, General Plan Amendments, Specific Plans, Zoning Map/Code
Amendments, and other applicable environmental documents, policy, or ordinance
matters related to the City's planning process.
   3.   The functions listed above shall be performed in compliance with §
17.500.010 (Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions),
Table 5-1 (Review Authority) and the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.600.020 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT.
A.   Appointment. The Board shall be comprised of 2 appointed members of the
Commission, who shall serve in compliance with
Chapter 3.03 (Commissions and Agencies) of the CCMC.
B.   Duties and Authority. The Board shall perform the duties and functions
prescribed by
Chapter 3.03 (Commissions and Agencies) of the CCMC and this Title, including
the review and final decision on any interpretations of this Title by the
Director.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.600.025 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
A.   Duties and Authority.  The Director:
   1.   Shall have the responsibility to perform all of the functions
designated by State law;
   2.   Shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this Title,
including the review of any administrative development project in compliance
with §
17.500.010 (Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions), Table 5-1 (Review
Authority) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA);
   3.   Shall perform other responsibilities assigned by the Council and
Commission; and
B.   Delegation and Supervision. The Director may delegate the responsibilities
of the Director to assigned City staff under the supervision of the Director.
When the Director designates a City staff person, the staff person shall
perform the duties assigned by the Director, in addition to those listed in §
17.600.025.A. (Duties and Authority) above, as appropriate to the personnel
title of the designee.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.610: NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND PARCELS
Section
   
17.610.005   Purpose
   
17.610.010   Nonconforming Uses
   
17.610.015   Loss of Nonconforming Status
   
17.610.020   Nonconforming Structures
   
17.610.025   Exemptions and Exceptions
   
17.610.030   Maintenance and Repair
   
17.610.035   Nonconforming Parcels
   
17.610.040   Unlawful Uses and Structures
   
17.610.045   Public Nuisance Abatement
§ 17.610.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter establishes regulations for legal nonconforming land uses,
structures, and parcels. These are land uses, structures, and parcels within
the City that were lawfully established, constructed, or subdivided before the
adoption or amendment of this Title, but which would be prohibited, regulated,
or restricted differently under the current terms of this title or future
amendments thereto.
It is the intent of this Chapter to encourage the continuing improvement of the
City, by limiting the extent to which nonconforming structures and uses may
continue to be used, expanded, or replaced, while allowing for improvements in
their appearance.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.610.010 NONCONFORMING USES.
A.   Continuation of Use.
   1.   Any nonconforming use, including a nonconforming use due to
nonconforming density, may be maintained and continued, provided that there is
no increase or enlargement of the area, space, or volume occupied by or devoted
to the nonconforming use. Alterations that do not increase or enlarge a
nonconforming use may be approved.
   2.   Increase or enlargement of the area, space, or volume occupied by or
devoted to the nonconforming use, which is not allowed pursuant to this section
shall mean, but not be limited to, increase in height; square footage
additions; additions to existing rooms; construction of new rooms; replacement
construction of units or portions of units; and construction of additional
units.
B.   Abandonment or Discontinuance of Use. A nonconforming use, which has been
abandoned or discontinued for a period of one year, shall not be reestablished,
and any subsequent reuse or any new use established shall conform to the
current provisions of this Title.
C.   Change of Use. A nonconforming use that is changed to, or replaced by, a
conforming use shall result in termination and subsequent abandonment of the
nonconforming use.
D.   Termination of Nonconforming Oil Uses. Notwithstanding Subsection A., all
nonconforming oil uses, regardless of the applicable zoning district or whether
an oil use was previously lawfully established or permitted, shall terminate
and be discontinued by November 24, 2026. Further, and notwithstanding the
provisions of
Chapter 11.12 (including §
11.12.005.A., Oil Drilling Permit), no new or expanded oil and gas activity,
such as drilling of new wells, redrilling or deepening of existing wells, or
the erection or installation of any derrick, structure, facilities or equipment
related to oil and gas production, excepting those existing oil and gas
activities and operations described in Subsection D.4. or as required to
facilitate termination of the nonconforming oil uses, shall be allowed within
the oil use premises after November 24, 2021. The provisions of this Subsection
shall not apply to (i) common carrier oil pipelines intended for regionally-
coordinated transport of hydrocarbons; (ii) injection wells that are permitted
and demonstrated to be active and necessary by CalGEM; (iii) service stations
or other like uses; or (iv) any previously closed oil or injection well that
has been verified to have been plugged in accordance with all applicable local,
state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including the California
statutes and regulations and all other requirements overseen by CalGEM, and for
which the well pad has been restored and revegetated to as near a natural state
as practicable.
   1.   Definitions. For purpose of this Subsection D., the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      a.   CalGEM. The California Geologic Energy Management Division, the
principal regulatory authority for the closure of oil and gas production sites.
      b.   Operator. A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
limited liability company, or other business entity that owns or holds the
right to use the oil use premises to extract oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon
substances, or use the oil use premises for injection. In the event there are
two or more persons or entities who qualify as an operator at any given time,
then this term shall apply to all persons or entities with regard to their
respective operations.
      c.   Oil Use Premises. The surface of any parcel of land that has been
used for the drilling, production, storage or transport of oil, gas or other
hydrocarbons, or for injection or water flooding in connection with oil and gas
activity.
      d.   Terminate or Termination. The discontinuance and removal of
nonconforming oil uses from the oil use premises, in accordance with all
applicable local, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and standards,
including, but not limited to, (i) the cessation of production and drilling
operations; (ii) the plugging of all oil and gas wells, including water
flooding injection wells, except injection wells as permitted and demonstrated
to be active and necessary by CalGEM; (iii) the dismantling and removal of all
surface facilities associated with the nonconforming oil use, including storage
tanks, above-ground pipelines, equipment, debris and other physical operational
components; (iv) the plugging/capping of subsurface pipelines; and (v) the
remediation, restoration and revegetation of the areas of the oil use premises
affected by the plugging and removal activities to as near a natural state as
practicable, free from all oil, rotary mud, oil-soaked earth, asphalt,
concrete, litter, debris and other substances associated with oil operations.
As to (ii) through (v) hereof, all related on-site activities and services
shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Mondays through
Fridays, 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Saturdays, and 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Sundays, and shall be prohibited at all other times. Internal roads and access
ways and storm water retention and other drainage features and facilities shall
remain in place.
   2.   Termination Program and Schedule Required.
      a.   Prior to initiation of any termination activity, or no later than by
November 24, 2022, the legal operator(s) for any nonconforming oil uses shall
prepare and submit to the Director for review and approval a termination
program and schedule demonstrating how compliance with §
17.610.010.D. shall be accomplished and fully completed by November 24, 2026.
The Director may request additional information prior to determining the
termination program and schedule is adequate, complete, and demonstrates
operator's ability to comply with Subsection D. within the required timeframe.
No termination activity may be commenced unless a termination program and
schedule has been received and approved by the Director, applicable fees have
been paid, and bond and insurance requirements have been met.
      b.   Each termination program and schedule shall consist of a written
description, supported by maps, exhibits and data, as appropriate, detailing
the activities and timeline for termination of oil and gas facilities in
compliance with Subsection D. At a minimum, each termination program and
schedule shall include:
         i.   A description and schedule detailing how and when all
nonconforming oil uses, including all applicable wells under Subsection D., any
drilling-related facilities, and any equipment and structures erected on the
oil use premises, will be removed, dismantled, demolished or disposed of in a
manner consistent with California statutes and regulations overseen by CalGEM,
and in strict accordance with all other applicable local, state and federal
laws, regulations, rules and standards;
         ii.   A description for termination and decommissioning of the areas
of the oil use premises affected by the plugging and removal activities,
including all well sites and areas used for related facilities, equipment and
storage, that details how the operator will safely dismantle and remove such
production facilities and remediate, restore and revegetate the areas of the
oil use premises affected by the plugging and removal activities to as near a
natural state as practicable, in accordance with all applicable requirements
set forth in Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14 (Natural Resources), Division 2
(Department of Conservation), Chapter 4 (Development, Regulation, and
Conservation of Oil and Gas Resources), Article 3 (Requirements), § 1775
(Oilfield Wastes and Refuse) and § 1776 (Well Site and Lease Restoration);
         iii.   A copy of any applicable permits, including any notices of
intent or any permit applications for permits pending, as required by other
applicable local, state and federal agencies having authority for regulation of
oil and gas well closures and plugging and decommissioning of oil-related uses,
facilities or equipment;
         iv.   A description and schedule detailing how and when the areas of
the oil use premises affected by the plugging and removal activities will be
remediated, restored and revegetated to as near a natural state as practicable,
free from all oil, rotary mud, oil-soaked earth, asphalt, concrete, litter,
debris and other substances caused by the drilling or pumping activity; and
         v.   Sufficient detail and documentation of the termination process
and related activities to substantiate and support the aggregate costs related
to termination and restoration of the areas of the oil use premises affected by
the plugging and removal activities, which are to be covered by the established
bond and insurance amounts for the guaranteed payment of such costs.
      c.   Following the Director's approval of the termination program and
schedule and determination that the termination program and schedule
sufficiently demonstrates operator's ability to comply with the requirements of
Subsection D. within the required timeframe, the operator shall provide to the
Director quarterly updates on the termination progress until such time that the
termination process is fully completed in accordance with California statutes
and regulations overseen by CalGEM and in strict accordance with all other
applicable local, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and standards.
      d.   A termination fee (per well), established by resolution of the City
Council, shall be paid and submitted along with each termination program and
schedule to recover the city's reasonable costs associated with review of the
termination program and schedule and related documents, and subsequent
monitoring and inspection of the oil use premises.
   3.   Bond and Insurance Requirements. Prior to initiation of any activity
detailed in the termination program and schedule, the operator shall comply
with all bond and insurance requirements established by resolution of the City
Council.
   4.   Continued Compliance Required. Until such time that all nonconforming
oil activities are fully terminated in compliance with this Subsection D.,
existing oil and gas activities and operations, such as production from
existing oil wells, water injection to existing injection wells and permitted
routine maintenance of existing wells and other facilities, shall be allowed to
continue during the interim period until removal of those nonconforming uses
have been completed consistent with the timeframes established in the approved
termination program and schedule. All such activities and operations shall be
conducted in compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 11.12 of this Code to the extent such provisions are not inconsistent
with this Subsection D. In the event of any conflict between this Subsection D.
and
Chapter 11.12 of this Code, this Subsection D. shall control.
   5.   Enforcement. Any failure to comply fully with the provisions of this
Subsection D. shall constitute a violation of this Title, and appropriate
action may be taken by the Director according to the provisions of this Title
and
Chapter 1.02 (Administrative Citations) of this Code.
E.   Conditional Uses.
   1.   Conformity of uses requiring Administrative Use Permits and Conditional
Use Permits. Any use existing at the time of adoption of this Title, in a
zoning district that allows the use subject to the granting of an
Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit, shall be deemed a legal
nonconforming use, and may only continue to the same extent that it previously
existed.
   2.   Previous Administrative Use Permits or Conditional Use Permits in
effect. A use that was established with an Administrative Use Permit or a
Conditional Use Permit, but which is no longer a use allowed by this Title
within the applicable zoning district, may continue in compliance with the
provisions and terms of the original permit. If the Administrative Use Permit
or Conditional Use Permit specified a termination date, then the use shall
terminate in compliance with the original permit.
F.   Nonconforming Private School Use in the MU-I District. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a nonconforming private school use in the MU-I zoning district,
which was originally established with a Conditional Use permit at a time when
the private school use fully conformed with all then existing applicable
provisions of this Title, may be modified and/or expanded, subject to the
following:
   1.   The modification and/or expansion shall require a modification of the
existing Conditional Use Permit, subject to review and approval by the
Commission in compliance with
Chapter 17.530 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits) and §
17.595.035 (Changes to an Approved Project).
   2.   The modification and/or expansion may only include property that is
already part of the existing private school use or that is directly and
physically abutting the existing school property.
   3.   Any application for a modification and/or expansion of an existing
Conditional Use Permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      a.   The submittal of a master plan document, in form and substance as
determined by the Director, which thoroughly outlines the extent of the
proposed modification and/or expansion, including any proposed increase to
student enrollment and/or staff;
      b.   The submittal of an economic study, in form and substance as
determined by the Director, which estimates the fiscal impacts of any
modification and/or expansion on the City. Such study shall include, but not be
limited to, a calculation of the economic and tax "opportunity cost" to the
City of expanding the nonconforming private school use.
   4.   After considering the economic study and the fiscal impacts on the city
from any modification and/or expansion of the existing private school use, the
appropriate review authority may impose reasonable conditions to mitigate the
fiscal impacts if it determines that such conditions will serve the public
interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare of the City.
   5.   The total area of the property included in the school (as proposed to
be expanded) may in no event exceed three and one-half acres.
G.   Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings in RMD and RHD Zoning Districts.
Existing single-family and two-family dwellings as of October 9, 2024, in the
RMD and RHD zones shall be considered a conforming use, unless the structure is
fully demolished voluntarily, in which case the new use shall conform to the
uses allowed in these zoning districts per this Title. For involuntary
demolition, see §
17.610.025 (Exemptions and Exceptions).
H.   Nonconforming Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings in Mixed Use Zoning
Districts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a single family or two-family
dwelling, which was originally established when the use fully conformed as a
conforming use and was existing at the time of adoption of this Title with all
then existing applicable provisions of this Title, may be modified and/or
expanded, subject to the following:
   The modification and/or expansion shall require an Administrative Use
Permit, subject to review and approval by the Commission in compliance with
Chapter 17.530 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits) and §
17.595.035 (Changes to an Approved Project).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2012-005 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-004
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2021-016 § 2 ; Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.610.015 LOSS OF NONCONFORMING STATUS.
A.   Termination by Discontinuance of Use.
   1.   If a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a conforming
structure is discontinued for a continuous period of at least one year, the
rights to a legal nonconforming status shall terminate.
   2.   The one-year period shall not apply if the Director determines that
legitimate and continual efforts to reuse or release the subject property have
been made during the one-year period.
   3.   The determination of abandonment shall be supported by evidence
satisfactory to the Director (such as the actual removal of equipment,
furniture, machinery, structures, or other components of the nonconforming use,
the turning-off of the previously connected utilities, or where there are no
business receipts/records available to provide evidence that the use is in
continued operation).
   4.   Without further action by the City, further use of the site or
structure shall comply with all of the current regulations of the applicable
zoning district and all other applicable provisions of this Title.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.610.020 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
A.   Alterations or Additions. The construction, enlargement, expansion,
extension, or reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall be subject to
the following.
   1.   Increase in area. Increase in area shall be allowed if it results in an
increase or enlargement of the area, space, or volume of the structure only if
the structure is nonconforming with respect to setbacks, height, distance
between structures, architectural projections, staircase and landing area
encroachments, and the requirements of the Uniform Building Code are met. New
additions and replacement structures shall meet the setback and height
requirements of the zoning district in which the nonconforming structure is
located except replacement structures required pursuant to §
17.610.025 - Exemptions and Exceptions.
   2.   Improvements to nonconforming multiple-family, mixed use, and non-
residential primary structure(s).
      a.   Major improvement defined.  A major improvement is an improvement
that will add 10% or more, with a minimum of 750 square feet, to the existing
gross floor area of the multiple-family or non-residential structure(s) on the
site, as determined by the Building Official.
      b.   Minor improvement defined.  If the City determines that the
estimated value of the work for which the permit is requested is equal to 10%
or more of the replacement value of the multiple-family or non-residential
structure(s) on the site, but at least $50,000 (to be adjusted annually each
July 1 to reflect the increase in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban
Consumers, Los Angeles/Riverside/Orange County Area, as established by the U.S.
Department of Labor for the period from March of the preceding year through
March of the current year), it shall be considered a Minor Improvement. In
application of this Section, "work value" and "replacement value" shall be
determined as follows.
         i.   Work value.  Each permit shall indicate the value of the work to
be performed. If the Building Official believes the work value estimate
indicated on the permit is too low, the Building Official shall estimate the
value of the proposed work for the purpose of this calculation.
         ii.   Replacement value. The replacement value of an existing
structure shall be determined using tables of reconstruction costs published by
the International Conference of Building Officials. The type of construction is
determined, and a cost per square foot is derived from the table. This cost is
multiplied by the number of gross square feet in the structure to obtain the
estimated reconstruction cost of the structure.
         iii.   Commercial revitalization area.  If the proposed minor
improvements include exterior building facade improvements to an existing
structure located within an area designated by the Council as a Commercial
Revitalization Area, the portion of the work value devoted to exterior building
facade improvements shall not be included in determining the 10% or $50,000
enforcement threshold for minor improvements.
      c.   Incidental improvements defined. An improvement that does not
qualify as a major or minor improvement shall be considered an Incidental
Improvement.
      d.   Requirements. Whenever a permit for a major improvement or minor
improvement to an existing nonconforming structure is requested, the Director
shall not approve the application unless the requirements of Table 6-1
(Requirements for Major and Minor Improvements) are met.
   Table 6-1
   Requirements for Major and Minor Improvements
Requirement Major and Minor Improvement
                                                                                     Major and
Requirement                                                                          Minor
                                                                                     Improvement
1.   Any sign on the subject site shall be in compliance with
Chapter 17.330                                                                      X
   (Signs).
2.   All roof equipment screening shall be provided in compliance with
   §                                                                             X
17.300.035 (Screening).
3.   All trash enclosures shall be provided, subject to the approval of the       X
Sanitation Manager and the Director.
4.   Parking lot landscaping, paving, screening, and striping shall meet all City X
requirements.
5.   All required bicycle parking spaces and end of trip facilities (lockers and
showers) shall be provided for the proposed uses on-site and meet all City           X
requirements in compliance with §
17.320.045.(1)
5.   Fences, walls, and hedges shall comply with §                               X
17.300.030 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).
6.   The project shall conform to the City’s Comprehensive Standard Conditions oX
Approval for Discretionary Projects as adopted by the Commission.
Notes:
   (1)   Bicycle parking and end of trip facilities requirements for minor and major
improvements may be adjusted if the Director determines the amount of bicycle
parking and end of trip facilities required cannot reasonably be accommodated due to
physical constraints of a site.
 
   3.   Improvements, reconstruction, and new construction to nonconforming
single-family and two-family, and triplex structure(s); accessory residential
structures; and accessory dwelling units.
      a.   Reconstruction or partial reconstruction of a nonconforming single-
family, two-family, and triplex structure; accessory residential structure; or
accessory dwelling unit that is/are not subject to §
17.610.025 - Exemptions and Exceptions, and that results in more than 50%
demolition of both of the exterior wall surface area and building footprint,
(measured from exterior wall to exterior wall), shall be completely
reconstructed in conformance with current code required setbacks, and height.
For purposes of this section, exterior wall surface area shall mean full height
exterior walls from grade to roof including existing framing, exterior sidings,
and interior sidings of said exterior walls.
      b.   If over a five-year period, the cumulative demolition of a
nonconforming single-family, two-family, and triplex structure; accessory
residential structure; or accessory dwelling unit exceeds 50% of both the
exterior wall surface area and building footprint, (measured from exterior wall
to exterior wall), that is/are not subject to §
17.610.025 - Exemptions and Exceptions, then the nonconforming single-family,
two-family, and triplex structure; accessory residential structure; or
accessory dwelling, shall be completely reconstructed in conformance with
current code required setbacks, and height. For purposes of this section,
exterior wall surface area shall mean full height exterior walls from grade to
roof including existing framing, exterior sidings, and interior sidings of said
exterior walls.
      c.   Through Lots with Frontages on both Charles Avenue and Milton
Avenue. Partial reconstruction, and/or additions to an existing legal
nonconforming detached accessory residential structure on through lots with
frontages on both Charles Avenue and Milton Avenue may be permitted in
accordance with the following standards, provided 1) the work does not result
in demolition exceeding the thresholds established in Subsection A.3.a or
A.3.b, and/or 2) the accessory residential structure has not been previously
modified pursuant to this Subsection A.3.c. In cases where this Subsection
A.3.c. does not apply, the work shall comply with the setback requirements in §
17.400.100 - Accessory Residential Structures, driveway length standards in §
17.320.035.N., and all other applicable code standards.
         i.   Existing legal nonconforming detached accessory residential
structures may be partially reconstructed in the same location and to the same
dimensions as the existing accessory residential structure.
         ii.   In addition, when there is an expansion of floor area of an
existing legal nonconforming detached accessory residential structure, the
proposed expansion may continue the horizontal building plane of the existing
structure provided the proposed expansion is no greater than 12 feet in height,
complies with the required side setback for the applicable zoning district, and
provides a minimum two-foot setback from one front lot line along the property
line that is of greater distance from the primary residence and/or the property
line separating the parcel from the street of a higher classification or
designation.
         iii.   The existing legal nonconforming driveway length may be
continued in conjunction with partial re-construction of an existing legal
nonconforming detached garage pursuant to this Section. Modifications to an
existing garage opening that result in a conforming minimum opening clearance
in accordance with §
17.320.035.C (Parking Space and Lot Dimensions) shall be permitted without
requiring conformance to current driveway length standards.
         iv.   The accessory residential structure shall comply with all other
applicable code standards required by this Title.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-005 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2019-004
§ 2 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No. 2023-002, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No.
2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.610.025 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
A.   Applicability. The following uses and/or structures damaged or destroyed
due to an involuntary catastrophic event (e.g., fire, earthquake, or other
calamity) may be reconstructed or replaced, and the use re-established provided
the requirements in this §
17.610.025 are met:
   1.   Nonconforming uses and structures.
   2.   Existing single-family and two-family use/structures in the RMD and RHD
zones deemed conforming as of October 9, 2024.
B.   Development Standards.  The new structure(s) shall comply with all
development standards (such as building envelope and footprint standards) in
effect when the damaged or destroyed structure(s) was originally constructed;
provided, however, that the new structure(s) shall contain no more dwelling
units and/or floor area than the damaged structure(s).
C.   Building and Fire Code Compliance. All new construction shall comply with
the current Building and Fire Code requirements; however, the Building Official
may require compliance for areas other than the new construction, when deemed
necessary.
D.   Time Limits.  A building permit for reconstruction must be obtained no
later than 18 months after the date of destruction, and construction must be
pursued diligently to completion.
E.   Current Requirements.  If the preceding requirements are not met, the
replacement structure shall comply with all current requirements of this Title
in effect on the date of application for the required building permit.
F.   Extensions. If the applicant submits a written request before expiration
of the 18 months, containing reasonable justification for an extension, the
Director may extend the deadline for issuance of the building permit for up to
an additional 18 months.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.610.030 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
A.   Maintenance and Repair. A nonconforming structure may be continued,
improved, and maintained, subject to the restrictions contained in this
Chapter.
B.   Seismic Retrofitting/Building Code Compliance. Repairs or alterations
required by law shall be allowed. Reconstruction required to reinforce
unreinforced masonry structures, or to comply with Building Code requirements,
shall be allowed without cost limitations. The seismic retrofitting and Code
compliance shall be limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety
standards and other applicable Building Code requirements, including State law
(such as Title 24 and the California Code of Regulations).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.610.035 NONCONFORMING PARCELS.
A nonconforming parcel of record that does not comply with the access, area, or
width requirements of this Title for the zoning district in which it is
located, shall be considered a legal building site, if it meets at least one of
the criteria specified by this Section.
A.   Applicability. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce
sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one or more of the
following:
   1.   Approved subdivision.  The parcel was created through a subdivision
approved by the City;
   2.   Variance or lot line adjustment.  The parcel was approved through the
Variance procedure, in compliance with
Chapter 17.550 (Variances and Administrative Modifications), or resulted from a
lot line adjustment; or
   3.   Partial government acquisition. The parcel was created in compliance
with the provisions of this Title but was made nonconforming when a portion of
the parcel was acquired by a governmental entity; including dedications
required as a Condition of Approval for development.
B.   Further Division or Reduction of Parcel - Prohibited. Where structures
have been erected on a nonconforming parcel, the area where structures are
located shall not be later divided so as to reduce the building site area and/
or frontage below the requirements of the applicable zoning district or other
applicable provisions of this Title, or to make the use of the parcel more
nonconforming.
 C.   Administrative Modification. A nonconforming parcel may be granted an
administrative modification pursuant to CCMC
Chapter 17.550 provided administrative modification findings stipulated in CCMC
§
17.550.020.A. can be made. An administrative modification approval shall not be
considered an expansion of a legal nonconformity.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2019-004 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.610.040 UNLAWFUL USES AND STRUCTURES.
Any use or structure, which did not comply with the applicable provisions of
this Title or prior planning and zoning regulations when established, are
violations of this Title and are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 17.650 (Enforcement). This Chapter does not grant any right to continue
occupancy of property containing an illegal or unpermitted use or structure.
The activity shall not be allowed to continue unless/until permits and
entitlements required by this Title and the CCMC are first obtained.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.610.045 PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
In the event that a nonconforming use or structure is found to constitute a
public nuisance, appropriate action shall be taken by the Director in
compliance with
Chapter 9.04 (Nuisances) of the CCMC.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.620: GENERAL PLAN, ZONING MAP AND ZONING CODE AMENDMENTS
Section
   
17.620.005   Purpose
   
17.620.010   Initiation of Amendments
   
17.620.015   Application Filing, Processing and Review
   
17.620.020   Commission Action on Amendments
   
17.620.025   Council Action on Amendments
   
17.620.030   Findings
   
17.620.035   Prezoning
§ 17.620.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures for the amendment of the General Plan, the
Zoning Map, and this Title. A General Plan Amendment may include revisions to
strategies, goals, land use designations, policies, or text. Zoning Map
amendments have the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to
another. Amendments to this Title may modify any procedure, provision,
requirement, or standard applicable to the development or use of property
within the City.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.620.010 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
An amendment may be initiated as follows:
A.   Council. A resolution of intention initiated by the Council;
B.   Commission.  A resolution of intention by the Commission;
C.   Director. An amendment initiated by the Director; or
D.   Property Owner. An application from a property owner.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.620.015 APPLICATION FILING, PROCESSING, AND REVIEW.
A.   Filing. An application for an amendment shall be completed, filed, and
processed in compliance with
Chapter 17.500 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). The application package
shall include all information specified in the application, any applicable
Division handout, and any additional information required by the Director in
order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the
findings required by §
17.620.030 (Findings) below.
B.   Notice and Hearings.  Notice and hearings regarding an application for an
amendment shall be provided in compliance with
Chapter 17.630 (Public Hearings and Administrative Review).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.620.020 COMMISSION ACTION ON AMENDMENTS.
The Commission shall make a written recommendation to the Council whether to
approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment, based
on the findings contained in §
17.620.030 (Findings) below.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.620.025 COUNCIL ACTION ON AMENDMENTS.
Upon receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the Council shall approve,
approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment based on the
findings contained in §
17.620.030 (Findings) below.
If the Council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the amendment
not previously considered by the Commission during its hearings, the proposed
modification may first be referred back to the Commission for its
recommendation.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.620.030 FINDINGS.
An amendment to the General Plan, the Zoning Map, or this Title may be approved
only if all of the following findings can be made in a positive manner, as
applicable to the type of amendment. It is the responsibility of the applicant
to establish evidence in support of the required findings.
A.   Mandatory Findings Required for all Amendments.
   1.   The proposed amendment ensures and maintains internal consistency with
the goals, policies, and strategies of all elements of the General Plan, and,
in the case of a Zoning Code amendment, will not create any inconsistencies
with this Title;
   2.   The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest,
health, safety, convenience or welfare of the City; and
   3.   The proposed amendment is in compliance with the provisions of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
B.   Additional Finding for Zoning Map Amendments. The site(s) is physically
suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with
adjoining land uses and absence of physical constraints) for the requested
zoning designation(s) and anticipated land use development.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.620.035 PREZONING.
A.   Purpose. An unincorporated property within the City's sphere of influence
may be prezoned for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to
the property, in the event of subsequent annexation to the City. The initiation
and the procedures for the prezoning shall be the same procedures that govern
the rezoning of property within the City.
   Upon the effective date of annexation of property that has been prezoned in
compliance with this Section, the zoning designation shall become the official
zoning designation for the property and shall be so designated on the City's
Official Zoning Map. All property not prezoned by the Council prior to
annexation shall be designated in the R1 (Single-Family Residential) Zoning
District upon annexation. See §
17.200.015.F. (Zoning Upon Annexation).
B.   Commission Action on Prezoning. The Commission shall make a written
recommendation to the Council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or
disapprove the proposed prezoning, based on the findings contained in §
17.620.035.D. (Findings for Prezoning) below.
C.   Council Action on Prezoning. Upon receipt of the Commission's
recommendation, the Council shall approve, approve in modified form, or
disapprove the proposed prezoning, based on the findings contained in §
17.620.035.D. (Findings for Prezoning) below.
   If the Council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the prezoning
not previously considered by the Commission during its hearings, the proposed
modification may first be referred back to the Commission for its
recommendation.
D.   Findings for Prezoning. A prezoning may only be approved if all of the
following findings can be made:
   1.   The proposed prezoning is consistent with the goals, policies, and
strategies of the General Plan;
   2.   The proposed prezoning would not be detrimental to the public interest,
health, safety, convenience or welfare of the City; and
   3.   The site is physically suitable (including access, provision of
utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical
constraints) for the requested/anticipated land use development(s).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
 CHAPTER 17.625: REQUIRED COMMUNITY MEETINGS
Section
   
17.625.005   Purpose
   
17.625.010   Applicability
   
17.625.015   Time and Number of Meetings
   
17.625.020   Location
   
17.625.025   Notification
   
17.625.030   Structure
   
17.625.040   Exceptions
§ 17.625.005 PURPOSE.
The community meeting is intended for the applicant to meet with neighbors and
community members at an early stage to present conceptual plans, provide
information regarding the proposed project, and receive feedback on project
plans prior to submitting for preliminary project review.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.625.010 APPLICABILITY.
The following entitlement applications are subject to a community meeting(s):
A.   Administrative Site Plan Reviews.
B.   Comprehensive Plans.
C.   Conditional Use Permits.
D.   Site Plan Reviews.
E.   Specific Plans.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.625.015 TIME AND NUMBER OF MEETINGS.
A.   Number of Meetings. Two community meetings shall be held, one prior to
submitting a preliminary project review or an application submittal, whichever
is first in the process, and one after application submittal. Except that only
one meeting shall be required for any residential project.
B.   Scheduling. Applicants shall work with an assigned planner to ensure
community meetings do not conflict with Planning Commission meetings, City
Council meetings, or other important city functions. A community meeting as
outlined herein, is separate and apart from any other outreach meetings the
applicant may conduct at their discretion, and any required public hearings.
(Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.625.020 LOCATION.
The applicant will hold the community meeting at or near the subject property
and shall also livestream the meeting, providing the public an opportunity to
attend virtually and provide comments. Ample parking for attendees should be
provided at the meeting location.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.625.025 NOTIFICATION.
A.   The applicant shall prepare a project website with information on the
project, including the project location (with a map), the requested
entitlements, a project description, and any architectural or conceptual
drawings available.
B.   The applicant shall be responsible for notification to occupants and
property owners within a minimum 500-foot radius of the subject property. The
notification shall be mailed out a minimum of 14 days prior to the scheduled
community meeting. The applicant shall provide the Current Planning Division
with an Affidavit of Mailing and all notification costs shall be the
responsibility of the applicant. The notification shall include the following
minimum information:
   1.   The date, time, and location of the community meeting and a link for
the public to attend online.
   2.   The project location (with a map), the requested entitlements, a
project description, web address for the project website, and contact
information including mailing address, phone number, and email information for
the applicant and representatives.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.625.030 STRUCTURE.
A.   The applicant hosted and facilitated community meeting shall follow the
structure and include the material as outlined below:
   1.   The meeting shall be held both in person and online, with the ability
for all attendees to ask questions and receive responses.
   2.   A sign-in sheet which shall include name, address, phone number, and
email address of each attendee shall be provided.
   3.   Applicant shall give an overview of the project and present plans
(i.e., floor plans, site plans, elevations, renderings, etc.) and results of
any preliminary environmental studies as applicable.
   4.   Applicant shall answer questions about the project from attendees,
including requested entitlement and operation details.
   5.   Applicant shall consider project changes in response to comments.
   6.   Applicant shall keep meeting minutes that include bullet points of all
concerns, comments, questions raised, and responses provided.
   7.   Applicant shall provide the sign in sheet, bullet point minutes, and
applicant presentation to the Project Planner within three working days
following the community meeting.
(Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.625.040 EXCEPTIONS.
A.   A community meeting shall not be required where requiring such a meeting
is prohibited by State Law.
B.   At the discretion of the Director. the community meeting requirements
above may be adjusted to allow a meeting to be held in person or online only,
and without creating a project website.
(Ord. No. 2024-006; Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
CHAPTER 17.630: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Section
   
17.630.005   Purpose
   
17.630.010   Notice of Public Hearings and Administrative Review
   
17.630.015   Notice of Decision - Director
   
17.630.020   Notice of Decision - Commission
   
17.630.025   Finality of Decision by Director or Commission
   
17.630.030   Recommendation by Commission
   
17.630.035   Notice of Decision - Council
   
17.630.040   Mailing of the Notice of Decision
§ 17.630.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures for public hearings before the Commission and
Council, and for administrative review by the Director. When a public hearing
is required by this Title, public notice shall be given and the hearing shall
be conducted as provided by this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.630.010 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS AND ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
Table 6-2 (Mandatory Public Hearings for Public Reviews Before the Commission
or Council), below, identifies the noticing requirements for public hearings or
public reviews before the Commission or Council.
   Table 6-2
   Mandatory Public Hearings or Public Reviews
   Before the Commission or Council
Type of Discretionary Re Type of Notice Required
view                     Mailed Notice Published Notice Posted Notice
Type of Discretionary Re                                 Type of Notice Required
view                                                     Mailed  Published Posted
                                                         Notice  Notice    Notice
                                                         21 days 14 days
                                                         before  before
                                                         the     the date  Within 30
                                                         date of of the    days after
A.   Deadline                                         the     public    application
                                                         public  hearing   deemed
                                                         hearing or review complete
                                                         or      (1)
                                                         review
B.   Type of Discretionary Review
   Applications:                                      X       X         X
   1.   Comprehensive Plan
   2.   Conditional Use Permit (CUP), except No. 3 Xelow
   3.   CUP for sale of alcoholic beverages        X                 X
   4.   General Plan Amendment
      a.   Land use map change                  X                 X
      b.   Text amendment                               X
   5.   Site Plan Review                           X                 X
   6.   Specific Plan                              X                 X
   7.   Subdivision (CCMC Ch. 15.10)               X                 X
   8.   Variance                                   X                 X
   9.   Zoning Code/Map Changes(1)
      a.   Map change                           X       X         X
      b.   Text amendment                               X
Note:
   (1)   Public notices for Planning Commission public hearings for Zoning Code/Map
Changes shall be published 20 days before the date of the Planning Commission public
hearing.
 
A.   Mailed Notice.  Written notices for public hearings, identified in
Table 6-2 (Mandatory Public Hearings or Public Reviews Before the Commission or
Council), scheduled for the Commission or Council shall be given in the
following manner.
   1.   Notices shall be mailed, postage prepaid to the following:
      a.   The applicant, occupants and owner(s), or their agent, of the
property being considered;
      b.   The owners and occupants of all property within a radius of 500 feet
of the exterior boundaries of the property, or the perimeters of the premises
of the proposed use involved in the application. This Subsection establishes
the minimum mailed notice requirements, and shall not preclude the provision of
notice to a greater number of persons;
      c.   Each local agency expected to provide water, schools, or other
essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide the
facilities and services may be significantly affected; and
      d.   A person who has filed a written request for notice with the
Director and has paid the fee established by the most current City Council Fee
Resolution for the notice.
   2.   Notices shall be mailed at least 21 days before the date scheduled for
the public hearing or review.
   3.   For the purposes of this notification, the last known name and address
of each property owner, as identified in the records of the Los Angeles County
Assessor, shall be used, unless a more current source of this information is
known.
   4.   The address of occupants shall be determined by visual site inspection
or other reasonably accurate means. The occupant notice requirement can be met
by mailing the notice to the occupant(s).
   5.   At the time of filing the application, the applicant or designee shall
provide a list of property owners and occupants within the prescribed area of
notification and shall sign an affidavit verifying that the list has been
prepared in compliance with the requirements of this Section.
   6.   The City shall prepare the notice, which shall clearly state the
following information:
      a.   The date, place, and time of the scheduled hearing;
      b.   The name of the hearing body;
      c.   A general explanation of the matter to be considered;
      d.   A general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the
subject property;
      e.   The manner in which additional information may be received;
      f.   Any other pertinent information deemed appropriate by the Director;
and
      g.   If a proposed Negative Declaration or final Environmental Impact
Report has been prepared for the project, in compliance with the City's use of
the State-promulgated CEQA Guidelines, the hearing notice shall include a
statement that the hearing body will also consider approval of the proposed
Negative Declaration or certification of the final Environmental Impact Report.
   7.   The Director has the discretion, on a case-by-case basis, to require
the applicant to expand the mailing list beyond the minimum mailing area
identified in §
17.630.010.A.1.b. above, based on criteria, including traffic impact, parking
demand, building shade and shadow, noise corridor, cul-de-sac street, view
impact, and other potential impact(s) and physical boundaries, that could help
delineate the impact area.
   8.   In the event a public hearing or review is opened but continued to a
date certain by the Commission or Council, further notice is not required, but
may be given at the Director's discretion.
   9.   The failure of any person or addressee to receive a written mailed
notice shall not invalidate the public hearing or review proceedings, provided
the Commission or the Council may continue the public hearing or review, if
deemed necessary, in compliance with §
17.630.010.A.8. above.
   10.   If the number of notices to be mailed is greater than 5,000, instead
of a mailed notice, the Director may provide a published notice in compliance
with §
17.630.010.B., except for cannabis storefront retail notices for Conditional
Use Permits.
B.   Published Notice. Published notices of public hearings or reviews,
identified in
Table 6-2 (Mandatory Public Hearings or Public Reviews Before the Commission or
Council), before the Commission and the Council shall be given in the following
manner:
   1.   Fourteen-day notice. A notice shall be published at least once in a
local newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than 14 days before
the date of the public hearing or review, except that a notice for a Planning
Commission public hearing for a Zoning Code Amendment or Zoning Code Map shall
be published not less than 20 days before the date of the public hearing or
review. The Director has the discretion to publish the notice in other
newspapers; and
   2.   Content of notice.  The content of the notice of a public hearing shall
be provided in compliance with §
17.630.010.A.6.a. through g. above.
C.   Posted Notice. In addition to the mailed notice and published notice,
identified in §
17.630.010.A. (Mailed Notice) and §
17.630.010.B. (Published Notice) above, posted notices for a public hearing or
review before the Commission or Council for the applications, identified in
Table 6-2 (Mandatory Public Hearings or Public Reviews Before the Commission or
Council) concerning specific real property, shall be provided, at the
applicant's expense, in compliance with the following provisions.
   1.   The sign shall be posted within 21 days after the subject application
is deemed complete by the Division. More than one sign may be required by the
Director for a large project, or a project site with more than one street
frontage.
   2.   The sign shall be located in a conspicuous place on the property
abutting a public street, not less than one foot nor more than ten feet inside
the property line. In the event the sign is not visible at this location, the
sign may be attached to a structure, freestanding fence, or wall that has a
minimal setback.
   3.   The sign shall be in compliance with the following requirements:
      a.   The size of the sign shall be 12 square feet in sign area, generally
measuring three feet by four feet;
      b.   The sign shall not exceed eight feet in height from the ground
level; however, if the property is surrounded by fences, walls, or hedges at or
near the property lines, additional height shall be provided as necessary to
ensure visibility of the sign from the public right-of-way;
      c.   The sign shall not be illuminated;
      d.   The sign shall include factual information about the title of the
pending development, project case number, brief description of the request,
name and telephone number of project proponent, location of property, and the
Division telephone number. In addition, the date, location, and time of the
scheduled public hearing or review shall be shown on the sign as soon as that
information is confirmed by the City, but no later than 21 days before the
scheduled public hearing or review;
      e.   The size, style, and color of the sign's lettering shall meet the
specifications approved by the Director;
      f.   A Building Permit shall not be required for the posting of a sign,
installed in compliance with this Section.
   4.   The sign shall remain in place until the expiration of the appeal
period following a decision by the review authority. If the application
requires the Council's final approval, or if an appeal is filed, the sign shall
remain in place, with the new hearing date noted, until the final decision by
the Council. The sign shall be removed within ten days of either the end of the
appeal period or the final decision by the Council, whichever applies.
   5.   The applicant shall submit to the Director an affidavit verifying that
the sign was posted on the site in a timely manner in compliance with this
Section.
   6.   Failure to post the sign, to include required information, or to comply
with applicable placement or graphic standards and requirements may result in a
delay in the required public hearing or review.
D.   Notice of Administrative Use Permits, Administrative Site Plan Review,
Administrative Modification, and Reasonable Accommodation Applications.
   Table 6-3 (see below) identifies the noticing requirements for
administrative actions by the Director.
   Table 6-3
   Mailed Notification Requirements For Administrative
   Review Applications
 
   Type of Administrative ReviSee Chapter Notice Requirement
                                             Mailed Notice     Mailing Deadline
                                             All property      15 days before
A.   Administrative Use Permit17.530      owners and        the anticipated
                                             occupants within  date of decision
                                             a 500-foot radius by Director
                                             All adjacent      15 days before
B.   Administrative           17.550      property owners   the anticipated
Modifications                                and occupants     date of decision
                                                               by Director
                                             All adjacent      15 days before
C.   Administrative Site Plan 17.540      property owners   the anticipated
Reviews                                      and occupants     date of decision
                                                               by Director
D.   Reasonable Accommodations17.550      None required     NA
 
   1.   In addition to all persons notified in compliance with
Table 6-3 (see above), a notice of decision on the Administrative Site Plan
Review, Administrative Modification, Administrative Use Permit and Reasonable
Accommodation applications shall be mailed to the applicant and other parties
directly involved with the application, in compliance with §
17.630.040 (Mailing of the Notice of Decision) below.
E.   Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required by §
17.630.010.A. (Mailed Notice) through §
17.630.010.D. (Notice of Administrative Use Permits, Administrative Site Plan
Review, and Administrative Modification), above, the Director may provide
additional notice, with content or using a distribution method as the Director
determines is necessary or desirable (e.g., on the Internet).
F.   Effect of Notification Requirements.  Nothing in the public notification
requirements identified in this Section is intended to supersede the procedures
established in this Chapter for other discretionary reviews.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2013-008 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006;
Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part))
§ 17.630.015 NOTICE OF DECISION - DIRECTOR.
The Director may record the decision, refer the matter to the Commission for
determination, or defer action and record the decision at a later date. The
decision shall contain applicable findings, any conditions of approval, and the
reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.630.020 NOTICE OF DECISION - COMMISSION.
The Commission may announce and record the decision at the conclusion of a
scheduled hearing, or defer action, take specified items under advisement, and
announce and record the decision at a later date. The decision shall contain
applicable findings, any conditions of approval, and the reporting/monitoring
requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the City.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
   § 17.630.025 FINALITY OF DECISION BY DIRECTOR OR COMMISSION.
The decision of the Director or Commission is final unless appealed in
compliance
Chapter 17.640 (Appeals).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.630.030 RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION.
At the conclusion of a public hearing on a Comprehensive Plan, Development
Agreement, Specific Plan, prezoning, or a proposed amendment to the General
Plan or Zoning Map/Code, the Commission shall forward a recommendation,
including all required findings, to the Council for final action.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.630.035 NOTICE OF DECISION - COUNCIL.
For an application requiring Council approval, the Council shall announce and
record its decision at the conclusion of the public hearing. The decision shall
contain the findings of the Council, any conditions of approval, and the
reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate impacts and
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.630.040 MAILING OF THE NOTICE OF DECISION.
Within ten working days after the final decision or recommendation is rendered
by the appropriate review authority, a notice of the decision, recommendation,
any applicable conditions of approval, and any reporting/monitoring
requirements, shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the
application. A copy of the notice shall also be sent to the property owner, if
different from the applicant, and to all other persons who have filed a written
request for notice.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  CHAPTER 17.640: APPEALS
Section
   
17.640.005   Purpose
   
17.640.010   Commission Review
   
17.640.015   Council Review
   
17.640.020   Appeal by both the Council and Commission
   
17.640.025   Appeals of Decisions
   
17.640.030   Filing and Processing of Appeals
   
17.640.035   Notice for Appeal Hearings
   
17.640.040   Notice of Final Decision - Commission
   
17.640.045   Appeal Pending
§ 17.640.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures for the following:
A.   The Council's review of a decision rendered by the Commission;
B.   The Commission's review of a decision rendered by the Director;
C.   The simultaneous request for an appeal by both the Council and Commission;
and
D.   The filing of an appeal, by other than the Council or Commission, of a
decision rendered by the Director or Commission.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.640.010 COMMISSION REVIEW.
A member of the Commission may request the opportunity to discuss any decision
previously rendered by the Director; however, a majority vote of the Commission
is required to initiate an appeal of the decision. Once the vote to initiate an
appeal is passed by a majority, the matter shall be scheduled for hearing.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.640.015 COUNCIL REVIEW.
A member of the Council may request the opportunity to discuss any decision
previously rendered by the Director or Commission; however, a majority vote of
the Council is required to initiate an appeal of the decision. Once the vote to
initiate an appeal is passed by a majority, the matter shall be scheduled for
hearing. The decision of the Council on the appeal shall be final and shall
become effective upon adoption of the resolution by the Council.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.640.020 APPEAL BY BOTH THE COUNCIL AND COMMISSION.
If members of both the Commission and Council file an appeal from the same
decision, the matter shall be scheduled for Council determination. The Council
shall determine whether the appeal shall be considered, and if so, by which
review authority. Once the Council determines that the appeal should be heard,
the appeal shall be scheduled for hearing by the review authority designated by
the Council.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.640.025 APPEALS OF DECISIONS.
An appeal filed by other than the Council or Commission shall be heard by the
following review authorities:
A.   Director Appeals.  A decision rendered by the Director may be appealed to
the Commission; and
B.   Commission Appeals. A decision rendered by the Commission may be appealed
to the Council.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.640.030 FILING AND PROCESSING OF APPEALS.
A.   Timing and Form of Appeal.  Appeals shall be submitted in writing and
filed with the Division or City Clerk, as applicable, within 15 days after the
decision date identified in the notice of decision. Appeals addressed to the
Commission shall be filed with the Division, while appeals addressed to the
Council shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall specifically state
the pertinent facts of the case, and the basis for the appeal as required by §
17.640.030.C. (Required Statement and Evidence) below. Appeals shall be
accompanied by the filing fee established by the City Council Fee Resolution.
   The number of days shall be construed as calendar days. Time limits will
extend to the following City Hall working day, where the last of the specified
number of days falls on a weekend, holiday, or other day when City Hall is
officially closed.
B.   Report and Scheduling of Hearing. When an appeal has been filed, the
Director shall prepare a report on the matter and schedule the matter for
consideration by the appropriate review authority.
C.   Required Statement and Evidence.
   1.   Applications for appeals shall include a general statement, specifying
the basis for the appeal and the specific aspect of the decision being
appealed.
   2.   Appeals shall be based upon an error in fact, dispute of findings or
inadequacy of conditions to mitigate potential impacts.
   3.   Appeals shall be accompanied by supporting evidence substantiating the
basis for the appeal.
D.   Action. If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the
Division or City Clerk, as applicable, shall notice the hearing in compliance
with §
17.640.035 (Notice for Appeal Hearings). At the hearing, the review authority
may consider any issue involving the matter that is the subject of the appeal,
in addition to the specific grounds for the appeal.
   1.   By resolution, the review authority may affirm, affirm in part, or
reverse the action, determination or decision that is the subject of the
appeal.
   2.   When reviewing an appeal, the review authority may amend or adopt
additional conditions of approval that may address other issues or concerns
than the subject of the appeal.
   3.   When reviewing an appeal, the review authority may disapprove the land
use entitlement approved by the previous review authority, even though the
appellant only requested a modification or elimination of one or more
conditions of approval.
   4.   If new or different evidence is presented on appeal, the Commission or
Council may, but shall not be required to, refer the matter back to the
Director or Commission for further consideration.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.640.035 NOTICE FOR APPEAL HEARINGS.
 A.   Appeal of Commission's Decision.  Where an appeal of a Commission
decision made following a public hearing, noticed in compliance with §
17.630.010 (Notice of Public Hearings and Administrative Review), above, is
filed with the City Clerk, and a hearing on the merits of the appeal is placed
in the Council agenda, notice shall be given in compliance with §
17.630.010 (Notice of Public Hearings and Administrative Review) above, unless
the Council determines otherwise.
B.   Appeal of Director's Decision. The Director may require mailed notices, on
a case-by-case basis, in compliance with §
17.630.010 (Notice of Public Hearings and Administrative Review) above, for the
appeal of an administrative discretionary review decision to the Commission or
Council. At minimum, notice of the appeal shall be mailed to all persons who
previously received notice of the Director's decision, at least 21 days before
the scheduled public hearing or review.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.640.040 NOTICE OF FINAL DECISION - COMMISSION.
Within ten working days after the final decision is rendered by the Commission,
a notice of the decision, and any applicable conditions of approval, shall be
mailed to the appellant at the address shown on the application. A copy of the
notice shall also be sent in compliance with §
17.630.040 (Mailing of the Notice of Decision).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.640.045 APPEAL PENDING.
While an appeal is pending, the establishment of any affected use or structure
shall be held in abeyance, and all permits and licenses issued for the use or
structure shall be stayed.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.650: ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
17.650.005   Purpose
   
17.650.010   Violations
   
17.650.015   Remedies Not Exclusive
   
17.650.020   Inspection
   
17.650.025   Recovery of Costs
   
17.650.030   Additional Permit Processing Fees
§ 17.650.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures intended to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this Title and the conditions of land use permit approval.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.650.010 VIOLATIONS.
A.   Public Nuisance.  Any use, structure, or property altered, enlarged,
erected, established, maintained, moved or operated contrary to the provisions
of this Title, or any condition of approval, is hereby declared to be unlawful
and a public nuisance, and may be abated by the City through civil proceedings
by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any
other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
B.   Stop Work Order.  Construction in violation of this Title, or any
condition imposed through this Title, shall be subject to the issuance of a
Stop Work Order. A violation of a Stop Work Order shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
C.   Penalty.  Any violation of this Title, or failure to comply with any of
its provisions, shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and punishable as such,
notwithstanding the fact that, at the discretion of the City Attorney,
violation of any section of this Title may be prosecuted as an infraction. Each
day a violation of any provision of this Title continues shall be a new and
separate violation.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.650.015 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
All remedies contained in this Title, for handling violations or enforcement of
its provisions, are not mutually exclusive of any other applicable provisions
of City, County, State, or Federal law, and do not prevent concurrent or
consecutive methods being used to achieve compliance against continuing
violations.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.650.020 INSPECTION.
Every owner and applicant seeking an approval, or any other action through this
Title, shall allow authorized City officials, or their designees, reasonable
access to any premises or property that is the subject of the approval or other
action. Once approval or other action has been granted in compliance with this
Title, the owner or applicant shall allow authorized City officials, or their
designees, access to the premises, where there is reasonable cause to believe
the premises or property is not in compliance with the approval or other
action.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.650.025 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
The procedures for the recovery of administrative costs and expenses incurred
by the City for the enforcement of this Title, or any condition imposed through
this Title, in cases where no permits are required to correct a violation,
shall be followed as set forth in §
9.04.140 (Code Enforcement Fees) of the CCMC.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.650.030 ADDITIONAL PERMIT PROCESSING FEES.
Any person who establishes a land use, or alters, constructs, enlarges, erects,
maintains, or moves a structure without first obtaining a permit required by
this Title, or any condition imposed through this Title, shall pay the
additional permit processing fees established by the City Council Fee
Resolution for the correction of the violation, before being granted a permit
for a use or structure on the site.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
CHAPTER 17.660: REVOCATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Section
   
17.660.005   Purpose
   
17.660.010   Hearings and Notice
   
17.660.015   Review Authority Action
   
17.660.020   Action Following Revocation
§ 17.660.005 PURPOSE.
This Chapter provides procedures for securing revocation or modification of
previously approved applications, permits, and entitlements.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.660.010 HEARINGS AND NOTICE.
The appropriate regulatory authority shall hold a public hearing to determine
if an application, permit, or entitlement granted in compliance with the
provisions of this Title should be revoked or modified. Written notice shall be
mailed (except for Temporary Use Permits), at least 21 days before the public
hearing, to the project applicant and/or property owner, as identified in the
records of the Los Angeles County Assessor, unless a more current source of
this information is known.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
  § 17.660.015 REVIEW AUTHORITY ACTION.
A.   Permit Revocation or Modification.  A land use permit or entitlement may
be revoked or modified by the review authority (e.g., Director, Commission, or
Council) that originally approved the permit or entitlement, if any one of the
following findings can be made:
   1.   Circumstances under which the permit or entitlement was granted have
been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings
contained in the original permit can no longer be made in a positive manner,
and the public health, safety, and general welfare require the revocation;
   2.   The permit or entitlement was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis
of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement(s) in the
application or in the applicant's testimony presented during the public hearing
for the permit or entitlement;
   3.   One or more of the conditions of the permit have not been substantially
fulfilled or have been violated;
   4.   The use or structure for which the permit was granted has ceased to
exist, or has been suspended for at least one year, as defined in §
17.610.015 (Loss of Nonconforming Status);
   5.   The improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in
violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute; or
   6.   The improvement/use allowed by the permit has become detrimental to the
public health, safety, or general welfare, or the manner of operation
constitutes or is creating a nuisance.
B.   Administrative Modification or Variance Revocation/Modification. An
Administrative Modification or Variance may be revoked or modified by the
review authority that originally approved the permit or entitlement, if any one
of the following findings can be made, in addition to those outlined in §
17.660.015.A.1. through 6. above:
   1.   Circumstances under which the permit or entitlement was granted have
been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings
contained in the original permit can no longer be made in a positive manner,
and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the
Administrative Modification or Variance; or
   2.   One or more of the conditions of the Administrative Modification or
Variance have not been met or have been violated, and the grantee has not
substantially exercised the rights granted by the Administrative Modification
or Variance.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.660.020 ACTION FOLLOWING REVOCATION.
When a revocation or modification hearing is initiated by the City, the permit
or entitlement shall be suspended automatically and the property owner shall be
notified immediately. When necessary, in order to protect public health,
safety, or general welfare, an authorized City official may order all or any
portion of the operations, formerly authorized by the permit or entitlement, to
cease during the time of suspension.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2024-006)
ARTICLE 7: DEFINITIONS
   Chapter
         
17.700   DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 17.700: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
17.700.005   Purpose
   
17.700.010   Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases
§ 17.700.005 PURPOSE.
This Article provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this Title that
are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any of
the definitions in this Article conflict with definitions in other provisions
of the CCMC, these definitions shall control for the purposes of this Title. If
a word is not defined in this Article, or in other provisions of the Title, the
most common dictionary definition is presumed to be operative.
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part) Ord. No. 2024-006)
§ 17.700.010 DEFINITIONS OF SPECIALIZED TERMS AND PHRASES.
The following definitions are in alphabetical order.
A.   Definitions, "A".
   Accessory Dwelling Unit. An attached or detached residential dwelling unit
that provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons
and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary residence. It shall
include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family or multiple-family dwelling
is or will be situated.
   Accessory Dwelling Unit, Junior. An attached residential dwelling unit
within a proposed or existing single-family dwelling that is no more than 500
square feet in size. A junior accessory dwelling unit may share sanitary
facilities with the primary dwelling unit but shall include a kitchen or
efficiency kitchen consistent with applicable State and Building Code statutes.
   Accessory Food Service.  A use accessory to a primary retail use, occupying
no more than 20% of the gross floor area of the primary use, where customers
are served prepared food and/or beverages from a walk-up ordering counter for
either on- or off-premise consumption.
   Accessory Retail Use. The retail sales of various products (including food)
in a store or similar facility that is located within a health care, hotel,
office, industrial, or studio complex for the purpose of serving employees or
customers of the primary use and is not visible from public streets. These uses
include pharmacies, gift shops, and food service establishments within
hospitals, as well as convenience stores and food service establishments within
hotel, office, and industrial complexes.
   Accessory Structure.  A structure that is physically detached from,
secondary, and incidental to, and commonly associated with, the primary
structure.
   Accessory Use.  A use customarily incidental to, related and clearly
subordinate to a principal use established on the same parcel, which does not
alter the principal use, nor serve property other than the parcel where the
principal use is located.
   Accessory Uses and Structures, Residential.  Any use and/or structure that
is customarily a part of or clearly incidental to a residence, which does not
change the character of the residential use and/or household. These uses
include the following detached accessory structures, and other similar
structures normally associated with a residential use of property:
 
Garages;                                                     Spas and hot tubs;
Gazebos;                                                     Storage sheds;
Greenhouses;                                                 Swimming Pools;
Outdoor recreational amenities, such as tennis and other on- Workshops.
side sport courts;
 
   Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles (including their incidental
restoration and repair), personal recreational vehicles and other personal
property, accessory to a residential use. Does not include home satellite dish
and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts; see
"Telecommunications Facilities."
   Adult Business.  Any adult bookstore, adult hotel or motel, adult motion
picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, cabaret, sexual encounter center,
or any other business or establishment that offers its patrons merchandise,
services, or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, but not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is
preempted by State law.
   Adult Day Care Facilities. State-licensed facilities that provide non-
medical care and supervision for more than six adults for periods of less than
24 hours.
   Agent. A person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and
act for a property owner in contacts with City employees, committees,
Commissions, and the Council, regarding matters regulated by this Title.
   Aisle. A driveway that also serves as a maneuvering space for ingress and
egress to one or more adjacent parking spaces.
   Alcoholic Beverage Sales.  The retail sale of beer, wine, and/or other
alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premise consumption.
   Alley. A public or private roadway, generally not more than 30-feet-wide,
that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of parcels having other public
street frontage, and that is not intended for general traffic circulation.
   Allowed Use. A use of land identified by
Article 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Zone-Specific Standards)
as a permitted or conditional use that may be established with a land use
permit and, where applicable, site plan review and/or building permit approval,
subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Title.
   Alteration. Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement
of rooms or the supporting members of a structure, or a change in the external
appearance of any structure, not including painting. See also "Structural
Alteration."
   Amnesty Program. The policies adopted under Resolution No. 97-R067 to
establish consistent enforcement policies and practices regarding unpermitted
property conversions and building constructions.
   Animal Sales and Services.
      a.   Animal Boarding and Kennels. Public or commercial facilities for the
keeping, boarding, or maintaining of common household pets for commercial
purposes, except for dogs or cats offered for sale in pet shops.
      b.   Animal Hospitals. An establishment providing medical and surgical
treatment for domestic animals. This classification allows 24-hour
accommodation of animals receiving medical services but does not include
kennels. Use allowed indoors only.
      c.   Pet Day Care.  A facility for the primary purpose of same day,
short-term keeping, boarding or maintaining of animals that do not require
medical treatment, and excludes the keeping of animals overnight.
      d.   Pet Shops. Retail stores selling or offering for adoption birds,
cats, dogs, fish, and other common household pets, including supplies for the
care and feeding of the animals sold. This use may include pet grooming as an
accessory or standalone use, but not the overnight boarding of animals other
than those for sale.
      e.   Veterinary Clinics. Office and medical treatment facilities used by
veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics. Use allowed
indoors only.
   Applicant. Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, or any entity or combination of entities who seek residential
property development permits or approvals from the City of Culver City.
   Approval. Includes both approval and approval with conditions.
   Architectural Feature.  Soffit, column, wing wall, canopy, roof eave,
balcony, bell tower, spires, clock tower, cupolas, turrets, and any other
similar element that does not create an interior floor space.
   Arterial Street. Arterial streets include primary and secondary arterial
streets. Primary arterial streets are major cross-town thoroughfares. Secondary
arterial streets connect primary arterial streets to smaller streets and
residential neighborhoods. Primary and secondary arterial streets are defined
in the General Plan Circulation Element.
   Assembly.
      a.   Clubs, Lodges, and Private Meeting Halls. Permanent, headquarters-
type and meeting facilities for organizations, operating on a membership basis,
for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for:
 
Business Associations;                  Civic, social, and fraternal
                                        organizations;
Labor Unions and similar organizations; Political Organizations;
Professional membership organizations;  Other membership organizations.
 
      b.   Religious Places of Worship. Facilities operated by organizations
for worship, or the promotion of religious activities, such as churches,
synagogues, mosques, and temples; and accessory uses on the same site, such as
living quarters for ministers and staff, child day care facilities and
religious schools, where authorized by the same type of land use permit
required for the church itself. Other establishments maintained by religious
organizations, such as full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other
potentially related operations (such as a recreational camp), are classified
according to their respective activities.
   Attic. The area between roof framing and the ceiling of the rooms below that
is not habitable per Building Code standards, but may be reached by ladder and
used for storage or mechanical equipment. Any such room with less than 70
square feet in area or less than seven feet in height shall constitute an
attic.
   Automated Teller Machine (ATM).  Computerized, self-service machines used by
banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals
and fund transfers, without contact with financial institution personnel. The
machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations, in
compliance with §
17.400.025 (Automatic Teller Machines).
   Awning. A permanent or temporary structure attached to, and wholly supported
by, a wall or a building, installed over and partially in front of doors,
windows or other openings in a building, and consisting of a frame and a top of
canvas or other similar material covering the entire space enclosed between the
frame.
B.   Definitions, "B".
   Balcony. An accessible platform structure that projects from a building
facade or wall without ground mounted structures or supports and is surrounded
by a railing or parapet.
   Banks and Financial Services. Financial institutions including:
 
Banks and trust companies;                Credit agencies;
Credit unions;                            Holding (but not primarily operating)
                                          companies;
Lending and thrift institutions;          Other investment companies;
Securities/commodity contract brokers and Security and commodity exchanges;
dealers;
                                          Vehicle finance (equity) leasing
                                          agencies.
 
      Does not include check-cashing or payday-loan facilities.
   Base Density. The number of base units per acre a residential development
project is entitled to under Culver City Zoning Code regulations before
applying any State, Local, or other bonuses. Projects within MU-1 or MU-2 zones
may receive a base density increase to 65 dwelling units per acre.
   Basement. That portion of a building or an area enclosed by walls located
below finished grade and beneath and not exceeding the first floor footprint
above, where the vertical distance from finished grade to the bottom of the
finished floor above is no more than three vertical feet at all points around
the perimeter of all exterior walls. A basement does not constitute a story.
All basements shall be limited to one floor level and not to exceed 12 feet in
height.
   Bay Window. A window formed as the exterior expression of a bay within a
structure, a bay in this context being an interior recess made by the outward
projection of the exterior finish of the exterior wall of a building with
exterior bottom portion no less than six inches above grade. The purpose of a
bay window is to admit more light than would a window flush with the wall line.
A bay window may be rectangular, polygonal, or arc-shaped. A bay window is also
called an oriel, or oriel window, when it projects from an upper story and
which may be supported by corbels. Bay windows may be multi-level.
   Bedroom.  Any room in a dwelling except a living room, bathroom, dining room
or kitchen, but including a den, family room, game room, library, office, play
room, sewing room, study, or other room that could, under the Building Code of
the City, be used for sleeping purposes without structural modification, and
also including an alcove, loft or similar feature within a room other than a
bedroom.
   Blank Wall. Any wall that is not enhanced by architectural detailing,
artwork, landscaping, windows, doors, or similar features. Solid and mechanical
doors and glass with less than 80% transparency are considered blank wall
areas.
   Broadcast Studios. Commercial and public communications uses, including
radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with
facilities entirely within buildings. Transmission and receiving apparatus,
including antennas and towers, are included under the definition of
Telecommunications Facilities.
   Building. See “Structure.”
   Business Frontage. The portion of a building occupied by a single business
tenant, which fronts on a public street, faces a courtyard, pedestrian corridor
or walkway, parking lot or alley, where customer access to the business is
available.
   Business and Consumer Support Services.  Establishments primarily providing
consumers and businesses with services, including maintenance, repair and
service, testing, rental, as well as the following:
      Blueprinting;
      Business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see "Vehicle
Service - Maintenance/Repair");
      Computer-related services (rental, repair);
      Copying, quick printing, and blueprinting services;
      Equipment rental businesses within buildings;
      Film-processing laboratories;
      Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site;
      Household appliance and equipment repair services;
      Janitorial and maid services;
      Mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping);Photocopying and
photofinishing;
      Protective services (other than office-related);
      Window cleaning.
C.   Definitions, "C".
   California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). State law (Cal. Pub. Res. Code
§§ 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the
environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to
occur.
   Cannabis Related Activities.
      a.   Cannabis. Except as specified herein, all parts of the Cannabis
sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or
not: the seeds thereof: the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from
any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also
means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis.
"Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from
the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this
division, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by § 11018.5 of
the Cal. Health and Safety Code
      b.   Cultivation. Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
      c.   Delivery. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products
to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform.
      d.   Dispensing or Dispensary. Any activity involving the retail sale of
cannabis or cannabis products from a retailer.
      e.   Distribution. The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and
cannabis products between licensees.
      f.   Manufacturer. To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make
or prepare a cannabis product.
      g.   Marijuana. Means "cannabis," as that term is defined in this Title.
      h.   Retailer-Storefront. A commercial cannabis business facility where
cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis
products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail
sale to customers at an on-site fixed location, including an establishment that
also offers delivery of cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail
sale, in addition to on-site sales, and where the operator holds a valid
commercial cannabis business permit from the City of Culver City authorizing
the operation of a retailer, and a valid state license as required by state law
to operate a retailer.
      i.   Retailer-Delivery only. A commercial cannabis business facility
where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or
cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for
retail sale to customers, where the premises are closed to the public and sales
are conducted exclusively by delivery, where a vehicle is used to convey the
cannabis or cannabis products to the customer from a fixed location, and where
the operator holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the City of
Culver City authorizing the operation of a retailer, and a valid state license
as required by state law to operate a retailer.
      j.   Testing laboratory. A laboratory, facility, or entity in the state
that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both
of the following:
         i.   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all
other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state.
         ii.   Licensed by the State of California.
   Canopy Depth. The maximum perpendicular distance that a canopy projects away
from the building wall to which it is attached.
   Canopy, Nonstructural. See “Awning.”
   Canopy, Structural. An architectural feature that projects from, and is
totally supported by, the exterior wall of a building; provides protection from
the elements to pedestrians below, or to occupants within the building; is
usually positioned above a window or door; and is permanent, in that it is not
retractable and cannot be removed from the building without altering the
building structure.
   Canopy Width.  The maximum parallel distance that a canopy extends across
the building wall to which it is attached.
   Carport.  A roofed structure over a driveway or a parking area, the purpose
of which is to shelter a vehicle.
   Check Cashing. Check cashing is a primary business, other than a bank,
credit union, or other similar financial institution, that cashes, sells, and/
or processes checks, money orders, electronic money transfers, and other
financial documents for a fee.
   Child Day Care Facilities. Facilities that provide non-medical care and
supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours. These
facilities include the following, all of which are also required to be licensed
by the California State Department of Social Services.
      a.   Child Day Care Center.  Commercial or non-profit child day care
facilities designed, approved and licensed as a child care center with no
permanent resident. Includes infant centers, preschools, sick-child centers,
and school-age day care facilities. These may be operated in conjunction with
another related facility, or as an independent land use.
      b.   Large Family Day Care Home. A day care facility located in a
residence where a full-time resident provides care and supervision for seven to
14 children. Children under the age of ten years who reside in the home count
as children served by the day care facility.
      c.   Small Family Day Care Home. A day care facility located in a
residence where a full-time resident provides care and supervision for up to
eight children. Children under the age of ten years who reside in the home
count as children served by the day care facility.
   Clubs, Lodges and Private Meeting Halls.  See “Assembly.”
   Commercial Entertainment and Recreation.
      a.   Arcade.  Any premises containing four or more entertainment devices,
or any premises wherein 50% or more of the public floor area is devoted to
amusement devices, whether or not said devices constitute the primary use or
any accessory use of the premises. For purposes of this definition, Amusement
Device means any mechanical or electronic game, machine or equipment played or
used for amusement, which, when so played or used, involves skill, is activated
by coin, token or key, or for which the player or user pays money for the
privilege of playing or using. Three or fewer machines are not considered a
land use separate from the primary use of the site. Up to ten amusement devices
are permitted in conjunction with a multiplex movie theater complex without
being considered an arcade.
      b.   Event Center. A facility for public or private meetings, events, or
social gatherings, including union halls, meeting halls, country clubs, banquet
halls, and other event centers. Included in this classification is the use of
functionally related facilities for the use of members or event/banquet
attendees including, but not limited to, kitchens, multi-purpose rooms,
classrooms, and storage.
      c.   Indoor Commercial Recreation.  Establishments providing indoor
amusement/entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, or renting
space for private events. This includes, but is not limited to, ice skating and
roller skating, batting cages, pool and billiard rooms as primary uses, and
bowling alleys.
      d.   Outdoor Commercial Recreation. Facilities for various outdoor sports
or entertainment and types of recreation where a fee is charged for use, such
as amphitheaters, golf driving ranges separate from golf courses, miniature
golf courses, batting cages, swim and tennis clubs. Does not include parks and
playgrounds, which are defined separately.
      e.   Theaters.  Indoor facilities for public assembly and group
entertainment, other than sporting events, including civic theaters and
facilities for "live" theater and concerts, and motion picture theaters. Does
not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and
indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events; see "Public Recreational
Facilities."
   Commercial Kitchen. Preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off-
site consumption which may include provisions for on-site pickup, not including
ghost kitchens. A catering service ancillary to a primary restaurant use is
included under the definitions of "Restaurants."
   Common Interest Development.  Any residential condominium, community
apartment house, or stock cooperative.
   Community Garden. The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers, or vegetables,
including the cultivation and tillage of soil and the production, cultivation,
growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, floricultural, or horticultural
commodity, by several individuals or households.
   Condominium.  As defined by Cal. Civil Code § 1351, a development where
undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled with a
separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described
on a recorded final map or parcel map. The area within the boundaries may be
filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be
physically attached to any land except by easements for access and, if
necessary, support.
   Contractor's Storage Yard. Storage yards operated by, or on behalf of, a
State licensed contractor for storage of large equipment, or other materials
commonly used in the individual contractor's type of business.
   Construction Contractors. An office-type facility occupied by businesses
that provide professional contracting services. This use does not include
outdoor storage of equipment and materials.
   Cottage Food Operation. A cottage food operation means an enterprise where
an individual prepares or packages non-potentially hazardous foods in his or
her private home for sale to consumers and as it is defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 113758. The definitions set forth in Cal. Health and Safety Code
§ 113758 are hereby incorporated herein by reference, as they are now enacted
or hereafter amended.
   Covered. Any enclosed, semi-enclosed, or unenclosed building area that is
covered by a solid roof.
D.   Definitions, "D".
   Deferred Compliance. Extended period of time for a property owner to comply
with Municipal Code provisions as granted by the Municipal Code Appeals
Committee as established under Resolution No. 97-R067.
   Density.  The number of housing units per gross acre, unless otherwise
stated, for residential uses.
   Detached. Any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with
another structure.
   Development. Any construction activity or alteration of the landscape, its
terrain contour or vegetation, including the erection or alteration of
structures. New Development is any construction, or alteration of an existing
structure or land use, or establishment of a land use, after the effective date
of this Title.
   Development Agreement.  A contract between the City and an applicant for a
development project, in compliance with Chapter 17.590 of this Title and Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 65864 et seq. A development agreement is intended to provide
assurance to the applicant that an approved project may proceed, subject to the
policies, rules, regulations, and conditions of approval applicable to the
project at the time of approval, regardless of any changes to City policies,
rules, and regulations after project approval. In return, the City may be
assured that the applicant will provide infrastructure and/or pay fees required
by a new project.
   Development Standard. Site or construction conditions that apply to a
residential development project pursuant to any ordinance, general plan
element, specific plan, charter amendment, or other local condition, law,
policy, resolution, or regulation as per Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(o)(1) of the
State Density Bonus Law, including, but not limited to, height limitations,
setback requirements, onsite open-space requirements, design standards, or
parking ratios as stipulated by any ordinance, general plan element, specific
plan, charter, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or
regulation.
   Disability. The definition of Disability shall be consistent with Cal. Gov't
Code §§ 12900 through 12996 and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
   District. See “Zoning District.”
   Drive-in and Drive-thru Facilities. Retail or service facilities where
products or services are provided to motorists who remain in their vehicles.
These facilities include drive-thru fast-food restaurants, and drive-up bank
teller windows, dry cleaners, pharmacies, and the like. Does not include:
automatic teller machines (ATMs), automobile service stations, or car washes,
which are separately defined.
   Duplex. See “Two-Family Dwelling/Duplex.”
   Dwelling Unit. Any structure designed or used for the shelter or housing
that contains permanent provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation, occupied by or intended for one or more persons on a long-term
basis.
E.   Definitions, "E".
   Eating and Drinking Establishments.
      a.   Bars and Night Clubs. Businesses where alcoholic beverages are sold
for on-site consumption, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes
bars, taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is
subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May include entertainment
(e.g., live music and/or dancing, comedy, and the like). May also include
artisanal alcohol production that does not exceed 20% gross floor area unless
approved by Administrative Use Permit to exceed no more than 30% gross floor
area. Does not include Adult Businesses.
      b.   Beverage Tasting Facility. A beverage tasting facility means an
ancillary tasting of alcoholic beverage product associated with a food and
beverage manufacturing use or a general retail use when that general retail use
includes the sale of beer, wine, and distilled spirits for off-site
consumption. A beverage tasting facility cannot exceed 20% of the gross floor
area of the food and beverage manufacturing or general retail use to which it
is associated unless approved by administrative use permit to exceed no more
than 30% gross floor area.
      c.   Artisanal Alcohol Production. Manufacturing of alcoholic beverage
products ancillary to a table service restaurant. Artisanal alcohol production
cannot exceed 20% gross floor area of the table service restaurant to which it
is a part unless approved by Administrate Use Permit to exceed no more than 30%
gross floor area.
      d.   Restaurant, Outdoor Dining. Any group of tables and chairs, and its
authorized decorative and accessory features, situated and maintained in an
open or partially enclosed or screened area on public or private property for
use in connection with a restaurant for the consumption of food and beverage
sold on-site.
      e.   Restaurant, Table Service or Take Out.  A retail business selling
food and beverages prepared on the site, where customers are served food at
tables or from a walk-up ordering counter, for either on- or off-premise
consumption, which may include fast-food and take-out restaurants. A restaurant
with drive-up or drive-through service is instead included under the definition
of "Drive-in and Drive-Thru Facilities." These restaurants may also provide
live entertainment that is clearly secondary to table service. May also include
artisanal alcohol production, subject to the provisions of §
17.400.015 (Alcoholic Beverage Sales).
   Emergency Shelter.  Facilities providing temporary shelter with minimal
supportive services for homeless persons that are limited to occupancy of 180
days or less by a homeless person, persons, household, or family operated by a
public or non-profit agency. These accommodations may include temporary
lodging, meals, laundry facilities, bathing, counseling, and other basic
support services.
   Environmental Impact Report (EIR). An informational document used to assess
the physical characteristics of an area, and to determine what effects will
result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
F.   Definitions, "F".
   False Mansard. A sloped wall segment that is above or projects down and away
from a vertical wall of a building, and that is not a building roof, as defined
by the Uniform Building Code, but that gives the visual appearance of a
traditional mansard roof.
   Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a
reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social
and technological factors.
   Firearms Sales. A retail establishment engaged in the selling, transferring,
or leasing of firearms.
   Floor Area. Is considered the same as Gross Floor Area or Gross Square
Footage. Floor Area shall include all area within each level or floor of a
structure, measured from exterior wall finish, except as otherwise defined in
this Title. All space within each floor shall be counted towards the area for
that floor and shall include, but not be limited to hallways; lobbies;
stairways and elevators; mechanical or utility rooms; storage rooms; and
restrooms; but shall not include basements or subterranean parking. The
following specific features and structures shall also be counted towards floor
area:
      a.   Bay Windows. Bay window protrusions with flooring that is less than
12 inches above the top surface of the interior finished floor, and which are
unobstructed with permanent structures, shall be counted as floor area.
      b.   Residential Staircases. For residential structures, a staircase
shall be counted only once if the area underneath the stairs is not accessible
and not visible by way of solid walls encasing the area under the stairs.
   Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of floor
area to total lot area. The maximum floor area permitted on a site shall be
determined by multiplying the floor area ratio (FAR) by the total area of the
site (FAR x Site Area = Maximum Allowable Floor Area). Basement area shall not
be included in calculation of FAR.
   Floor Area, Single-Family Residential. In the R1 Zone, residential floor
area shall include any floor area, confined from exterior wall to exterior
wall, within the main dwelling unit, accessory structures, and garages, with
the exception that attached and detached accessory dwelling units and junior
accessory dwelling units shall not be counted towards FAR and garages located
in the rear one-half of the lot shall not be counted towards FAR. On a typical
lot type defined by
Figure 7-1 (Examples of Lot Types), the "rear one-half of the lot" shall be
defined as the area between the rear property line and the midline between the
front and rear yard property lines. On any lot type not represented in
Figure 7-1, the garage exemption from FAR shall be determined by the Director.
Interior areas with ceiling heights greater than 14 feet shall be counted twice
toward the floor area with the exception that the first 250 square feet of such
areas shall be counted only once towards the floor area.
G.   Definitions, "G".
   General Plan. The City of Culver City general plan, including all elements
thereof and all amendments thereto, as adopted by the City Council under the
provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65300 et seq., and referred to in this Title
as the "General Plan."
   Grade. The ground surface immediately adjacent to the exterior base of a
structure, typically used as the basis for measurement of the height of the
structure.
H.   Definitions, "H".
   Handcraft Industries. Establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small
products primarily by hand, including jewelry, pottery and other ceramics,
furniture, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products.
   Hazardous Materials/Wholesale Fuel Storage and Distribution. The storage of
hazardous materials including but not limited to pressurized gas, chemicals,
minerals and ores, petroleum or petroleum-based fuels, fireworks, and
explosives. Includes any establishment engaged in sale of petroleum/fuel
products, including storage, refinery, and recycling of biodiesel fuels that
may be serviced by pipeline, rail, or trucks. This land use does not include
the storage of small quantities of explosives or hazardous materials, as
customary in hardware, landscaping, or sporting goods stores, etc.
   Health/Fitness Facilities. Fitness centers, gymnasiums, health and athletic
clubs, including any of the following: indoor sauna, spa, tanning or hot tub
facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and other indoor
activities.
   Heliport. A facility for the takeoff and landing of helicopters. Also
includes support activities such as fueling and maintenance, storage,
communications equipment, buildings and structures, lights, and other equipment
and structures required by the United States Government and/or the State for
the safety of aircraft operations.
   Home Occupation. The conduct of a business within the business owner's
primary residence, with the business activity being subordinate to the
residential use of the property.
   Hotel or Motel. Facilities with guest rooms or suites, provided with or
without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging
(less than 30 days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior
walkway, and typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging;
for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, and the like.
Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also
includes accessory guest facilities, such as swimming pools, tennis courts,
indoor athletic/fitness facilities, and accessory retail uses. This use
includes bed and breakfasts. For stays of longer than 30 consecutive days up to
365 consecutive days, see "Hotel or Motel (Extended Stay)."
   Hotel or Motel (Extended Stay). Facilities with one or more guest rooms or
suites, provided with or without kitchen facilities, rented to general public
for long term lodging purposes of greater than 30 consecutive days but less
than 365 consecutive days; except that such facilities may be leased by
businesses for corporate use for periods of 365 consecutive days or greater, so
long as each guest room or suite is vacated by the guest within 365 days. Hotel
or Motel (Extended Stay) typically includes a variety of services in addition
to lodging, such as restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, and
similar traveler-related uses. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic/fitness facilities, and
accessory retail uses.
   Housing Development Project. A housing development project that meets the
following definition per Cal. Gov’t. Code § 65589.5(h)(2), as may be amended
from time to time:
      a.   Residential units only.
      b.   Mixed-use developments consisting of residential and nonresidential
uses with at least two-thirds of the square footage designated for residential
use.
      c.   Transitional housing or supportive housing.
I.   Definitions, "I".
   Individual With a Disability. The definition of an individual with a
disability shall be consistent with Cal. Gov't Code §§ 12900 through 12996 and
the regulations promulgated thereunder.
   Internet Café. A business where customers can use a computer with Internet
access for a fee, usually per hour or minute. It may also sell food and
beverages.
J.   Definitions, "J".
   No specialized terms beginning with the letter "J" are used at this time.
K.   Definitions, "K".
   Kitchen. Any room or space within a structure containing a combination of
the following facilities that are capable of being used for the cooking or
preparation of food: oven/microwave oven, stove, refrigerator exceeding six
cubic feet, and sink.
L.   Definitions, "L".
   Land Use Permit. Authority granted by the City to use a specified site for a
particular purpose, including but not limited to Administrative Use Permits,
Comprehensive Plans, Conditional Use Permits, Specific Plans, Variances and
planning clearances, as established by Article 5 (Land Use and Development
Permit Procedures) of this Title.
   Landscaping.
      a.   Hardscape. Constructed landscape elements, including items such as
colored or textured concrete pavers, wood decks, rockwork, masonry planters,
wood box planters, water features, walls and fences.
      b.   Hardscape Areas.  Areas including patios, decks, walkways and
paving.
      c.   Hydrozone.  A portion of the landscaped area having plants with
similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same
schedule.
      d.   Infiltration Rate. The rate of water entry into the soil expressed
as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
      e.   Landscaped Area.  The open space area (entire parcel less the
building footprint, driveway, and parking area) developed with ornamental plant
material, and hardscape. Water features are included in the calculation of the
landscaped area.
      f.   Landscaping. Ornamental live plant materials (trees, shrubs, vines,
groundcover or turf) in containers or at grade and decorative hardscape areas.
      g.   Overspray. Water delivered beyond the landscaped areas.
      h.   Parkway. Land area between street curb and sidewalk.
      i.   Plant Materials.  Trees, shrubs, vines ground cover, turf or any
other ornamental live plants.
      j.   Planted Area.  Areas including live ornamental plant materials
installed within open space landscaped areas.
      k.   Runoff.  Water that is not absorbed by the planted area to which it
is applied and flows from the area. For example, runoff may result from water
that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration
rate) or where there is a severe slope.
      l.   Street Trees. Trees planted within a public street right-of-way.
      m.   Turf.  A single-bladed grass or sod.
   Laundries and Dry Cleaning Plants. Service establishments engaged primarily
in high volume laundry and garment services, including: power laundries (family
and commercial); garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper
service; industrial laundries; carpet and upholstery cleaners. Does not include
laundromats or dry cleaning pick-up stores with limited dry cleaning equipment;
see "Personal Services."
   Libraries and Museums. Public or quasi-public facilities, including
aquariums, arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and
exhibits, libraries, museums, and planetariums, which are generally non-
commercial in nature.
   Live/Work Unit. An integrated housing unit and working space occupied and
utilized by a single household, in a structure that has been designed or
structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work
activity.
   Lot or Parcel. A recorded lot or parcel of real property under single
ownership, lawfully created as required by the Subdivision Map Act and City
ordinances, including this Title. Portions of a Lot or Parcel that are within
the public right-of-way and restricted by easement, or similar instrument, to
sidewalk, alley, or street uses shall not be considered a part of the Lot or
Parcel. Types of lots include the following.
      a.   Corner Lot.  A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than 135
degrees. If the intersection angle is more than 135 degrees, the lot is
considered an interior lot.
      b.   Flag Lot.  A lot having access from the building site to a public
street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee.
      c.   Interior Lot.  A lot abutting only one street.
      d.   Key Lot.  An interior lot, the side of which adjoins the rear
property line of a reverse corner lot.
      e.   Reverse Corner Lot. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot.
      f.   Through Lot. A lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets.
   Figure 7-1 Examples of Lot Types
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-40.jpg]
 
   Lot Area.
      a.   Gross Lot Area. The total horizontal area of a lot or parcel of land
inclusive of easements and future dedications where the owner of the property
does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land. Gross lot area
shall exclude any previous easements or dedications for a public street, right-
of-way, or alley. For State Density Bonus Law projects, see Cal. Gov’t Code §
65915.
      b.   Net Lot Area. The total horizontal area of a lot or parcel of land
exclusive of the following (see
Figure 7-2):
         i.   Proposed public facilities which include, but are not limited to
alleys, highways, streets, or other necessary public sites when included within
a proposed project; and
         ii.   Other public or private easements where the owner of the
property does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land.
   Figure 7-2 Lot Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e7a5445aa7221ed1fa2d2552cd3682bc8abac596/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.jpg]
 
   Lot Coverage.  See “Site Coverage.”
   Lot Depth. The average linear distance between the front and the rear lot
lines, or the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear line.
The Director shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration.
   Lot Frontage. The boundary of a lot adjacent to a public street right-of-
way.
   Lot Line or Property Line.  Any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot
lines are as follows.
      a.   Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the property line separating the
parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line with the
shortest frontage. (If the lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the
front lot line shall be determined by the Director.) On a through lot, both lot
lines are front lot lines, and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line.
      b.   Interior Lot Line. Any lot line not abutting a street.
      c.   Rear Lot Line. A property line that does not intersect the front lot
line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot
line.
      d.   Side Lot Line. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
      e.   Zero Lot Line. The location of a structure on a lot in such a manner
that one or more edges rests directly on a lot line.
   Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot
lines. The Lot Width of irregular shaped lots may be determined through a
Zoning Clearance.
   Low Barrier Navigation Center. A Housing First, low barrier, service-
enriched shelter focused on moving people into permanent housing that provides
temporary living facilities while case managers connect individuals
experiencing homelessness to income, public benefits, health services, shelter,
and housing.
M.   Definitions, "M".
   Manufacturing.
      a.   Chemical Product Manufacturing.  Manufacturing facilities that
produce or use basic chemicals, and other establishments creating products
predominantly by chemical processes. Facilities included in this definition
manufacture three general classes of products: (1) basic chemicals, such as
acids, alkalines, salts, and organic chemicals; (2) chemical products to be
used in further manufacture, such as synthetic fibers, plastic materials, dry
colors, and pigments; and (3) finished chemical products to be used for
ultimate consumption, such as drugs, cosmetics, and soaps; or to be used as
materials or supplies in other industries, such as paints, fertilizers, and
explosives; (4) cannabis manufacturer and cannabis cultivation. Also includes
sales and transportation establishments handling the chemicals described above
in other than one of the uses included in the Retail Trade group in the land
use and permit tables.
      b.   Clay and Pottery Products Manufacturing.  Manufacturing facilities
engaged primarily in producing, cutting, shaping, and finishing structural clay
products, including pipe, china plumbing fixtures, and vitreous china articles.
Artist/craftsman uses are included in "Handcraft Industries" and "Small-Scale
Products Manufacturing."
      c.   Construction Materials Manufacturing. Manufacturing, processing, and
sales involving concrete, plaster, lumber, paving and roofing materials as
defined below.
         i.   Concrete, Gypsum and Plaster Product Manufacturing. Manufacturing
establishments producing bulk concrete, concrete building block, brick, tile
and all types of precast and prefab concrete products. Also includes ready-mix
concrete batch plants, lime manufacturing, and manufacture of gypsum products,
such as plasterboard. A retail ready-mix concrete operation as an incidental
use in conjunction with a building materials outlet is defined under "Building
Material Stores."
         ii.   Lumber and Wood Product Manufacturing.  Manufacturing,
processing, and sales uses involving the milling of forest products to produce
rough and finished lumber and other wood materials for use in other
manufacturing, craft, or construction processes. Includes the following
processes and products:
            a.)   Containers, pallets and skids;
            b.)   Milling operations;
            c.)   Trusses and structural beams;
            d.)   Turning and shaping of wood products;
            e.)   Wholesaling of basic wood products;
            f.)   Wood product assembly.
         Craft-type shops are included in "Artisan Shops," and other wood and
cabinet shops are included under "Furniture and Fixture Manufacturing." The
indoor retail sale of building materials is included under "Building Material
Stores."
         iii.   Paving and Roofing Materials Manufacturing.  The manufacture of
various common paving and petroleum-based roofing materials, including bulk
asphalt, paving blocks made of asphalt, creosote wood and various compositions
of asphalt and tar.
      d.   Electronics and Equipment Manufacturing. Establishments engaged in
manufacturing machinery, apparatus, and supplies for the generation, storage,
transmission, transformation and use of electrical energy, including:
         i.   Appliances, such as stoves/ovens, refrigerators, freezers,
laundry equipment, fans, vacuum cleaners, sewing machines;
         ii.   Aviation instruments;
         iii.   Electronic components and accessories, and semiconductors,
integrated circuits, related devices;
         iv.   Electronic instruments, components and equipment such as
calculators and computers;
         v.   Electronic transmission and distribution equipment;
         vi.   Electrical welding apparatus;
         vii.   Industrial apparatus;
         viii.   Industrial controls;
         ix.   Instruments for measurement, testing, analysis and control,
associated sensors and accessories;
         x.   Lighting and wiring equipment such as lamps and fixtures, wiring
devices, vehicle lighting;
         xi.   Miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies, such
as batteries, X-ray apparatus and tubes, electro-medical and electrotherapeutic
apparatus, electrical equipment for internal combustion engines;
         xii.   Motors and generators;
         xiii.   Optical instruments and lenses;
         xiv.   Photographic equipment and supplies;
         xv.   Pre-recorded magnetic tape;
         xvi.   Radio and television receiving equipment, such as television
and radio sets, phonograph records and surgical, medical and dental
instruments, equipment, and supplies;
         xvii.   Surveying and drafting instruments;
         xviii.   Telephone and telegraph apparatus;
         xix.   Transformers, switch gears and switchboards.
         Does not include testing laboratories (soils, materials testing, and
the like) (see "Business Support Services") or research and development
facilities separate from manufacturing (see "Research and Development").
      e.   Fabric Product Manufacturing. Manufacturing facilities fabricating
clothing, draperies, and other similar products, and/or producing textiles and
leather products, which may include any of the following operations:
         i.   Coating, waterproofing, or otherwise treating fabric;
         ii.   Dying and finishing fiber, yarn, fabric and knit apparel;
         iii.   Manufacture of felt goods, lace goods, non-woven fabrics and
miscellaneous textiles;
         iv.   Manufacture of knit apparel and other finished products from
yarn;
         v.   Manufacturing of woven fabric, carpets and rugs from yarn;
         vi.   Preparation of fiber and subsequent manufacturing of yarn,
threads, braids, twine cordage;
         vii.   Upholstery manufacturing;
         viii.   Custom tailors and dressmakers not operating as factory and
not located on the site of a clothing store ("General Retail Stores") are
instead included under "Personal Services."
      f.   Food and Beverage Manufacturing. Manufacturing facilities producing
or processing foods and beverages for human consumption, and certain related
products. Includes:
         i.   Bakeries (non-retail);
         ii.   Bottling plants;
         iii.   Breweries;
         iv.   Candy, sugar and confectionary products manufacturing;
         v.   Coffee roasting;
         vi.   Ghost kitchens;
         vii.   Grain mill products and by-products;
         viii.   Miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products.
      g.   Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing.  Manufacturers producing: wood
and metal household furniture and appliances; bedsprings and mattresses; all
types of office furniture and public building furniture and partitions,
shelving, lockers and store furniture; and miscellaneous drapery hardware,
window blinds and shades.
      h.   Glass, Metal, and Plastics Product Manufacturing. Manufacturing
facilities: 1) producing flat glass and other glass products, which are
pressed, blown, or shaped from glass produced in the same establishment; 2)
assembling metal parts, including uses that produce metal duct work, tanks,
towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors and gates, and similar products;
and 3) producing finished plastic products, fiberglass, and rubber products,
such as tires, footwear, flooring, and other rubber products, from natural,
synthetic or reclaimed rubber.
      i.   Machinery Manufacturing. The manufacturing of machinery and
equipment used for the manufacturing of other products; as parts in the
assembly of other products; and for end-use purposes, including the following:
         i.   Constructive equipment;
         ii.   Laundry and dry cleaning;
         iii.   Die casting;
         iv.   Materials handling;
         v.   Engines and turbines;
         vi.   Oil field equipment;
         vii.   Farming and gardening;
         viii.   Passenger and freight elevators;
         ix.   Food products manufacturing;
         x.   Printing;
         xi.   Heating, ventilation, air conditioning;
         xii.   Refrigeration equipment;
         xiii.   Industrial trucks and tractors;
         xiv.   Textile manufacturing.
      j.   Motor Vehicle/Transportation Equipment Manufacturing. The
manufacturing of equipment for transporting people and goods, including
aircraft and other aerospace equipment, railroad equipment, motor vehicles and
auto parts, motorcycles, and bicycles.
      k.   Paper Product Manufacturing. The manufacture of paper and
paperboard, from both raw and recycled materials, and their conversion into
products such as paper bags, boxes, envelopes, wallpaper, and the like.
      l.   Small-scale Products Manufacturing. Manufacturing facilities not
classified in another major manufacturing group, including: musical
instruments; toys; sporting and athletic goods; pens, pencils, and other office
and artists' materials; buttons, costume novelties, miscellaneous notions;
brooms and brushes; and other miscellaneous products.
      m.   Stone and Cut Stone Products Manufacturing. Manufacturing facilities
engaged in cutting, shaping, and finishing granite, marble, limestone, slate,
and other stone for building and miscellaneous use.
   Media Production. Facilities for motion picture, television, video, sound,
computer, and other communications media production. These facilities include
the following types.
      a.   Backlots/Outdoor Facilities. Outdoor sets, backlots, and other
outdoor facilities, including supporting indoor workshops and craft shops.
      b.   Indoor Support Facilities. Administrative and technical production
support facilities, including administrative and production offices, post-
production facilities (editing and sound recording studios, foley stages, and
the like.), special effects and optical effects units, film laboratories, and
the like.
      c.   Soundstages.  Warehouse-type facilities providing space for the
construction and use of indoor sets, including supporting workshops and craft
shops. Does not include facilities using live audiences.
   Medical Services.
      a.   Offices/Clinics.  Facilities primarily engaged in furnishing
outpatient medical, mental health, surgical, dental and other personal health
services, including urgent care. Counseling services by other than medical
doctors or psychiatrists are included under "Offices."
      b.   Hospitals.  Hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in
providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including
surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized
medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete
health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory
retail uses and emergency heliports.
      c.   Labs.  Medical and dental laboratories.
   Metal Products Fabrication, Machine and Welding Shops.  Facilities engaged
primarily in the assembly of metal parts, including the following uses that
produce metal duct work, tanks, towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors
and gates, and similar products, including:
      a.   Blacksmith and welding shops;
      b.   Machine shops and boiler shops;
      c.   Sheet metal shops.
   Mezzanine/Loft. An intermediate or fractional floor area between the floor
and ceiling of a main story that is open to the floor below. A mezzanine/loft
floor area shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than one-third of
the area of the story directly underneath said mezzanine/loft area or the
floor-to-plate height of the mezzanine/loft area exceeds 14 feet.
   Mining/Resource Extraction. The on-site extraction of surface or subsurface
mineral products or natural resources. This use includes borrow pits, mining
operations, oil drilling or fracking, and uses incidental to mining operations
including structures necessary to the on-site production of mineral products or
natural resources.
   Mixed Use Project. Any development that contains a combination of
residential and non-residential uses within one building, or an integrated
group of buildings on one development site.
   Mobile Home.  A trailer, transportable in one or more sections, certified
under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act
of 1974, over eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, with or without a
permanent foundation. Does not include recreational vehicle, commercial coach
or factory-built housing. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included
under the definition of "Single-Family Dwellings".
   Mobile Home Park. Any site planned and improved to accommodate two or more
mobile homes used for residential purposes; or on which two or more mobile home
lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease; or were formerly held
out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative,
condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobile homes
used for residential purposes.
   Mortuaries and Funeral Homes. Funeral homes and parlors, where deceased are
prepared for burial or cremation, and funeral services may be conducted.
   Multiple-Family Dwellings. A building or a portion of a building containing
four or more separate residential dwelling units.
N.   Definitions, "N".
   Nonconforming Structure. A structure that was legally constructed and which
does not conform to current code provisions/standards prescribed for the zoning
district in which the structure is located.
   Nonconforming Use. A use of a structure (either conforming or nonconforming)
or land that was legally established and maintained prior to the adoption of
this Title, and which does not conform to current code provisions governing
allowable land uses for the zoning district in which the use is located.
O.   Definitions, "O".
   Offices. Offices include administrative/business, government, media
production/post-production, broadcasting and professional offices such as real
estate offices, travel agencies, advertising agencies, graphic design,
architecture and engineering services, attorneys, accounting services,
counseling services, and computer software production and programming, among
others. These do not include: medical offices (see "Medical Services - Offices/
Clinics"); or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business or
sales activity that is the primary use.
   Open Space, Common.  Areas of a developed site that are available for active
and/or passive recreational use by residents of a multiple-family residential
project.
   Open Space, Private.  An area of a developed site that directly accessible
from an individual dwelling unit, which is available for active and/or passive
recreational uses by the inhabitants of the dwelling unit, and which is open on
top or on at least one side.
   Ornamental Feature.  A statue, fountain, sculpture or any other similar
freestanding decorative element that does not provide shelter and is not a
sign, and which serves an aesthetic purpose.
   Outdoor Retail Sales and Display. The long-term placement of goods or
merchandise not located within an entirely enclosed building and without
screening or fencing. Ancillary to a primary use.
P.   Definitions, "P".
   Parking Facilities.  Service establishments in the business of storing
operative cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and other motor vehicles
for clients. Includes both day use and long-term public and commercial garages,
parking lots and structures, except when accessory to a primary use. (All
primary uses are considered to include any customer or public use off-street
parking required by this Title). Includes sites where vehicles are stored for
rental or leasing.
   Parks and Playgrounds. Public parks, play lots, playgrounds, and athletic
fields for non-commercial neighborhood or community use, including tennis
courts. If privately owned, the same facilities are included under the
definition of "Private Residential Recreation Facilities."
   Party Wall. A wall shared by two adjoining properties or buildings.
   Personal Services. Establishments providing non-medical services as a
primary use, including:
      a.   Clothing rental;
      b.   Psychics;
      c.   Dry cleaning pick-up stores with limited equipment;
      d.   Shoe repair shops;
      e.   Hair, nail, facial, and personal care;
      f.   Tailors;
      g.   Laundromats (self-service laundries);
      h.   Tanning Salons;
      i.   Massage therapy (licensed therapeutic);
      j.   Tattoo Parlors.
      These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to
the services provided.
   Planning Commission. The City of Culver City Planning Commission, appointed
by the City Council in compliance with Cal. Gov't Code § 65101, referred to
throughout this Title as the "Commission".
   Plant Nurseries. Any outdoor and/or indoor establishment primarily engaged
in the retail or wholesale sale of plants, trees, vegetation, shrubs, seeds,
bulbs, all of which may or may not be grown onsite or elsewhere. This
classification may include the retail or wholesale sale of plants and garden
products such as sod, garden tools, and pots. This use does not include
cannabis cultivation.
   Porte Cochere. A solid roofed structure that extends from and is attached
for a depth of no more than 16 feet to the entrance of a building over an
adjacent driveway, with no less than 7 feet of vertical clearance, the purpose
of which is to shelter a person entering or exiting a vehicle.
   Primary Structure.  A structure that accommodates the primary use of the
site.
   Primary Use.  The main purpose for which a site is permitted, developed and
occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site during most
of the hours when activities occur.
   Printing and Publishing.  Establishments engaged in printing by letterpress,
lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic) copying;
and other establishments serving the printing trade, such as bookbinding,
typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This use also
includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals;
establishments manufacturing business forms and binding devices. "Quick
printing" services are included in the definition of "Business and Consumer
Support Services."
   Private Residential Recreational Facilities. A privately-owned, non-
commercial recreation facility provided for a residential project or
neighborhood residents, including swimming pools and sport court facilities.
Does not include golf courses, country clubs, or private sport courts accessory
to single-family dwellings.
   Public Facilities.  All facilities and properties owned or operated by
Culver City municipal government. Includes public safety facilities operated by
the City or other public agencies, including fire stations, other fire
prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and
headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.
   Public Recreational and Cultural Facilities. Facilities owned and operated
by public agencies, including community centers, libraries, museums, outdoor
theatres and similar types of facilities.
   Public Utility Facilities. Fixed-base structures and facilities serving as
junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission level
to another, or to local distribution and service levels. These uses include any
of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit
requirements by Cal. Gov't Code § 53091:
      a.   Electrical substations and switching stations;
      b.   Natural gas regulating and distribution facilities;
      c.   Public water system wells, treatment plants and storage;
      d.   Telephone switching facilities;
      e.   Wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields.
      These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified
in "Offices").
Q.   Definitions, "Q".
   No definitions of terms beginning with the letter "Q" are used at this time.
R.   Definitions, "R".
   Reasonable Accommodations. Reasonable accommodation means providing an
individual with a disability, or developers of housing for individuals with
disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning regulations
or policies, including the modification or waiver of certain requirements when
necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.
   Recycling Facilities. Facilities open to the public for the collection or
processing of recyclable material, subject to certification under the
California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act, which include
the following types of facilities:
      a.   Incidental Small Collection Recycling Facility.  A use incidental to
a primary use of property, established for the acceptance of recyclable
materials from the public, and occupying less than 500 square feet. Incidental
small collection recycling facilities may include the following as defined in
this Chapter:
         i.   One or more single reverse vending machines in a grouping that
includes separate containers adjacent to each machine;
         ii.   Recyclable material containers that do not utilize power-driven
processing equipment.
      b.   Small Collection Recycling Facility.  A use subordinate to and
different from the main use of property, which subordinate use is established
for the acceptance of recyclable materials from the public, occupies an area no
larger than 1,200 square feet, and involves no permanent structures. Small
collection recycling facilities may include the following as defined in this
Chapter:
         i.   One or more bulk reverse vending machines;
         ii.   A mobile unit;
         iii.   Kiosk-type units.
      c.   Large Collection Recycling Facility.  A collection facility larger
than 1,200 square feet that is the main use of the property, and may include
permanent structures. The 1,200 square feet area shall be composed of the
cumulative total of all permitted recycling facilities on a site, lot or
parcel. The use is established for the acceptance and storage of recyclable
materials from the public.
      d.   Recyclable Material. Aluminum, glass, plastic, paper and other items
intended for remanufacture or reconstitution for reuse in an altered or renewed
form. Refuse or materials deemed hazardous by the Culver City Fire Chief are
expressly excluded from this definition.
      e.   Reverse Vending Machine.  An automated mechanical device that
accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers, and issues a
cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the
container's redemption value, as determined by State law. These vending
machines may accept aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and other
containers. A Bulk Reverse Vending Machine is a reverse vending machine larger
than 50 square feet, designed to accept more than one container at a time, that
issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container.
      f.   Mobile Recycling Unit.  An automobile, truck, trailer, or van used
for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other
containers.
      g.   Recycling Facility, Processing.  A building or enclosed space used
for the collection and processing of recyclable materials for efficient
shipment, or to an end user's specifications, through baling, briquetting,
compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding,
cleaning, remanufacturing and other methods.
   Research and Development. Indoor facilities for scientific research, and the
design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical
and mechanical components in advance of product manufacturing, which are not
associated with a manufacturing facility on the same site. Includes chemical
and biotechnology research and development, and cannabis testing laboratories.
Does not include computer software companies (see "Offices"), soils and other
materials testing laboratories (see "Business Support Services"), or medical
laboratories (see "Medical Services - Offices/Clinics").
   Residential Care Facility. Facilities providing 24-hour residential,
assisted living, social and personal care for children, the elderly, and people
with limited ability for self-care. Varying levels of care and supervision are
provided. Residential care facilities may include basic services and community
space. Includes: board and care homes; children's homes; orphanages;
rehabilitation centers; convalescent homes, nursing home and similar
facilities. Excludes emergency shelters, transitional housing, supportive
housing, and facilities for persons requiring surgical or other primary medical
treatment.
   Retail.
      a.   Artisan Shops.  Retail stores selling art glass, ceramics, jewelry,
and other handcrafted items, where the facility includes an area for the
crafting of the items being sold.
      b.   Building Material Stores. Retail establishments selling lumber and
other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors.
Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, tile, fixtures, nursery stock, lawn and
garden supplies. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even
if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Includes
incidental retail ready-mix concrete operations, except where excluded by a
specific zoning district. Establishments primarily selling electrical,
plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies to the trade are
classified in "Wholesaling and Distribution." Hardware stores are listed in the
definition of "General Retail Stores," even if they sell some building
materials.
      c.   Construction Equipment Sales.  Retail establishments selling or
renting heavy construction equipment, including cranes, earth-moving equipment,
heavy trucks, and the like.
      d.   Convenience Stores. Retail stores of 3,500 square feet or less in
gross floor area, which carry a range of merchandise oriented to convenience
and travelers' shopping needs. These stores may be part of a service station or
an independent facility.
      e.   Food Retail. A retail establishment that serves food and non-
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or for take-out, which is
distinguished from a restaurant as it is not capable of preparing or serving
full meals and does not include wait service. Includes bakeries, bagel shops,
donut shops, cookie and candy shops, juice stores, coffee and tea shops, ice
cream and yogurt shops, and other similar uses as determined by the Director.
      f.   General Retail Stores. Stores and shops selling lines of merchandise
not specifically listed under another use classification, including secondhand
stores (thrift retail stores), which are retail establishments that buy and
sell used products of the same type. Such types of stores and lines of
merchandise include:
         i.   Appliances;
         ii.   Florists and houseplant stores (indoor);
         iii.   Antiques;
         iv.   Furniture and home furnishing;
         v.   Art gallery;
         vi.   Grocery stores;
         vii.   Artists' supplies;
         viii.   Hardware;
         ix.   Auto parts (not including repair);
         x.   Bakeries (retail only);
         xi.   Hobby materials;
         xii.   Bicycles;
         xiii.   Jewelry;
         xiv.   Books;
         xv.   Luggage and leather goods;
         xvi.   Cameras and photographic supplies;
         xvii.   Musical instruments, parts and accessories;
         xviii.   Cannabis dispensary, retail-store front, and ancillary
delivery service;
         xix.   Clothing and accessories;
         xx.   Newsstands;
         xxi.   Collectable items sales;
         xxii.   Orthopedic supplies;
         xxiii.   Computer and computer equipment;
         xxiv.   Religious goods;
         xxv.   Consumer electronics;
         xxvi.   Small wares;
         xxvii.   Curio, gift and souvenir shops;
         xxviii.   Specialty shops;
         xxix.   Department stores;
         xxx.   Sporting goods and equipment;
         xxxi.   Stationery;
         xxxii.   Drugstores and pharmacies;
         xxxiii.   Dry goods;
         xxxiv.   Toys and games;
         xxxv.   Fabrics and sewing supplies;
         xxxvi.   Variety stores.
      g.   Pawn Shops.  Retail establishments that accept personal property as
collateral for loans, and offer the property for sale to the public.
      h.   Shopping Center.  A site occupied by a mix of commercial uses that
are primarily retail stores, but may also include personal service uses, eating
and drinking establishments, or other uses where the businesses share common
pedestrian and parking areas.
      i.   Warehouse Retail. A retail store emphasizing product lines other
than groceries, with a sales floor of 40,000 square feet or larger, that
typically package and sell products in large quantities or volumes, where
products are typically displayed in their original shipping containers. Sites
and buildings are usually large and industrial in character. Patrons may be
required to pay membership fees.
S.   Definitions, "S".
   Salvage and Wrecking. Any property used for the breaking up, dismantling,
sorting, storage, distribution, or sale of any scrap, waste material or junk.
   Schools. The uses in this category do not include pre-schools and child day
care facilities (see "Child Day Care Facilities"). See also the definition of
"Studios - Art, Dance, Music, Photography, etc." for smaller-scale facilities
offering specialized instruction. Schools includes:
      a.   Public Schools, Kindergarten to 12th Grade. A public institution of
learning for minors offering instruction in those courses of study required by
the California Education Code and maintained in compliance with the standards
set by the State Board of Education. This use includes pre-K, kindergarten,
elementary school, middle or junior high school, or senior high school.
      b.   Private Schools, Kindergarten to 12th Grade. A private institution
of learning for minors. This use includes private pre-K, kindergarten,
elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or
boarding schools.
      c.   Colleges, Universities, and Trade Schools. A public or private
institution of higher education providing curricula of a general or
professional nature. This classification includes Vocational/Trade schools,
Business/Secretarial schools, Military Academies, and Professional schools
(law, medicine, and the like).
   Senior Citizen Congregate Care Housing.  Residential developments reserved
for senior citizens but where common facilities are typically provided for
meals and recreation. The use includes independent living units and assisted
living units. This use may include supportive medical and non-medical services
directly affiliated with the treatment of on-site patients.
   Setback. The distance by which the wall of a structure, parking area or
other development feature must be separated from a lot line, other structure or
development feature, or street centerline. See also "Yard."
   Signs. See §
17.330.015 (Sign Definitions).
   Single-Family Dwellings.  A building designed for and/or occupied
exclusively by one household Also includes factory-built, modular housing
units, constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), and
mobile homes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations.
   Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Unit. A dwelling unit with a minimum floor area
of 200 square feet and a maximum floor area of 350 square feet. These dwelling
units shall have kitchen and bathroom facilities. Each dwelling unit is
restricted to occupancy by no more than two persons and is offered on a monthly
rental basis or longer.
   Site.  A parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single
control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use.
Portions of a Site that are within the public right-of-way and restricted by
easement, or similar instrument, to sidewalk, alley, or street uses shall not
be considered a part of the Site (except for calculations of Gross Lot Area and
Density).
   Site Coverage. The percentage of total site area occupied by structures and
paving for vehicle use. Structure/building coverage includes the primary
structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers,
storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, and the like) and architectural
features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches,
stairs, and the like). Structure/building coverage is measured from exterior
wall to exterior wall. Pavement coverage includes areas necessary for the
ingress, egress, outdoor parking, and circulation of motor vehicles.
   Special Event. A duly licensed and approved activity of limited duration
that is not directly related to an established business on the premises where
the event is held, such as a carnival or Christmas tree sales on a vacant or
unused lot, or a fund-raising activity of a nonprofit organization held on the
improved premises of an established business.
   Split Jurisdiction Lot. As used in this Section, shall mean a lot or parcel
where the City of Culver City and the boundary of another jurisdiction, such as
the City of Los Angeles, bisects the parcel or lot boundaries.
   State Density Bonus Law. Chapter 4.3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Cal.
Gov’t Code.
   Storage.
      a.   Warehouse Storage.  Facilities for the storage of furniture,
household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold
storage. Does not include personal storage facilities offered for rent or lease
to the general public. The storage of materials accessory and incidental to a
primary use is not considered a land use separate from the primary use.
      b.   Personal Storage Facility. A structure or group of structures
containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers
rented as individual storage spaces.
      c.   Outdoor Storage (Accessory). On-site at-grade or shelved space for
the storage of business-related materials, products, and goods. All on-site
storage is limited to those materials directly used or produced in relation to
the functional on-site business activity, subject to all storage and screening
requirements of this Title.
   Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling above.
   Street. A public thoroughfare accepted by the City, which affords principal
means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive,
lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare, except an alley as
defined in this Article.
   Street Line. The boundary between a street right-of-way and property.
Portions of a property that are within the public right-of-way and restricted
by easement, or similar instrument, to sidewalk, alley, or street uses shall
not be considered a part of the property (except for calculations of Gross Lot
Area and Density).
   Street Wall. The wall of a building facing the street or near the property
line. The street wall may include arcades, colonnades, recessed pedestrian
entrances, decorative stairs, public art, and other features deemed pedestrian-
oriented.
   Structural Alteration. Any construction or physical change in the supporting
members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. See
also "Alteration."
   Structure.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
attachment to the ground or attachment to something located on the ground. For
the purposes of this Title, the term "structure" includes "buildings."
   Studios - Art, Dance, Music, Photography, etc. Small-scale facilities,
typically accommodating students in no more than 3,000 square feet of
instructional area. These include facilities for: individual and group
instruction and training in the arts; performing arts and production rehearsal;
photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the
studio facilities; and fitness studio uses including, but not limited to,
educational tutoring and training, martial arts training, aerobics, yoga,
personal training, indoor cycling, pilates, and gymnastics, or a similar use as
determined by the Director. Larger facilities are included under the definition
of "Health/Fitness Facilities."
   Subdivision.  
      a.   The division of any improved or unimproved land, shown on the latest
equalized County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the
purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future. Property
shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads.
streets, utility easements, or railroad rights-of-way.
      b.   Subdivision shall also include all the following:
         i.   Any planned development, as defined in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code §
11003.
         ii.   Any community apartment project as defined by Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code § 11004.
         iii.   Any condominium project, as defined in Cal. Civil Code §§ 783
and 1351.
         iv.   Any stock cooperative as defined in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §
11003.2, including any legal or beneficial interests therein.
      c.   Any such developments shall be subject to any specific provisions of
this Chapter pertaining to such a subdivision: provided that, absent specific
provisions relating to such developments. any reference to a condominium
subdivision or condominium conversion in Chapter 15.10 (Subdivisions) and the
Zoning Code, as set forth in Title 17 of this Code, and the Subdivision Map Act
(Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66410 et seq.) shall be deemed to refer to any condominium
subdivision. condominium conversion, stock cooperative apartment, or community
apartment project.
      d.   Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or
public utility shall not be considered a division of land for the purpose of
computing the number of parcels.
   Subdivision Map Act, or Map Act. Division 2, Title 7 of the Cal. Gov't Code,
commencing with § 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those
provisions.
   Subterranean Parking.  A parking area fully below grade or partially below
grade, such that not more than three feet of the structure projects above
grade.
   Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is
occupied by the target population and that is linked to on-site or off-site
services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
and when possible, work in the community. Supportive Housing shall be
considered a residential use of the same type as other residential uses of the
same type in the same zone.
T.   Definitions, "T".
   Tandem Parking.  A parking space configuration where two or more parking
spaces are lined up behind each other.
   Target Population. Adults with low-income having one or more disabilities,
including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse or other chronic health
conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanternman
Developmental Disabilities Services Act, and may, among other populations,
include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the
foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans,
or homeless people.
   Telecommunications.
      a.   Antenna.  Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or
similar devices used for the transmission and/or reception of electromagnetic
radiation waves, including devices with active elements extending in any
direction, and directional parasitic arrays with elements attached to a
generally horizontal boom that may be mounted on a vertical support structure.
      b.   Building- or Roof-mounted Antenna.  An antenna mounted on the side
or top of a building or another structure (e.g., water tank, billboard, church
steeple, freestanding sign, and the like), where the entire weight of the
antenna is supported by the building, through the use of an approved framework
or other structural system attached to one or more structural members of the
roof or walls of the building.
      c.   Cellular.  An analog or digital wireless communication technology
based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites, each of which
contains antennas.
      d.   Cellular Mobile Radio Telephone Utility Facility (Facility).  A type
of remote communication installation that includes a grouping or series of
antennas that transmit, relay, and receive radio waves, together with equipment
functionally integrated into a communication system, located on a cell site
that is part of a network for transmission of telephone service.
      e.   Co-location. The locating of wireless communications equipment from
more one provider on a single ground-mounted, roof-mounted, or structure-
mounted facility.
      f.   Dish Antenna. A parabolic, dish-like antenna that transmits and/or
receives electromagnetic waves by line of sight.
      g.   Ground-Mounted Antenna. An antenna, the entire weight of which is
supported by a manufacturer- and/or installer-specified and City-approved
platform, framework, pole or other structural system; which system is
freestanding, affixed directly on or in the ground by a foundation, excluding
lateral bracing to a building.
      h.   Height. The vertical distance between the highest point of a dish
antenna, when actuated to its most vertical position and grade below for a
ground-mounted dish antenna, and to the roof below for a roof-mounted dish
antenna.
      i.   Monopole.  A structure composed of a single spire used to support
antennas and related equipment.
      j.   Primary Dish Antenna Facility.  A facility that is the primary use
of a site consisting of one or more dish antennas, the ancillary structures and
electronic equipment necessary to support or operate the antennas, and offices
for the business selling transmission services.
      k.   Reasonable Functional Use. The positioning of a dish antenna that
permits substantially unobstructed line of sight with geosynchronous orbiting
satellites, or microwave dish antennas, from or to which the dish antenna
receives or transmits electromagnetic waves.
      l.   Satellite Dish Antenna.  An antenna for the home, business or
institutional reception of television, data, and other telecommunications
broadcasts from orbiting satellites.
      m.   Telecommunications Facilities.  Public, commercial and private
electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and
receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, cellular
telephone, and data network communications; including commercial earth stations
for satellite-based communications. Includes antennas, towers, commercial
satellite dish antennas, conduit and equipment structures. Does not include
telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing
hard-wired or direct cable connections.
   Temporary Event.  A duly licensed and approved activity of limited duration,
directly related to an established business on the premises where the event is
held, such as the outdoor sales of Christmas trees by a supermarket, or a
weekend festive promotion for a business staged outdoors and providing
complimentary food, music, entertainment or similar attractions to entice
public attendance or participation.
   Townhouse.  A group of four or more attached single-family dwelling units
sharing a common wall with other single-family dwelling units on one or two
sides. Ownership of townhouses may be fee simple (separate lots) or
condominiums. May also be referred to as a townhome or rowhouse. Townhouses are
considered a multiple-family housing type in this Title.
   Transit Stations.  Passenger stations for vehicular and rail mass transit
systems; includes buses, taxis, railways, and the like.
   Transitional Housing. Temporary housing for at least six months for a
homeless individual or family transitioning to permanent housing. Housing can
take several forms including group housing or multi-family units and may
include supportive services to allow for necessary life skills in support of
independent living. Transitional housing shall be considered a residential use
of the same type as other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
   Triplex.  Attached residential structure under single ownership containing
three dwellings.
   Two-Family Dwelling/Duplex. One residential structure on a single lot
containing two dwelling units, each of which is functionally separate from the
other.
U.   Definitions, "U".
   Unit. See “Dwelling Unit.”
   Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged,
intended, occupied, or maintained.
V.   Definitions, "V".
   Variance. A discretionary entitlement that may waive or relax the
development standards of this Title, in compliance with
Chapter 17.550 (Variances and Administrative Modifications).
   Vehicle Sales/Rental.  The sales and rental of automobiles, trucks, vans,
and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and
retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This includes, but it is not
limited to, retail establishments selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks,
and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories,
incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: the sale of auto parts/
accessories separate from a vehicle dealership or bicycle and moped sales (see
"Retail - General Retail Stores").
   Vehicle Services. The repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, or
finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and other
vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale
of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This includes, but it is not limited to,
the following categories.
      a.   Accessories Installation. Minor facilities that specialize in the
addition of supplemental convenience items or devices to vehicles that do not
involve the primary operating system of a vehicle (such as motors or
transmissions) or structural features (such as body, chassis, or suspension).
These establishments provide installation of alarms, stereos, window tinting,
and the like.
      b.   Body/Paint.  Facilities that provide vehicle painting, body, frame,
and fender work indoors.
      c.   Car Washes.  Permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing
establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing
services. Temporary car washes are fund-raising activities, typically conducted
at a service station or other automotive-related business, where volunteers
wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is limited to one day. See
Chapter 17.520 (Temporary Use, Special Event and Temporary Event Permits).
      d.   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. A retail business that provides
charging facilities for electric vehicles. Does not include repair services
that are incidental to charging services (see "Fueling/Charging, Incidental
Repair"), the storage or repair of wrecked or abandoned vehicles (see "Salvage
and Wrecking"), vehicle painting, body or fender work (see "Vehicle Sales and
Services - Body/Paint"), or the rental of vehicle storage or parking spaces. A
convenience store (see "Retail - Convenience Store") on the same site as a
fueling station is considered a separate land use, and is separately defined.
      e.   Fueling Stations.  A retail business selling gasoline or other motor
vehicle fuels. Does not include repair services that are incidental to fuel
services (see "Fueling, Incidental Repair"), the storage or repair of wrecked
or abandoned vehicles (see "Salvage and Wrecking"), vehicle painting, body or
fender work (see "Vehicle Sales and Services - Body/Paint"), or the rental of
vehicle storage or parking spaces. A convenience store (see "Retail -
Convenience Store") on the same site as a fueling station is considered a
separate land use, and is separately defined.
      f.   Fueling/Charging, Incidental Repair. A retail business selling
gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels and/or providing charging facilities for
electric vehicles. This use includes repair services that are incidental to
fuel/charging services. A convenience store (see "Retail - Convenience Store")
on the same site as a fueling station is considered a separate land use, and is
separately defined.
      g.   Impounding/Storage. Facilities that provide impounding and storage
of towed or impounded vehicles. Does not include towing (see "Vehicle Services
- Towing").
      h.   Maintenance/Repair.  Repair facilities dealing with vehicles,
including the installation, replacement, tuning, or maintenance of the various
parts, equipment, or operating systems of a vehicle.
      i.   Towing.  Facilities that provide vehicle towing. Does not include
storage of towed or impounded vehicles (see "Vehicle Sales and Services -
Impounding/Storage").
W.   Definitions, "W".
   Warehousing and Distribution.  Facilities for the storage of furniture,
household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes terminal
facilities for handing freight and cold storage. Does not include: warehouse or
personal storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public
(see "Storage, Personal Storage Facilities"); and warehouse facilities in which
the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling and distribution (see
“Wholesaling and Distribution”).
   Wholesaling and Distribution.  Establishments engaged in selling merchandise
to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional
business users; to the trade; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or
brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or
companies. Includes such establishments as:
      a.   Agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants;
      b.   Assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative
marketing of farm products;   
      c.   Cannabis distribution;
      d.   Cannabis retail-delivery only;
      e.   Merchant wholesalers;
      f.   Stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air
conditioning supplies and equipment.
   Wing Wall. A wall that extends from an exterior building wall; is
architecturally integrated into the design of the building to which it is
attached, and has the effect of partially or entirely "fencing" an outdoor
area.
X.   Definitions, "X".
   No specialized terms beginning with the letter "X" are used at this time.
Y.   Definitions, "Y".
   Yard.  An area between a lot line and a setback, unobstructed and unoccupied
from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by this Title. See §
17.300.020 (Setback Regulations and Exceptions).
      a.   Front Yard. An area extending across the full width of the lot
between the front lot line and the required setback.
      b.   Rear Yard.  An area extending the full width of the lot between a
rear lot line and the required setback.
      c.   Side Yard. An area extending the full depth of the lot between the
nearest side lot line and the required setback.
Z.   Definitions, "Z".
   Zoning Code.  The Culver City Zoning Code, Title 17 of the Culver City
Municipal Code, referred to herein as "this Title".
   Zoning District. Any of the residential, mixed use, planned development,
special-purpose, or overlay districts established by
Article 2 of this Title (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses, and Zone-
Specific Standards), within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited,
and certain site planning and development standards are established (e.g.,
setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, and the like).
(Ord. No. 2005-007 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2006-009 § 21; Ord. No. 2013-004 § 2
(part); Ord. No. 2013-008 §§ 1, 3 (part); Ord. No. 2014-007 § 2 (part); Ord.
No. 2016-001 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2017-019 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2018-011 § 2
(part); Ord. No. 2019-003 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2020-012 § 2 (part); Ord. No.
2021-003 (part); Ord. No. 2021-012 § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2022-008; Ord. No.
2023-002, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2024-005, Exhibit A (part) Ord. No. 2024-
006; Ord. No. 2025-002, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2025-007, Exhibit A (part);
Ord. No. 2025-008, Exhibit A (part); Ord. No. 2025-010, Exhibit A (part))
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to 1965 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
Administrative Code
 
State Cite       Code Section
Part 2, Title 24 17.320.030
Title 8, § 5194 9.03.105
Title 24, Part 8 15.02.745
 
Business and Professions Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                                 Code Section
789.3                                                      15.09.340
1101.5                                                     15.09.315
1104.4(b), (d), (f)                                        15.09.210
1940(c)                                                    15.09.305
1940.2                                                     15.09.340
1941.1                                                     15.09.330
1946.2                                                     15.09.300
1946.2(c)                                                  15.09.315
1946.2(g)(1)(B)                                            15.09.300
1954                                                       15.09.315
Div. 2, Ch. 9 (§§ 4000 et seq.)                          11.16.005
                                                           11.07.005,
                                                           11.07.010,
4600 et seq.                                               11.07.020,
                                                           11.07.065,
                                                           11.07.095
5537                                                       15.02.115
6737.1                                                     15.02.115
Div. 3, Ch. 15 (§ 8700)                                   15.10.445,
                                                           15.10.645
8726                                                       15.10.015
8761(d)                                                    15.10.015
                                                           15.10.015,
8762                                                       15.10.960,
                                                           15.10.970
                                                           15.10.015,
11003                                                      15.10.755,
                                                           17.700.010
11003.1                                                    15.10.755
                                                           15.10.015,
11003.2                                                    15.10.755,
                                                           17.700.010
11003.4                                                    15.10.755
                                                           15.10.015,
11004                                                      15.10.755,
                                                           17.700.010
13470                                                      17.330.035
13530                                                      17.330.035
Division 8, Chapter 9, Article 6 (commencing with § 21660)11.18.020
23006                                                      13.03.025
23007                                                      13.03.025
23038                                                      11.01.005
23038.1                                                    11.01.005
26000 et seq.                                              11.32.020
26001                                                      11.17.025
26090(e)                                                   11.17.015
                                                           
 
Civil Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite Code Section
51         13.02.100
51 et seq. 13.02.105
685        15.10.945
           15.10.015,
783        15.10.755,
           17.700.010
798.23.5   15.13.010
798.35     15.13.010,
           15.13.035
799.24     11.34.015
799.29     15.13.010
817        15.10.945
827        15.09.220,
           15.09.225
829-834    15.02.105
1351       15.10.015,
           17.700.010
1714.1(b)  9.04.255
1722       11.21.305
1940       11.34.015
1940(c)    15.09.205
1942.5     15.09.035
1942.5(c)  15.09.030
1950.7     11.34.030
3480       17.210.015
4080       15.02.105,
           15.02.115
4100       9.11.205
 
Civil Procedure Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite      Code Section
1013a           3.10.070
1094.5          11.01.255,
                15.09.240
                11.07.100,
1094.6          11.13.225,
                11.17.140,
                15.09.240
1094.8          17.330.060
                11.34.015,
1161            11.34.020,
                11.34.045
1161(2)         15.09.315
1161(3)         15.09.315
1161(4)         15.09.315
1161.1          11.34.020,
                11.34.045
1162            15.09.310
1179.01 et seq. 15.09.370
1230.010        15.01.040
1280 et seq.    9.12.010,
                9.12.045
1284.2          9.12.050
1775 et seq.    9.12.010
2015.5          9.01.730
                
Code of Regulations
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                                   Code Section
Title 14, § 671                                             9.01.010
Title 14, Division 2, Chapter 4, Article 3, §§ 1775 and 17717.610.010
Title 14, Division 7                                         5.08.050
Title 14, § 17402(a)(11.5)                                  5.08.005
Title 14, § 17402(a)(26.6)                                  5.08.005
Title 14, §§ 17402(a)(30), (31)                            5.08.050
Title 14, § 17402.5(b)(4)                                   5.08.005
Title 14, §§ 17409.5.8(c)(2), (3)                          5.08.005
Title 14, § 17852(a)(10)                                    5.08.050
Title 14, § 17852(a)(12)                                    5.08.050
Title 14, §§ 17852(a)(24.5)(A)1 - 3                        5.08.050
Title 14, § 17855(a)(4)                                     5.08.005
Title 14, § 17896.2(a)(4)                                   5.08.005
Title 14, § 17896.5                                         5.08.005
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(13)                                  5.08.005
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(62)                                  5.08.005
Title 14, § 18815.5(d)                                      5.08.005
Title 14, § 18815.5(e)                                      5.08.005
Title 14, § 18815.5(f)                                      5.08.005
Title 14, § 18815.7                                         5.08.005
Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12                             5.08.005
Title 14, § 18981.2                                         5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(5)                                     5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(6)                                     5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(7)                                     5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(8)                                     5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(14.5)                                  5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(18)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(22)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(24)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(25)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(26)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(27)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(29)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(30)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(31.5)                                  5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(33)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(35)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(38)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(39)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(40)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(41)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(43)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(45)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(46)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(48)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(49)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(51)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(54)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(55)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(60)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(61)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(62)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(64)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(65)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(71)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(73)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(74)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982(a)(76)                                    5.08.005
Title 14, § 18982.2(a)(28)                                  5.08.005
Title 14, § 18983.1(b)                                      5.08.005
Title 14, §§ 18984.1(a), (b)                               5.08.005
Title 14, § 18984.8                                         5.08.015
Title 14, § 18984.9(b)                                      5.08.015
Title 14, § 18984.9(b)(3)                                   5.08.015
Title 14, § 18984.9(c)                                      5.08.010,
                                                             5.08.015
Title 14, § 18991.3(b)                                      5.08.025,
                                                             5.08.030
Title 14, § 18991.4                                         5.08.025
Title 14, § 18991.5(a)(1)                                   5.08.030
Title 14, § 18991.5(a)(2)                                   5.08.030
Title 14, § 18993.1                                         5.08.050
Title 14, § 18995.4                                         5.08.005
Title 14, § 18996.2                                         5.08.060
Title 22                                                     5.03.020
Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7                            5.08.005
Title 24                                                     15.02.410,
                                                             15.02.430
Title 24, Part 2                                             15.02.105
Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 11A and/or Chapter 11B             15.02.1120
Title 24, Part 2.5                                           15.02.115
Title 24, Part 3                                             15.02.120
Title 24, Part 4                                             15.02.125
Title 24, Part 5                                             15.02.130 ,
                                                             15.02.430
Title 24, Part 6                                             15.02.135
Title 24, Part 8                                             15.02.140,
                                                             15.02.505
Title 24, Part 10                                            15.02.145
Title 24, Part 11                                            5.08.040,
                                                             15.02.150
Title 25, § 6932                                            17.580.010
Title 27                                                     5.08.005
Title 27, Division 2                                         5.08.050
Constitution
State Cite Code Section
State Cite             Code Section
Art. X, § 2           5.03.010
Art. XI, § 2          15.10.015
                       3.07.300,
Art. XI, § 5          5.05.010,
                       11.17.010
                       5.03.010,
Art. XI, § 7          5.05.010,
                       11.17.010
Art. XIII              15.11.035
Art. XIII B            5.06.080
                       3.08.287,
Art. XIII C            3.12.005,
                       11.32.145
Art. XIII D            3.12.005
Art. XIII D, § 4(c)   3.12.015
Art. XIII D, § 4(e)   3.12.015
Art. XIII D, § 6(a)   3.12.015
Art. XIII D, § 6(a)(1)3.12.015
                       
 
Education Code
 
State Cite                                                              Code
                                                                        Section
Title 2, Division 4, Part 27, Chapter 9, Article 13 (commencing with § 5.08.025
49580)
 
Evidence Code
 
State Cite Code Section
1060       9.03.105
 
Fish and Game Code
 
State Cite                               Code Section
Div. 2, Ch. 10 (commencing with § 1900) 15.10.940,
                                         15.10.945
Div. 3, Ch. 1.5 (commencing with § 2050)15.10.940,
                                         15.10.945
Div. 3, Ch. 10 (commencing with § 2800) 15.10.940,
                                         15.10.945
12029                                    11.17.025
                                         
 
Food and Agricultural Code
 
State Cite                                          Code Section
Division 17, Chapter 10.5 (commencing with § 47000)11.18.020
 
Government Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                      Code Section
900 et seq.                                     3.10.005
905                                             3.10.005
910                                             3.10.030
911.2                                           3.10.020,
                                                11.01.235
912.4                                           3.08.275
935                                             3.08.275
935(e)                                          3.10.045
935.4                                           3.10.010
                                                3.10.050,
945.6                                           3.10.060,
                                                3.10.065
6020 et seq.                                    9.08.615
6061                                            15.01.050,
                                                15.01.070
6062                                            9.04.115
6066                                            5.02.040,
                                                15.01.050
6250 et seq.                                    5.08.055
Div. 7 (commencing with § 6584)                15.01.095
6700(a) - (l)                                   7.01.015
6701                                            7.01.015
7070                                            3.04.400
12419.10                                        9.04.140
12650 et seq.                                   11.21.240
12900 - 12996                                   17.700.010
12926                                           9.01.020
36516                                           3.01.005
37100.5                                         11.32.010
37101                                           11.32.010
38773                                           9.04.235
38773.1                                         9.04.115 ,
                                                9.04.235
                                                9.04.110 ,
38773.5                                         9.04.235,
                                                9.05.070
38773.7                                         9.04.125
40200 et seq.                                   15.06.310,
                                                15.10.765
                                                15.02.120,
                                                15.02.125,
                                                15.02.130,
50022.1 - 50022.8                               15.02.135,
                                                15.02.140,
                                                15.02.145,
                                                15.02.150,
                                                15.02.160
50022.2                                         15.02.105,
                                                15.02.115
50075 et seq.                                   5.06.015,
                                                5.06.020
50075.1                                         5.06.055
50075.3                                         5.06.055
51030 et seq.                                   11.07.005
51036                                           11.18.020
53060.4                                         15.09.265,
                                                15.09.365
                                                1.02.005,
                                                1.02.050,
53069.4                                         11.01.600,
                                                11.01.655,
                                                15.09.240
53069.5                                         9.04.250
35088 et seq.                                   11.21.240
53088(2)(q) - (r)                               11.21.240
53091                                           17.700.010
53312.7(a)                                      15.12.040
53326(a)                                        15.12.035
53326(b)                                        15.12.035
Title 5, Div. 2, Ch. 2.5, (§ 53311 et seq.)    15.12.025
Title 7, Div. 1, Ch. 4.3                        17.700.010
                                                3.08.210,
                                                3.08.257,
53750                                           15.01.045,
                                                15.01.055,
                                                15.01.060
53750(h)                                        3.08.287
53753                                           15.01.050,
                                                15.01.070
54950                                           3.04.405
54950 et seq.                                   15.02.105,
                                                15.11.095
54954.3                                         3.01.145
54956                                           15.02.105
54988                                           9.04.010 ,
                                                9.04.140
65101                                           17.700.010
65300 et seq.                                   17.700.010
65302                                           15.03.005
65350 et seq.                                   17.570.020
65356                                           17.570.020
65451                                           17.570.005
65453                                           17.570.025
65456                                           17.570.020,
                                                17.570.025
65560                                           15.03.005
Tit. 7, Div. 1, Ch. 3 (commencing with § 65580)15.10.945
65583.2(c)(3)(B)                                15.10.945
65589(d)                                        17.540.020
65589(j)(1)                                     17.540.020
65589.5(d)(2)                                   15.10.940,
                                                15.10.945
65589.5(h)(2)                                   17.580.010,
                                                17.700.010
65660                                           17.400.065
65662                                           17.400.065
65800 et seq.                                   17.100.015,
                                                17.200.015
65800                                           15.03.005
65850.5                                         15.02.115
65850.7                                         15.02.105,
                                                15.02.115
65852.2                                         17.400.095
65852.2(c) and (e)                              17.400.095
65852.2(g)                                      17.400.095
65852.6                                         15.10.940
65852.21                                        15.10.940
65852.21(a)                                     15.10.940
65852.22                                        17.400.095
65852.26                                        17.400.095
65852.28                                        15.10.015,
                                                15.10.945
65857                                           17.590.020
65863.7                                         15.13.010
65863.7(e)                                      15.13.040
65864 et seq.                                   17.700.100
65865.2                                         17.590.025
65866                                           17.590.050
65867                                           17.590.020
65867.5                                         17.590.020
65868                                           17.590.045
65868.5                                         17.590.030
65913.4.5                                       15.10.015,
                                                15.10.945
                                                17.580.005,
                                                17.580.010,
65915                                           17.580.015,
                                                17.580.020,
                                                17.580.035,
                                                17.700.010
65915 et seq.                                   17.580.005,
                                                17.580.045
65915(o)(1)                                     17.700.010
65915R                                          17.580.020
Chapter 4.3 (§§ 65915 - 65918)                17.580.015
65943                                           7.05.015
65962.5                                         15.10.940,
                                                15.10.945
66006                                           15.06.505
66310 - 66342                                   17.400.095
66314(d)(7)                                     17.400.095
66316                                           17.400.095
66317                                           17.400.095
66321                                        17.400.095
66321(b)(4)(A), (B), and (C)                    17.400.095
66323                                           17.400.095
66332                                           17.400.095
66333(c)                                        17.400.095
66340                                        17.400.095
66341                                           17.400.095
66355(a)                                        17.400.095
66355(b)                                        17.400.095
66355(c)                                        17.400.095
                                                15.10.015,
66410 et seq.                                   15.10.940,
                                                17.700.010
66411.7                                         15.10.015,
                                                15.10.940
66411.7(a)                                      15.10.940
66411.7(a)(1), (2), and (3)                     15.10.940
66412                                           15.10.060
66425 et seq.                                   15.10.605
66427.4                                         15.13.010
66436                                           15.10.960
66444 - 66450                                   15.10.940
66445                                           15.10.645
66450                                           15.10.645
66451.10 - 66451.24                             15.10.960
66452.6                                         15.10.275
66452.6(e)                                      15.10.275
66453.5(c)                                      15.10.275
66466(f)                                        15.10.420
66474.2                                         15.10.280
66477                                           15.10.750
66483                                           15.10.740
66499.11 et seq.                                15.10.450
66499.20.3                                      15.10.960
66499.34                                        15.10.980
66499.35                                        15.10.980
66499.41                                        15.10.015,
                                                15.10.945
66499.41(a)(4)(D)                               15.10.945
81000 et seq.                                   3.06.005
82007                                           3.06.010
82013                                           3.06.010
82015                                           3.06.010
82025                                           3.06.010
82031                                           3.06.010
82041.5                                         3.06.010
82047                                           3.06.010
Ch. 4, 84100 et seq.                            3.11.005
84305                                           3.06.035
84501                                           3.06.010
84506.5                                         3.06.035
85201                                           3.06.030
85201(c)                                        3.06.030
85311(b)                                        3.06.025
87200                                           3.11.010
87300                                           3.11.010
                                                
 
Health and Safety Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                          Code Section
1569.2                                              17.580.010
1596.76                                             11.17.025
                                                    11.17.025,
11018.5                                             11.32.020,
                                                    17.700.010
11353.1                                             11.17.025
11362.1 - 11362.45                                  11.17.025
11362.2                                             17.210.015
11362.3                                             9.10.055
11362.5                                             11.17.025
11362.7 et seq.                                     11.17.025
11362.7 - 11362.83                                  11.17.025
11362.7                                             11.17.025
11464.5                                             11.17.205,
                                                    11.17.210
11370.4                                             11.17.115
11379.8                                             11.17.115
118507                                              15.02.410
13113.7                                             15.09.315
Div. 12, Part 2.7 (§ 13800)                        15.01.025
Div. 20, Ch. 6.95                                   5.05.020
Div. 106, Part 2, Ch. 1 (§§ 123275 et seq.)       11.16.030
17920.3                                             9.04.015,
                                                    17.400.095
17926.1                                             15.09.315
17951                                               9.04.010 ,
                                                    9.04.140
17953                                               15.10.015
17980                                               9.04.125
18214                                               11.34.015
18218                                               15.13.010
Div. 13, Part 2.5 (§§ 18901 et seq.)              17.580.035
18908                                               15.02.710
18941.5                                             15.02.710
18950 et seq.                                       15.05.035
19955 et seq.                                       15.02.105
19957.5                                             15.02.105
Div. 24, Part 1.9                                   3.03.515
25115                                               9.03.105
25117                                               9.03.105
25135.1(d)                                          9.03.300
25135.7(c)(1)                                       9.03.300
25135.7(d)                                          9.03.310
25185                                               9.03.130
25185.5                                             9.03.130
25316                                               9.03.105
25356                                               15.10.940,
                                                    15.10.945
                                                    9.03.100,
25500 et seq.                                       9.03.150,
                                                    9.03.155
25501.1                                             9.03.105
25502                                               9.03.100
25508                                               9.03.140
25509                                               9.03.115
25509(a)(5)                                         9.03.130
                                                    9.03.105,
25511                                               9.03.125,
                                                    9.03.130
25517                                               9.03.150
25533                                               9.03.120
25534                                               9.03.120
26000 - 26211                                       11.17.025
26220 - 26231.2                                     11.17.025
39730.5 - 39730.8                                   5.08.005
40460 et seq.                                       7.05.105
42300                                               9.03.105
44223                                               7.05.100
44244.1                                             7.05.120
50052.5                                             17.580.075
50053                                               17.580.075
50072                                               15.09.320
                                                    3.08.400,
50079.5                                             15.09.225,
                                                    15.09.320
109925                                              11.17.025,
                                                    11.32.020
109935                                              11.17.025,
                                                    11.32.020
113758                                              17.210.015, 17.220.015,
                                                    17.700.010
113781                                              11.18.020
113783                                              5.08.005
113789                                              5.08.005
113841                                              5.08.005
113842                                              5.08.005
114079                                              5.08.025
Division 104, Part 9, Chapter 8 (commencing with § 5.08.005
114960)
Division 104, Part 14 (commencing with § 117600)   5.08.005
                                                    
 
Labor Code
 
State Cite                          Code Section
Div. 2, Part 7, Ch. 1, Articles 1-5 3.07.090
147.5                               11.17.025
 
Penal Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite        Code Section
186.22(f)         13.03.400
266(h)            11.07.040
266(i)            11.07.040
315               11.07.040
316               11.07.040
318               11.07.040
320               13.01.135
326.5             11.06.005
326.5(a)          11.06.005
330               13.01.130,
                  13.01.135
330a              13.01.130,
                  13.01.135
365               13.02.105
594               9.04.260
594(a)(1)         9.04.265
640.6             9.04.265
647               11.07.040
667.5(c)          11.17.115
830 et seq.       13.03.210
853.5 et seq.     1.01.060
1192.7(c)         11.17.115
1203.4            11.07.030
111005(b)(11)     11.17.110
13300(b)(11)      11.17.110
16850             13.03.200
17110   11.19.040
23635             13.03.200
23650   11.19.040
25250             13.03.215
26710             11.19.020
26815             11.19.040
26835             11.19.085
26885             11.19.040,
                  11.19.055
30363             11.19.040
30510             3.04.400
30515             3.04.400
32000             11.19.040
32310             11.19.040
 
Public Resources Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                                  Code Section
                                                            7.05.005,
21000 et seq.                                               11.13.210,
                                                            17.100.015,
                                                            17.700.010
21065                                                       5.05.020
21072                                                       15.10.945
21155                                                       17.580.010
40141                                                       5.08.005
40181                                                       5.08.005
40191                                                       5.08.005
40195.1                                                     5.08.050
41500                                                       5.08.005
41802                                                       5.08.005
Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 13.1 (commencing with § 42652)5.08.005
                                                            
 
Public Utilities Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite Code Section
799        3.08.290
5840(m)    11.21.480
5860       11.21.480
5870(n)    11.21.480
6354(e)    3.08.270
7901       11.26.020,
           11.26.040
           3.08.350,
21411      3.08.550,
           3.08.1050
           
 
Revenue and Taxation Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                         Code Section
107.6                              11.26.040
214.15                             15.10.940
401                                3.08.140
402.1(a)(11)(C)(ii)                15.10.940
421                                15.10.960
                                   3.08.540,
Div. 2, Part 1                     3.08.1040,
                                   3.08.1055
                                   3.08.120,
                                   3.08.335,
Div. 2, Part 1 (§§ 6001 et seq.) 3.08.340,
                                   3.08.355,
                                   3.08.535,
                                   3.08.1035
Div. 2, Part 1 (§§ 7200 et seq.) 11.16.005
                                   3.08.125,
6067                               3.08.545,
                                   3.08.1045
6203                               3.08.120,
                                   3.08.540
                                   3.08.135,
6366                               3.08.350,
                                   3.08.550,
                                   3.08.1050
                                   3.08.135,
6366.1                             3.08.350,
                                   3.08.550,
                                   3.08.1050
                                   3.08.120,
6701                               3.08.340,
                                   3.08.540,
                                   3.08.1040
                                   3.08.120,
6702                               3.08.340,
                                   3.08.540,
                                   3.08.1040
                                   3.08.120,
6711                               3.08.340,
                                   3.08.540,
                                   3.08.1040
                                   3.08.120,
6715                               3.08.340,
                                   3.08.540,
                                   3.08.1040
                                   3.08.120,
6737                               3.08.340,
                                   3.08.540,
                                   3.08.1040
                                   3.08.120,
6797                               3.08.340,
                                   3.08.540,
                                   3.08.1040
                                   3.08.120,
6828                               3.08.340,
                                   3.08.540,
                                   3.08.1040
                                   3.08.100,
                                   3.08.120,
Div. 2, Part 1.5 (§§ 7200 et seq.3.08.130,
                                   3.08.135,
                                   3.08.145
7202                               3.08.135
                                   3.08.510,
                                   3.08.535,
                                   3.08.550,
                                   3.08.555,
Div. 2, Part 1.6                   3.08.560,
                                   3.08.1035,
                                   3.08.1050,
                                   3.08.1055,
                                   3.08.1060
                                   3.08.310,
                                   3.08.335,
Div. 2, Part 1.6 (§§ 7251 et seq.3.08.350,
                                   3.08.355,
                                   3.08.1010
                                   3.08.245,
7284.6                             3.08.270,
                                   3.08.510
7284.7                             3.08.270
Div. 2, Part 1.7                   3.08.555,
                                   3.08.1055
                                   3.08.310,
Div. 2, Part 1.7 § 7285.9         3.08.355,
                                   3.08.510,
                                   3.08.1010
20501 et seq.                      5.06.050
20581 et seq.                      5.06.050
30001 et seq.                      3.08.960
31020                              11.17.025
34010 - 34021.5                    11.17.025
                                   
 
Streets and Highways Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite        Code Section
181 et seq.       3.07.200
Div. 4 (§ 2800)  15.01.025
                  15.01.025.,
Div. 4.5 (§ 3100)15.11.065,
                  15.11.105
3114              15.01.060
5115 et seq.      15.01.020
Div. 10, (§ 8500)15.01.095
8620              15.01.080
22000 et seq.     9.08.205
22553             15.01.070
 
Vehicle Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                        Code Section
260(a)                            7.02.200
670                               13.02.020
                                  3.08.350,
Div. 3, Ch. 1 (§ 4000 et seq.)   3.08.550,
                                  3.08.1050
5101.3                            7.03.700
5101.4                            7.03.700
5101.5                            7.03.700
5101.6                            7.03.700
5101.8                            7.03.700
                                  3.08.350,
Div. 3.5 (commencing with § 9840)3.08.550,
                                  3.08.1050
13202.6                           9.04.270
22507                             7.03.300
22651                             7.03.620
22651.05                          7.03.620
22650 et seq.                     9.05.015
22651                             7.03.620
22651(n)                          7.01.235
22651.05                          7.03.620
22660                             9.05.005
22850.5 - 22855                   7.03.620
22852                             7.03.620
27465                             11.10.310
35400                             7.02.300
35401                             7.02.300
35402                             7.02.300
35411                             7.02.300
35790                             15.13.010
                                  
 
Water Code
 
State Cite       Code Section
Div. 7 (§ 13000)15.10.265
13276            11.17.025
13373            5.05.020
 
Welfare and Institutions Code
 
State Cite              Code Section
602                     9.04.265
742.16                  9.04.265
8100                    11.19.035
8103                    11.19.035
Div. 8, Ch. 65 (§ 825517.400.065
 
REFERENCES TO 1965 CODE
1965 Code Section 2000 Code Section
1965 Code Section 2000 Code Section
1-1               1.01.005
1-2               1.01.010
1-2.1             1.01.015
1-3               1.01.020
1-4               1.01.025
1-5               1.01.030
1-6               1.03.005
1-7               1.03.005
1-8               1.03.010
1-9               1.03.010
1-10              1.01.035
1-10.1            1.01.040
1-10.2            1.01.045
1-10.3            1.01.050
1-10.4            1.01.055
1-11              1.01.060
2-1               3.01.100
2-1.A             3.01.005
2-3               3.01.020
2-6               3.01.110
2-7               3.01.115
2-8               3.01.120
2-9               3.01.125
2-10              3.01.130
2-11              3.01.135
2-12              3.01.140
2-13              3.01.145
2-14              3.01.145
2-15              3.01.150
2-17              3.01.160
2-18              3.01.160
2-19              3.02.010
2-20              3.02.010
2-21              3.02.015
2-22              3.02.015
2-25              3.02.020
2-26              3.02.025
2-27              3.02.005
2-28              3.05.005
2-29              3.05.010
2-30              3.05.015
2-31              3.05.020
2-32              3.05.020
2-33              3.05.025
2-34              3.05.030
2-35              3.05.035
2-36              3.05.040
2-37              3.05.045
2-38              3.05.050
2-39              3.05.055
2-43              3.05.060
2-45.5            3.05.070
2-46              3.05.200
2-47              3.05.205
2-48              3.05.210
2-49              3.05.215
2-52              3.05.300
2-86.1            15.07.005
2-86.2            15.07.010
2-86.3            15.07.015
2-86.4            15.07.015
2-86.5            15.07.020
2-86.6            15.07.025
2-86.7            15.07.030
2-86.8            15.07.035
2-86.9            15.07.040
2-87              3.07.200
2-88              3.07.205
2-90              3.07.205
2-91              3.07.205
2-95              3.02.030
2-100             3.10.005
2-101             3.10.010
2-102             3.10.015
2-103             3.10.020
2-104             3.10.025
2-105             3.10.030
2-106             3.10.035
2-107             3.10.040
2-108             3.10.040
2-109             3.10.045
2-110             3.10.050
2-111             3.10.055
2-112             3.10.060
2-113             3.10.065
2-114             3.10.070
2-115             3.10.075
2-116             3.10.080
2-117             3.06.005
2-118             3.06.010
2-119             3.06.015
2-120             3.06.020
2-121             3.06.025
2-122             3.06.030
2-123             3.06.035
2-124             3.06.040
2-125             3.06.045
2-126             3.06.050
2-127             3.06.055
2-128             3.06.055
2-129             3.06.055
2-140             3.07.300
3-1               9.06.100
3-2               9.06.105
3-3               9.06.110
3-4               9.06.115
3-5               9.06.120
3-6               9.06.125
3-8               9.06.135
3-9               9.06.140
3-10              9.06.145
3-11              9.06.150
3-12              9.06.155
3-13              9.06.160
3-16              9.06.170
3-20              11.09.200
3-21              11.09.205
3-22              11.09.210
3-23              11.09.215
5-12              9.10.055
6-13              11.09.300
6-14              11.09.305
6-15              11.09.310
6-16              11.09.315
6-17              11.09.320
6-18              11.09.325
6-19              11.09.330
6-20              11.09.335
6-21              11.09.340
6-22              11.09.345
8-27              7.04.250
8-33              7.04.405
8-34              7.04.410
9-150             15.03.010
9-150.5           15.03.015
9-151             15.03.020
9-151.5           15.03.025
9-152             15.03.030
9-152.5           15.03.035
9-153             15.03.040
9-153.5           15.03.045
9-154             15.03.050
9-154.5           15.03.055
9-155             15.03.060
9-155.5           15.03.065
9-156.5           15.03.080
9-157             15.03.085
9-157.5           15.03.090
10-1              11.06.100
10-2              11.06.105
10-3              11.06.110
10-4              11.06.115
10-5              11.06.120
10-6              11.06.125
10-7              11.06.130
10-8              11.06.135
10-9              11.06.140
10-10             11.06.145
10-11             11.06.145
10-12             11.06.145
10-13             11.06.145
10-14             11.06.145
10-15             11.06.145
10-16             11.06.145
11-1              11.05.005
11-2              11.05.010
11-3              11.05.015
11-4              11.05.020
11-5              11.05.025
11-6              11.05.030
11-7              11.05.035
11-8              11.05.040
11-9              11.05.045
11-11             11.05.050
11-12             11.05.055
11-14             11.05.060
11-17             11.05.065
11-18             11.05.075
12-1              3.09.005
12-2              3.09.010
12-3              3.09.015
12-4              3.09.015
12-5              3.09.020
12-6              3.09.020
12-7              3.09.025
12-8              3.09.030
12-9              3.09.035
12-10             3.09.040
16-1              9.03.005
16-8              9.03.100
16-9              9.03.105
16-10             9.03.110
16-11             9.03.115
16-12             9.03.120
16-13             9.03.125
16-14             9.03.130
16-15             9.03.135
16-16             9.03.140
16-17             9.03.145
16-18             9.03.150
16-19             9.03.155
16-20             9.03.160
16-21             9.03.165
16-24             9.03.300
16-25             9.03.305
16-26             9.03.305
16-27             9.03.310
17A-1             9.09.005
17A-2             9.09.010
17A-3             9.09.015
17A-4             9.09.020
17A-5             9.09.020
17A-6             9.09.025
17A-7             9.09.030
17A-8             9.09.035
17A-9             9.09.040
18-1 A. - D.      11.02.005
18-1 E.           11.02.015
18-2              11.02.020
18-3              11.02.025
18-4              11.02.100
18-5              11.02.105
18-6              11.02.110
18-7              11.02.115
18-8              11.02.120
18-9              11.02.125
18-10             11.02.130
18-11             11.02.135
18-12             11.02.140
18-13             11.02.145
18-14             11.02.150
18-15             11.02.155
18-16             11.02.160
19-10             11.01.005
19-11             11.01.005
19-12             11.01.005
19-13             11.01.005
19-14             11.01.005
19-14.1           11.01.005
19-15             11.01.005
19-16             11.01.010
19-17             11.01.015
19-18             11.01.020
19-19             11.01.025
19-20             11.01.030
19-21             11.01.200
19-22             11.01.205
19-23             11.01.035
19-24             11.01.040
19-25             11.01.045
19-26             11.01.050
19-27             11.01.055
19-28             11.01.210
19-29             11.01.215
19-30             11.01.220
19-31             11.01.225
19-33             11.01.065
19-34             11.01.230
19-35             11.01.070
19-37             11.01.075
19-38             11.01.235
19-39             11.01.240
19-40             11.01.080
19-41             11.01.085
19-42             11.01.245
19-43             11.01.245
19-44             11.01.245
19-45             11.01.300
19-46             11.01.300
19-47             11.01.305
19-48             11.01.310
19-49             11.01.315
19-50             11.01.255
19-52             11.01.320
19-53             11.01.325
19-54             11.01.330
19-55             11.01.335
19-56             11.01.340
19-57             11.01.340
19-58             11.01.345
19-59             11.01.350
19-60             11.01.355
19-61             11.01.360
19-62             11.01.365
19-63             11.01.370
19-66 A., B.      11.11.005
19-66 C.          11.11.010
19-66 D.          11.11.015
19-66 E.          11.11.020
19-66 F.          11.11.025
19-66 G.          11.11.030
19-68             11.01.090
19-68.1           11.01.090
20-1              13.03.100
20-2              13.03.105
20-3              13.03.110
20-4              13.03.115
20-5              13.03.120
20-6              13.03.125
20-7              13.03.130
20-8              13.03.135
20-9              13.03.140
20-10             13.03.145
20-11             13.03.150
21-1              7.01.005
21-1.1            7.01.010
21-1.2            7.01.015
21-2.1            7.01.100
21-2.2            7.01.105
21-2.3            7.01.110
21-2.4            7.01.115
21-2.5            7.01.120
21-2.6            7.01.125
21-2.7            7.01.130
21-2.8            7.01.135
21-2.9            7.01.135
21-3.1            7.01.200
21-3.2            7.01.205
21-3.3            7.01.210
21-3.4A           7.01.215
21-3.4B           7.01.220
21-3.5            7.01.225
21-3.6            7.01.230
21-3.7            7.01.230
21-3.8            7.01.235
21-3.9            7.01.240
21-4.1            7.01.300
21-4.2            7.01.305
21-4.3            7.01.310
21-4.4            7.01.315
21-4.5            7.01.320
21-4.6            7.01.325
21-4.7            7.01.330
21-4.8            7.01.335
21-5.1            7.01.335
21-5.2            7.02.010
21-6.1            7.02.015
21-6.2            7.02.020
21-6.3            7.02.025
21-7.1            7.02.030
21-8.1            7.02.035
21-9.4            7.02.040
21-9.5            7.02.050
21-10.1           7.02.055
21-10.2           7.02.055
21-10.3           7.02.060
21-11.1           7.02.065
21-12.1           7.02.345
21-13.1           7.03.200
21-13.2           7.03.205
21-13.3           7.03.210
21-13.4           7.03.215
21-13.5           7.03.220
21-13.6           7.03.225
21-13.7           7.03.230
21-13.8           7.03.235
21-13.9           7.03.235
21-13.10          7.03.235
21-13.11          7.03.240
21-13.12          7.03.245
21-13.13          7.03.250
21-14.1           7.03.010
21-14.2           7.03.015
21-14.3           7.03.020
21-14.4           7.03.025
21-14.5           7.03.030
21-14.6           7.03.035
21-14.7           7.03.040
21-14.8           7.03.045
21-15.1           7.03.400
21-15.2           7.03.405
21-15.3           7.03.410
21-15.4           7.03.415
21-15.5           7.03.420
21-16.1(a)        7.02.200
21-16.1(b)        7.02.205
21-16.1(c)        7.02.210
21-16.1(d)        7.02.215
21-16.1(e)        7.02.220
21-17.6           7.03.525
21-17.7           7.03.530
21-17.8           7.03.535
21-17.9           7.03.540
21-17.10          7.03.545
21-17.11          7.03.550
21-17.12          7.03.555
21-18.1           7.02.300
21-18.2           7.02.305
21-18.3           7.02.310
21-18.4           7.02.310
21-18.5           7.02.315
21-18.6           7.02.320
21-18.7           7.02.325
21-18.8           7.02.330
21-18.9           7.02.335
21-18.10          7.02.340
21-18.11          7.02.345
                  9.05.075,
22-1              9.06.025,
                  9.08.670,
                  11.09.440
22-10.1           9.04.200
22-10.2           9.04.205
22-10.3           9.04.210
22-10.4           9.04.215
22-10.5           9.04.220
22-10.6           9.04.225
22-10.7           9.04.230
22-10.8           9.04.235
22-10.9           9.04.240
22-10.10          9.04.245
22-10.11          9.04.250
22-10.12          9.04.255
22-10.13          9.04.260
22-10.14          9.04.265
22-10.15          9.04.270
22-15             9.05.005
22-16             9.05.010
22-17             9.05.015
22-18             9.05.015
22-19             9.05.025
22-20             9.05.030
22-21             9.05.035
22-22             9.05.040
22-23             9.05.045
22-24             9.05.050
22-25             9.05.050
22-26             9.05.055
22-27             9.05.060
22-28             9.05.065
22-29             9.05.070
22-30             9.08.600
22-31             9.08.605
22-32             9.08.610
22-33             9.08.615
22-34             9.08.620
22-35             9.08.625
22-36             9.08.630
22-37             9.08.635
22-38             9.08.640
22-39             9.08.645
22-40             9.08.650
22-41             9.08.650
22-42             9.08.655
22-43             9.08.660
22-44             9.08.655
22-45             9.08.675
22-70             11.09.400
22-71 A.          11.09.405
22-71 B.          11.09.410
22-71 C.          11.09.415
22-71 D.          11.09.420
22-71 E.          11.09.425
22-71 F.          11.09.430
22-71 G.          11.09.435
22-72             9.04.600,
                  9.06.005
22-73             9.04.605,
                  9.06.010
22-74             9.04.610,
                  9.06.015
22-75             9.06.020
23-1              13.02.005
23-2              13.02.010
23-3              13.02.100
23-3.01           13.02.105
23-4              13.02.110
23-4.01           13.02.115
23-4.02           13.02.120
23-5              13.03.005
23-6              13.03.010
23-7              13.01.005
23-8              13.01.005
23-13             13.01.100
23-14             13.01.105
23-15             13.01.110
23-16             13.01.115
23-17             13.01.120
23-18             13.01.125
23-19             13.01.130
23-20             13.01.135
23-20.A           11.06.005
23-24.1           11.13.005
23-24.2           11.13.010
23-24.3           11.13.015
23-24.4(A)        11.13.100
23-24.4(B)        11.13.105
23-24.4(D)        11.13.110
23-24.4(F)        11.13.115
23-24.4(G)        11.13.120
23-24.4(H)        11.13.125
23-24.4(I)        11.13.130
23-24.4(J)        11.13.135
23-24.4(K)        11.13.140
23-24.5           11.13.200
23-24.6           11.13.205
23-24.7           11.13.210
23-24.8           11.13.215
23-24.9           11.13.220
23-24.10          11.13.225
23-24.11          11.13.230
23-24.12          11.13.235
23-24.13          11.13.305
23-24.14          11.13.310
23-24.15          11.13.315
23-28             11.02.010
23-29             13.03.015
23-30             13.03.015
23-31             13.01.010
23-32             13.01.010
23-40             11.06.010
23-40             13.03.020
23-42             13.01.020
23-43             13.03.025
23-44.1           9.07.005
23-44.2           9.07.010
23-44.3           9.07.015
23-44.4           9.07.020
23-44.5           9.07.025
23-44.6           9.07.030
23-44.7           9.07.035
23-44.9           9.07.040
23-44.10          9.07.045
23-44.11          9.07.050
23-44.12          9.07.055
23-44.13          9.07.055
23-44.14          9.07.055
23-44.15          9.07.060
23-46             9.07.065
23-47             13.02.020
23-48             13.01.025
23-49             11.05.070
23-50             13.02.200
23-51             13.02.205
23-58             13.01.030
24-41             13.01.015
25-1              9.10.005
25-3              9.10.015
25-10             9.10.050
25-11             9.10.055
25-11.1           9.10.060
25-12             9.10.200
25-15             9.10.300
25-16             9.10.305
26-1              11.09.005
26-2              11.09.010
26-3              11.09.015
26-4              11.09.020
26-5              11.09.025
26-6              11.09.030
26-7              11.09.035
26-8              11.09.040
26-9              11.09.045
26-10             11.09.050
26-11             11.09.055
26-12             11.09.060
26-13             11.09.065
28-1              3.04.100
28-2              3.04.100
28-3              3.04.105
28-5              3.04.110
28-6              3.04.115
28-7              3.04.120
28-8              3.04.125
28-9              3.04.130
28-12             3.04.200
28-13             3.04.205
28-14             3.04.210
28-15             3.04.220
28-16             3.04.225
28-17             3.04.230
28-18             3.04.005
28-19             3.04.005
28-20             3.04.005
28-21             3.04.300
28-22             3.04.305
28-23             3.04.310
28-25             3.04.315
28B-1             15.08.005
28B-2             15.08.010
28B-3             15.08.015
28B-4.1           15.08.025
28B-5             15.08.030
28B-6             15.08.035
28B-7             15.08.040
29-1              5.02.005
29-2              5.02.020
29-3              5.02.025
29-4              5.02.030
29-5 A.           5.02.400
29-5 B.           5.02.405
29-5 C.           5.02.410
29-5 D.           5.02.415
29-5 E.           5.02.420
29-5 F.           5.02.425
29-6              5.02.035
29-7              5.02.040
29-10             5.02.200
29-11             5.02.205
29-12             5.02.210
29-13             5.02.215
29-14             5.02.220
29-15             5.02.225
29-16             5.02.230
29-17             5.02.235
29-18             5.02.240
29-19             5.02.245
29-20             5.02.250
29-21             5.02.255
29-22             5.02.260
29-23             5.02.265
29-24             5.02.270
29-25             5.02.275
29-26             5.02.280
29-27             5.02.285
29-28             5.02.290
29-29             5.02.295
29-30             5.02.300
29-31             5.02.305
29-38             5.03.020
29-39             5.03.030
29-40             5.03.055
29-41             5.03.060
32-1              15.09.005
32-2              15.09.010
32-3              15.09.015
32-4              15.09.020
32-5              15.09.020
32-6              15.09.025
32-7              15.09.030
32-8              15.09.035
32-9              15.09.040
32-10             15.09.045
33-1              3.08.100
33-2              3.08.105
33-3              3.08.110
33-4              3.08.115
33-5              3.08.120
33-6              3.08.120
33-7              3.08.125
33-8              3.08.130
33-9              3.08.135
33-10             3.08.140
33-11             3.08.145
33-12             3.08.150
33A-1             3.08.900
33A-2             3.08.905
33A-3             3.08.910
33A-4             3.08.915
33A-5             3.08.920
33A-6             3.08.925
33A-7             3.08.930
33A-8             3.08.935
33A-9             3.08.940
33A-10            3.08.945
33A-11            3.08.950
33A-12            3.08.955
33A-13            3.08.960
33B-1             3.08.200
33B-2             3.08.205
33B-3             3.08.210
33B-4             3.08.215
33B-5             3.08.220
33B-6             3.08.225
33B-8             3.08.235
33B-9             3.08.240
33B-10            3.08.245
33B-11            3.08.250
33B-12            3.08.255
33B-13            3.08.260
33B-14            3.08.265,
                  3.08.267
33B-15            3.08.270
33B-16            3.08.275
33B-17            3.08.280
33B-18            3.08.235
33D-1             3.08.400
33D-2             3.08.405
33D-3             3.08.410
33D-4             3.08.415
33D-5             3.08.420
33D-6             3.08.425
33D-7             3.08.430
33D-8             3.08.435
33D-9             3.08.440
33D-10            3.08.445
33D-11            3.08.450
33D-12            3.08.455
33D-13            3.08.460
33D-14            3.08.465
33D-15            3.08.470
33E-1             3.08.600
33E-2             3.08.605
33E-3             3.08.610
33E-4             3.08.615
33F-1             3.08.700
33G-1             3.08.005
33G-2             3.08.005
33G-3             3.08.005
33H-1             15.06.005
33H-2             15.06.010
33H-3             15.06.015
33H-4             15.06.020
33H-5             15.06.025
33H-6             15.06.030
33H-7             15.06.035
33H-8             15.06.040
33H-9             15.06.045
33H-10            15.06.050
33H-11            15.06.055
33H-40            15.06.300
33H-41            15.06.305
33H-42            15.06.310
33H-42.5          15.06.315
33H-43            15.06.320
33H-44            15.06.325
33H-45            15.06.330
33I-1             15.01.005
33I-2             15.01.010
33I-3             15.01.015
33I-4             15.01.020
33I-5             15.01.025
33I-6             15.01.030
33I-7             15.01.035
33I-8             15.01.040
33I-9             15.01.045
33I-10            15.01.050
33I-11            15.01.055
33I-12            15.01.060
33I-13            15.01.065
33I-14            15.01.070
33I-15            15.01.075
33I-16            15.01.080
33I-17            15.01.085
33I-18            15.01.090
33I-19            15.01.095
33I-20            15.01.100
33I-21            15.01.105
33J-1             3.08.800
33J-2             3.08.805
33J-3             3.08.810
33J-4             3.08.815
33J-5             3.08.820
33J-6             3.08.825
33K-1             7.05.100
33K-2             7.05.105
33K-3             7.05.110
33K-4             7.05.115
33K-5             7.05.120
34-1              11.10.005
34-2              11.10.010
34-3              11.10.015
34-4              11.10.020
34-5              11.10.025
34-6              11.10.030
34-7              11.10.035
34-7A             11.10.040
34-8              11.10.045
34-9              11.10.050
34-10             11.10.055
34-11             11.10.060
34-12(a)          11.10.300
34-12(b)          11.10.305
34-12(c)          11.10.310
34-12(d)          11.10.315
34-12(e)          11.10.320
34-12(f)          11.10.325
34-12(g)          11.10.330
34-13             11.10.065
34-15             11.10.070
35A-1             5.04.005
35A-2             5.04.010
35A-3             5.04.015
35A-4             5.04.020
35A-5             5.04.025
35A-6             5.04.030
35A-7             5.04.035
35A-8             5.04.040
35A-9             5.04.045
35A-10            5.04.050
35A-11            5.04.055
35A-12            5.04.060
35A-20            5.04.065
35A-31            5.04.070
35B-1             11.30.005
35B-2             11.30.010
35B-3(a)          11.30.100
35B-3(b)          11.30.105
35B-3(c)          11.30.110
35B-3(d)          11.30.115
35B-3(e)          11.30.120
35B-3(f)          11.30.125
35B-3(g)          11.30.130
35B-3(h)          11.30.135
35B-3(i)          11.30.140
35B-3(j)          11.30.145
35B-3(k)          11.30.150
35B-3(l)          11.30.155
35B-3(m)          11.30.160
35B-3(n)          11.30.165
35B-3(o)          11.30.170
35B-3(p)          11.30.175
35B-4(a)          11.30.300
35B-4(b)          11.30.305
35B-4(c)          11.30.310
35B-4(d)          11.30.315
35B-4(e)          11.30.320
35B-4(f)          11.30.325
35B-4(g)          11.30.330
35B-4(h)          11.30.335
35B-5(a)          11.30.400
35B-5(b)          11.30.405
35B-5(c)          11.30.410
35B-5(d)          11.30.415
35B-5(e)          11.30.420
35B-6(a)          11.30.500
35B-6(b)          11.30.505
35B-6(c)          11.30.510
35B-6(d)          11.30.515
35B-6(e)          11.30.520
35B-6(f)          11.30.525
35B-6(g)          11.30.530
35B-6(h)          11.30.535
35B-6(i)          11.30.540
35B-6(j)          11.30.545
35B-6(k)          11.30.550 -
                  11.30.560
35B-7             11.30.700
35B-8(a)          11.30.705
35B-8(b)          11.30.710
35B-8(c)          11.30.715
35B-8(d)          11.30.720
35B-8(e)          11.30.725
35B-8(f)          11.30.730
35B-8(g)          11.30.735
35B-8(h)          11.30.740
35B-8(i)          11.30.745
35B-8(j)          11.30.750
35B-8(k)          11.30.755
35B-8(l)          11.30.760
35B-9             11.30.900
35B-10            11.30.905
35B-11            11.30.910
35B-12            11.30.915
35B-13            11.30.920
35B-14(a)         11.30.925
35B-14(b)         11.30.930
35B-14(d)         11.30.935
35B-14(e)         11.30.940
35B-14(f)         11.30.945
38-1              15.05.005
38-2              15.05.010
38-3              15.05.015
38-4              15.05.020
38-5              15.05.025
38-6              15.05.030
38-7              15.05.035
38-8              15.05.040
38-9              15.05.045
38-10             15.05.050
38-11             15.05.055
38-12             15.05.060
39-1              7.05.005
39-2              7.05.010
39-3              7.05.015
39-4              7.05.020
39-5              7.05.025
39-6              7.05.030
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Code Section
Ord. No.             Code Section
CS-2 § 11           11.02.010
CS-2, Chapter IV     11.02.025
CS-24 § 2 (k)       13.01.100
CS-38                13.02.010
CS-49                11.06.145
CS-49 § 11.01       11.01.010
CS-49 § 11.02       11.01.015
CS-49 § 11.04       11.01.025
CS-49 § 11.07       11.01.205
CS-49 § 11.08       11.01.035
CS-49 § 11.09       11.01.040
CS-49 § 11.10       11.01.045
CS-49 § 11.11       11.01.055
CS-49 § 11.12       11.01.210
CS-49 § 11.13       11.01.220
CS-49 § 11.17       11.01.230
CS-49 § 11.18       11.01.070
CS-49 § 11.22       11.01.075
CS-49 § 11.23       11.01.235
CS-49 § 21.01       11.01.320
CS-49 § 21.02       11.01.325
CS-49 § 21.03       11.01.330
CS-49 § 21.04       11.01.335
CS-49 § 21.05       11.01.340
CS-49 § 21.06       11.01.350
CS-49 § 21.07       11.01.355,
                     11.01.360
CS-49 § 21.08       11.01.365
CS-49 § 31.01       11.01.005
CS-49 § 51.01       11.01.005
CS-49 § 71.03       11.01.005
CS-49 § 71.04       11.01.005
CS-49 § 71.05       11.01.005
CS-49 § 81.03       11.01.080
CS-49 § 81.04       11.01.085
CS-58 § 1           3.04.200
CS-58 § 2           3.04.205
CS-58 § 5           3.04.220
CS-58 § 6           3.04.230
CS-58 § 7           3.04.225
CS-84                3.02.010
CS-94 § 1           3.04.300
CS-94 § 2           3.04.310
CS-100 § 51         7.04.250
CS-100 § 72         7.04.405
CS-100 § 73         7.04.410
CS-120               13.01.105
CS-183               5.02.045
CS-188 §§ 1 - 5    3.07.205
CS-210               11.09.340
CS-225               13.03.150
CS-225 § 3          13.03.110
CS-225 § 4          13.03.105
CS-225 § 6          13.03.120
CS-225 § 8          13.03.135
CS-225 § 9          13.03.115
CS-225 § 11         13.03.140
CS-239               5.02.025
259 § 1             11.09.005
259 § 2             11.09.010
259 § 3             11.09.015 -
                     11.09.065
CS-275 Art. II § 1  13.02.100
CS-275, Art. II § 3 13.03.005
CS-275 Art. IV       13.03.010
CS-290               9.10.055
CS-290 Art. II § 1  9.10.005
CS-290 Art. II § 6  9.10.050
CS-290 Art. II § 7  9.10.055
CS-290 Art. II § 9  9.10.200
CS-306               5.01.105
CS-333 § 1          3.01.100
CS-333 § 4          3.01.110
CS-333 § 5          3.01.115
CS-333 § 8          3.01.120
CS-333 §§ 13, 14, 13.01.135
CS-333 § 16         3.01.140
CS-333 §§ 17, 18   3.01.145
CS-333 § 21         3.01.150
CS-333 § 23         3.01.130
CS-333 § 25         3.01.160
CS-353 § 1          3.05.005
CS-353 § 4          3.05.010
CS-353 § 5          3.05.015
CS-353 § 6          3.05.020
CS-353 §§ 6, 7     3.05.025
CS-353 § 8          3.05.030
CS-353 § 9          3.05.035
CS-353 § 10         3.05.040
CS-353 § 11         3.05.045
CS-353 § 12         3.05.050,
                     3.05.055
CS-353 § 16         3.05.060
379                  13.01.010
CS-385 § 1          3.02.025
CS-386 § 1          3.02.020
CS-405 § 1          9.10.055
CS-412               1.01.060
CS-432               13.02.005
436 § 2             3.07.200
436 § 3             3.07.200
453 §§ 1, 2        1.03.005
CS-457               3.04.005
CS-458               11.09.015 -
                     11.09.025
CS-459               13.03.015
460 § 1             9.08.005
460 § 2             9.08.010,
                     9.08.020
460 § 3             9.08.025
460 § 4             9.08.030
466                  11.09.005 -
                     11.09.065
CS-473               3.01.160
CS-473 §§ 1, 2     13.01.005
CS-488               11.06.145
CS-489 § 4          11.02.110
CS-498 § 2          11.02.100
CS-498 § 3          11.02.105
CS-498 § 5          11.02.115
CS-498 § 6          11.02.120
CS-498 § 7          11.02.125
CS-498 § 8          11.02.130
CS-498 § 9          11.02.135
CS-498 § 10         11.02.140
CS-498 § 11         11.02.145
CS-498 § 12         11.02.150
CS-498 § 13         11.02.155
CS-498 § 14         11.02.160
516                  5.02.030
CS-520 § 2          3.08.900
CS-520 § 3          3.08.905
CS-520 § 4          3.08.910
CS-520 § 5          3.08.915
CS-520 § 6          3.08.920
CS-520 § 7          3.08.925
CS-520 § 8          3.08.930
CS-520 § 9          3.08.935
CS-520 § 10         3.08.940
CS-520 § 11         3.08.945
CS-520 § 12         3.08.950
CS-520 § 13         3.08.955
521 § 1             13.01.110
521 § 2             13.01.115
521 § 3             13.01.120
523 § 1             13.01.125
523 § 8             13.01.135
528 §§ 1, 2        1.03.010
CS-529               9.08.435
CS-534               3.02.005
CS-535               5.02.400 -
                     5.02.425
CS-536               13.03.125,
                     13.03.130
CS-538               3.04.315
CS-544               3.02.015
CS-548               11.06.010,
                     13.03.020
558 § 1             9.08.105
558 §§ 2, 8        9.08.110
558 § 3, 4, 6, 10   9.08.125
558 § 5             9.08.130
558 § 7             9.08.145
558 § 9             9.08.150,
                     9.08.155
558 § 10            9.08.120
558 § 11            9.08.135
558 § 12            9.08.140
558 § 13            9.08.160,
                     9.08.165
CS-559               13.01.130
CS-566 § 1          3.08.905
CS-570 § 1 (part)   9.09.005 -
                     9.09.040
CS-572 § 1          11.01.005
CS-572 § 2          11.01.070
CS-579 § 1          3.08.960
CS-591 § 1          11.02.105
609                  3.07.205
CS-612 § 1          5.04.005
CS-612 § 2          5.04.010
CS-612 § 3          5.04.015
CS-612 § 4          5.04.020
CS-612 § 5          5.04.025
CS-612 § 6          5.04.030
CS-612 § 7          5.04.035
CS-612 § 8          5.04.040
CS-612 § 9          5.04.045
CS-612 § 10         5.04.050
CS-612 § 11         5.04.055
CS-612 § 12         5.04.060
613 § 4             9.08.015
CS-621 § 1 (part)   3.08.200 - 3.08.225, 3.08.235 - 3.08.280
CS-627 § 1(part)    13.01.015,
                     13.01.020
CS-635 § 1          13.03.025
CS-639 § 1          7.04.250
CS-649 §§ 1-3      13.02.020
CS-653 § 2 (part)   9.07.065
CS-655 § 1          11.01.005
CS-655 § 2          11.01.005
655 § 3             11.01.005
CS-655 § 4          11.01.025
CS-655 § 5          11.01.030
CS-655 § 6          11.01.200
CS-666 § 1(1)       5.02.200
CS-666 § 1(2)       5.02.205
CS-666 § 1(3)       5.02.210
CS-666 § 1(4)       5.02.215
CS-666 § 1(6)       5.02.225
CS-666 § 1(7)       5.02.230
CS-666 § 1(8)       5.02.235
CS-666 § 1(9)       5.02.240
CS-666 § 1(10)      5.02.245
CS-666 § 1(11)      5.02.250
CS-666 § 1(12)      5.02.255
CS-666 § 1(13)      5.02.260
CS-666 § 1(14)      5.02.265
CS-666 § 1(15)      5.02.270
CS-666 § 1(16)      5.02.275
CS-666 § 1(17)      5.02.280
CS-666 § 1(18)      5.02.285
CS-666 § 1(19)      5.02.290
CS-666 § 1(20)      5.02.295
CS-666 § 1(21)      5.02.300
CS-668 § 7          11.01.215
CS-668 § 8          11.01.225
CS-668 § 10         11.01.065
CS-671 § 1          3.08.235
CS-674 § 1          5.04.065
CS-675 § 1          13.01.025
CS-688 § 1          3.01.100
CS-694 § 1          3.02.005
CS-695 § 1          11.02.105
CS-696 § 1 (part)   3.09.005 -
                     3.09.040
CS-700 § 3          11.01.005
CS-700 §§ 1 and 2  11.01.005
CS-700 § 4          11.01.230
CS-714 § 1-2        11.01.005
CS-719 § 1          5.02.305
CS-723 § 2          3.01.005
CS-727 § 1          3.08.235
CS-733 § 1          11.05.070
CS-736 § 1 (part)   9.08.500 -
                     9.08.520
CS-736 § 2          9.08.525
CS-748 § 1(1)       15.08.005
CS-748 § 1(2)       15.08.010
CS-748 § 1(3)       15.08.015
CS-748 § 1(5)       15.08.030
CS-748 § 1(6)       15.08.035
CS-748 § 1(7)       15.08.040
CS-749 § 1          3.01.125
CS-757 § 1 (1)      3.01.100
CS-763 § 1          9.05.005 -
                     9.05.070
CS-770 § 1          3.04.210
CS-771 § 1          3.08.235
CS-776 § 1          5.02.220
CS-782 § 1 (part)   3.08.600 -
                     3.08.615
CS-788 § 1 (part)   11.06.145
CS-790 § 2 (part)   3.08.100 -
                     3.08.145
CS-795 § 1          5.04.070
CS-797 § 1          3.08.150
CS-807 § 1 (part)   9.08.600,
                     9.08.605
CS-809 § 3          9.08.510
CS-812 § 1          3.08.235
CS-818 § 1          5.04.070
CS-820 § 1          3.08.235
CS-825 § 1 (part)   11.09.400 -
                     11.09.435
CS-826 § 3          9.03.005
CS-828 § 1          11.02.105
CS-829 § 1          3.08.210
CS-829 § 2          3.08.215
CS-829 § 3          3.08.220
CS-830 §§ 1, 2     3.08.225
CS-831 § 1          9.09.020
CS-852 § 1 (part)   11.01.005,
                     11.01.200
CS-855 § 1 (part)   15.07.005 -
                     15.07.040
CS-869 § 1          11.11.005 -
                     11.11.030
CS-870 § 1          11.06.005
CS-879 § 1          3.08.235
CS-880 § 1          3.08.240
CS-887 § 1          3.08.235
CS-895 § 1          13.02.100
CS-899 § 1          1.01.060
CS-900 § 1          11.01.005
CS-900 § 2          11.01.220
CS-900 § 3          11.01.235
CS-901 § 1          3.02.030
CS-908 § 1          5.04.065
CS-909 § 1          11.01.210
CS-909 § 2          11.01.220
CS-910 § 1          3.05.015
CS-921 § 1 (part)   3.08.400 -
                     3.08.470
CS-928 § 1          11.02.105
CS-933 § 1(A, B, C) 3.08.005
CS-934 § 1          3.08.700
943 § 1 (part)      3.04.110,
                     3.04.130
CS-944 § 1 (part)   15.03.095
                     15.08.005 -
CS-945 § 1 (part)   15.08.015,
                     15.08.030 -
                     15.08.040
CS-948               13.02.200
968 § 1             3.08.225
CS-968 § 2          3.08.700
CS-969 § 1          5.02.400 -
                     5.02.425
CS-970 § 1          3.04.300
CS-973 § 1          9.10.015 ,
                     9.10.055
CS-978 § 1          5.02.035
CS-980 § 1          3.01.005
                     13.02.100,
CS-991 § 1          13.02.110 -
                     13.02.120
CS-993 § 1          5.02.040
CS-998 § 1 (part)   9.08.600,
                     9.08.605
CS-1006 § 1         9.10.055
CS-1006 § 2         9.10.060
CS-1016 § 1         11.01.240
CS-1020 § 1         11.06.005
83-0004 § 1         3.01.005
83-0010 § 2         11.01.005
83-019 § 1          11.01.005
                     11.10.005 -
                     11.10.035,
83-020 § 1          11.10.045 -
                     11.10.065,
                     11.10.300 -
                     11.10.330
83-021 § 1          15.06.005 -
                     15.06.055
83-022 § 1          11.02.105
                     7.01.005 -
                     7.01.015,
                     7.01.100 -
                     7.01.135,
                     7.01.200 -
                     7.01.240,
                     7.01.300 -
                     7.01.335,
                     7.02.010 -
                     7.02.040,
                     7.02.050 -
83-027 § 1          7.02.065,
                     7.02.200 -
                     7.02.220,
                     7.02.345,
                     7.03.010 -
                     7.03.045,
                     7.03.200 -
                     7.03.245,
                     7.03.400 -
                     7.03.420,
                     7.03.525 -
                     7.03.555
83-031 § 1          11.10.055
83-031 §§ 2-3      11.10.300 -
                     11.10.330
83-031 § 4          11.10.070
83-032 §§ 1 - 4    3.08.135
84-001 § 1          13.02.020
84-003 § 1          11.10.300 -
                     11.10.330
84-004 § 1          11.09.200
84-011 § 1          3.08.210
84-011 § 2          3.08.215
84-011 § 3          3.08.220
84-011 § 4          3.08.225
                     9.06.100 -
84-012 § 2          9.06.125,
                     9.06.135 -
                     9.06.170
84-013 § 1          3.02.005
84-018 § 1          11.05.005
84-018 § 2          11.05.010
84-018 § 3          11.05.015
84-018 § 4          11.05.035
84-018 § 5          11.05.045
84-018 § 6          11.05.055
84-018 § 7          11.05.060
84-018 § 8          11.05.065
84-018 § 9          11.05.075
84-018 § 11         11.05.020
84-018 § 12         11.05.050
84-018 § 13         11.05.070
84-020 § 1          3.05.200 -
                     3.05.215
84-022 § 1          7.01.230
84-023 § 1          9.08.045
84-025 § 1          15.08.020,
                     15.08.025
84-026 § 1          11.01.005
84-029 § 1          3.05.060
84-035 § 1          9.06.110
85-001 § 1          7.03.250
85-002 § 1          3.01.005
85-004 § 1          7.02.300 -
                     7.02.345
85-010 § 1          1.01.015
85-012 § 1          3.10.005 -
                     3.10.080
85-016 § 1          3.01.005
85-017 § 1, 2       11.09.215
85-018 § 1          1.01.035 -
                     1.01.055
86-004 § 1          3.08.235
86-008 § 1          3.02.005
86-019 § 1          11.01.205
86-024 § 1          7.01.335
86-027 § 1          11.09.345
87-001 § 1          11.01.245
87-002 § 1          11.01.305,
                     11.01.310
87-002 § 2          11.01.300
87-003 § 1          11.01.050
87-004 § 1          3.01.005
87-007 § 1          3.01.115
87-010 § 1          15.09.005 -
                     15.09.045
                     15.01.005 -
87-012 § 1          15.01.020,
                     15.01.030 -
                     15.01.105
87-016 § 1          15.07.020
87-016 § 2          15.07.025
87-016 § 3          15.07.030
87-016 § 4          15.07.035
87-016 § 5          15.07.040
87-018 § 1          11.02.105
87-019 § 1          13.03.025
                     11.30.005,
                     11.30.010,
                     11.30.100 -
                     11.30.175,
                     11.30.300 -
                     11.30.335,
87-021 § 1          11.30.400 -
                     11.30.420,
                     11.30.500 -
                     11.30.560,
                     11.30.700 -
                     11.30.760,
                     11.30.900 -
                     11.30.945
87-026 § 1          15.03.095
87-031 § 1          7.03.220
87-035 § 1          11.01.315
                     11.01.005,
                     11.01.025,
                     11.01.045,
                     11.01.065,
                     11.01.080,
88-009 § 1          11.01.085,
                     11.01.210,
                     11.01.215,
                     11.01.225,
                     11.01.235,
                     11.01.325 -
                     11.01.335
88-013 § 1          3.08.210
88-014 § 1          9.03.005
88-014 § 2          9.03.100 -
                     9.03.160
88-015 § 1          11.02.105
88-016 § 1          11.01.245
                     15.06.100 -
                     15.06.115,
88-019 § 2          15.06.125,
                     15.06.130,
                     15.06.140 -
                     15.06.155
88-023 § 1          3.10.045
88-027 § 1          3.05.070
89-001 § 1          13.02.205
89-002 § 1          13.03.100
89-009 § 1          11.01.030
89-013 § 2          15.07.005
89-013 § 3          15.07.020
89-016 § 1          11.01.010
89-016 § 2          11.01.015
89-016 § 3          11.01.030
89-016 § 4          11.01.045
89-016 § 5          11.01.220
89-016 § 6          11.01.235
89-016 § 7          11.01.245
89-021 § 1          11.02.105
89-024 § 1          3.01.005
90-003               15.06.310
                     15.06.300,
90-003 § 1          15.06.305,
                     15.06.320 -
                     15.06.330
                     15.06.005 -
90-003 § 2          15.06.025,
                     15.06.055
90-004 § 1          3.08.800 -
                     3.08.825
90-009 § 1          5.02.220
90-015 § 1          7.01.335
90-018 §§ 1 and 2  11.01.005
90-018 § 3          11.01.005
90-018 § 4          11.01.200
90-018 § 5          11.01.205
90-018 § 6          11.01.220,
                     11.01.235
                     5.03.020,
90-022 § 1          5.03.030,
                     5.03.055,
                     5.03.060
90-023 § 1          1.01.035
90-023 § 2          1.01.045
90-023 § 3          15.03.095
90-024 § 1          3.08.810
90-031 § 1          7.01.335
91-003 § 1 (part)   3.07.300
91-004 § 8          11.01.005
91-004 § 9          11.01.305
91-005 § 1 (part)   15.05.005 -
                     15.05.045
91-006 § 1 (part)   9.04.200
91-013 § 1 (part)   9.03.300 -
                     9.03.310
91-014 § 2          15.01.005
91-014 § 3          15.01.015
91-014 § 4          15.01.025
91-014 § 5          15.01.045
91-014 §§ 6C14     15.01.055
91-014 §§ 15C18    15.01.060
91-014 §§ 19C21    15.01.070
91-014 §§ 22, 23   15.01.085
91-014 § 24         15.01.105
91-015 § 1          3.08.400
91-016 § 1          1.01.050
91-017 § 1          11.01.245
91-018 § 1          15.05.005 -
                     15.05.060
91-019 § 1          7.05.100 -
                     7.05.120
91-021 § 1          3.01.005
91-022 § 1          7.01.335
91-025 § 1          11.01.205
91-027 § 1          11.01.230
92-002 § 4          9.08.135
92-009 § 2          9.08.330
92-011               3.05.300
92-017 § 1          11.01.245
92-017 § 2          11.10.005,
                     11.10.010
92-017 § 4          11.10.070
93-002 § 1          9.08.110
93-002 § 2          9.08.115
93-002 § 3          9.08.125
93-004 § 1 (part)   7.05.005 -
                     7.05.030
93-005 § 1          3.01.100
93-009 § 1          13.01.030
93-011 § 1          7.01.005
93-012 § 1          13.02.105
93-013 § 1          9.09.005
93-014 § 1          7.05.015
94-002 § 1          3.05.015
94-004 § 2 (part)   9.07.020
94-013 § 1          15.06.310
94-013 § 2          15.06.315
94-015 § 1 (part)   9.08.035
94-017 § 1          15.05.010
94-017 § 2          15.05.015
94-017 § 3          15.05.030
94-017 § 4          15.05.035
94-017 § 5          15.05.040
94-017 § 6          15.05.045
94-017 § 7          15.05.050
94-018 § 1          3.01.135
94-019 §§ 1, 2     3.05.300
94-022 §§ 1-4      3.08.210
94-025 §§ 1, 2     3.08.215
94-025 §§ 3, 4     3.08.220
94-025 § 5          3.08.225
94-026 § 1 (part)   9.06.005 -
                     9.06.020
94-027 § 3 (part)   9.04.205 -
                     9.04.270
94-032 § 1          9.10.005
94-032 § 2          13.03.025
95-002 § 1          11.05.070
                     9.07.005 -
95-004 § 2 (part)   9.07.015,
                     9.07.025 -
                     9.07.060
95-007 § 1          15.03.020
95-009 § 1          1.01.060
95-014 § 1          9.07.035
95-019 § 1          3.04.315
96-004 §§ 1, 2     7.02.200 -
                     7.02.220
96-006 § 1          3.01.020
                     3.08.410,
                     3.08.420 -
                     3.08.435,
                     3.08.445 -
                     3.08.455,
96-007 § 1 (part)   3.08.465,
                     3.08.610,
                     3.08.615,
                     15.06.030,
                     15.06.040,
                     15.06.050,
                     15.06.330
96-008 § 1          9.03.165
                     9.08.610 -
96-010 § 1 (part)   9.08.665,
                     9.08.675
96-011 § 1          11.01.370
96-013 § 1          7.02.200 -
                     7.02.220
96-018 § 1          11.09.205
96-018 § 2          11.01.315
96-018 § 3          9.08.010
96-018 § 4 (part)   9.08.040
96-019 § 1          1.01.045
96-021 § 1          11.01.370
96-023 § 1          9.10.055
96-024 § 1          11.10.040
96-026 § 1          7.01.335
96-027 § 1          11.01.090
96-027 § 2          11.01.090
96-028 § 1          7.01.335
96-029 § 1          11.10.070
96-033 § 1          7.01.005
96-033 § 2 (part)   7.01.215,
                     7.01.220
                     9.05.075,
96-034 § 2          9.06.025,
                     9.08.670,
                     11.09.440
96-035 § 1          11.01.255
97-003 § 1          13.03.300 -
                     13.03.315
97-004 §§ 1, 2     11.13.300
97-008 § 1          3.05.015
97-009 § 1 (part)   7.01.110
97-009 § 2          7.01.335
97-009 § 4 (part)   7.02.040 -
                     7.02.050
97-009 § 6          7.03.220
97-009 § 7          7.03.530
97-009 § 8          7.03.555
97-015 §§ 1, 2     3.05.300
97-018 § 1          15.05.030
97-022 § 1          11.01.255
98-004 §§ 1, 2     3.05.300
98-006 § 4          11.01.005
98-006 § 5          11.01.010
98-006 §§ 6, 7     11.01.305
                     11.13.005 -
                     11.13.015,
                     11.13.100 -
98-006 § 20 (part)  11.13.140,
                     11.13.200 -
                     11.13.235,
                     11.13.305 -
                     11.13.315
98-012 § 1          15.06.110
98-012 § 2          15.06.150
98-017 § 1          3.01.135
99-003 § 1          9.08.615
99-004 § 1          11.10.010
99-009 § 1 (part)   9.10.300,
                     9.10.305
99-010 § 1          11.01.255
99-011 §§ 1, 2     3.05.300
2000-001 § 1        3.08.200 - 3.08.290
2000-013 §1         7.03.520
2000-014 §1         9.08.307
2000-015             Adopting Ordinance
2000-018 §1         Repealing 7.04.005 - 7.04.060
2000-019 §1         11.20.005 -
                     11.20.060
2000-020 §§1, 2    3.05.300
2000-021 § 1        11.01.205
2001-004 §1         7.03.015
2001-006 §1         7.03.520
2001-007 § 1        11.26.005 -
                     11.26.050
2001-008 § 1        11.01.255
                     11.30.005,
                     11.30.010,
                     11.30.100 -
                     11.30.175,
                     11.30.300 -
                     11.30.335,
2001-009 § 1        11.30.400 -
                     11.30.420,
                     11.30.500 -
                     11.30.560,
                     11.30.700 -
                     11.30.760,
                     11.30.900 -
                     11.30.945
2001-010 § 1        3.05.285
                     5.01.005 -
2001-012 § 1        5.01.020,
                     5.01.030 -
                     5.01.105
                     11.21.005,
                     11.21.010,
                     11.21.100 -
                     11.21.255,
2001-014 § 2        11.21.300 -
                     11.21.315,
                     11.21.400 -
                     11.21.470,
                     11.21.500 -
                     11.21.520
2001-017 § 1        11.01.230
2001-019 § 1        13.03.101,
                     13.03.102
2001-019 § 2        13.03.105
2002-004 § 1        9.03.007
                     9.07.055,
2002-005 § 1        11.01.230,
                     15.05.015,
                     15.05.035
                     9.10.015,
                     9.10.020,
                     9.10.055,
2002-005 § 2        9.10.300,
                     15.05.015,
                     15.05.030,
                     15.05.035
2002-005 § 4        11.01.230
2002-006 § 1        7.02.005
2002-007 § 1        15.05.005 -
                     15.05.060
2002-016 § 1        5.01.005 -
                     5.01.105
2003-003             15.11.005 -
                     15.11.115
2003-006 § 2        13.02.200
2003-007 § 1        7.02.210
2003-010 § 1        11.01.090
2003-010 § 2        11.01.600 -
                     11.01.660
2003-011 § 1        7.02.005
                     Repealing
                     11.12.005 -
                     11.12.050,
                     11.12.100 -
                     11.12.175,
2003-013 § 1        11.12.300 -
                     11.12.340; Adding
                     11.12.005 - 11.15.050,
                     11.12.100 -
                     11.12.175,
                     11.12.300 -
                     11.12.335
2003-014 § 1        Repealing and adding
                     15.08.020
                     Repealing
                     15.02.005 -
                     15.02.040,
                     15.02.100 - 15.02.140,
                     15.02.200 -
                     15.02.240,
                     15.02.300 -
                     15.02.310, 15.02.400 - 15.02.430,
                     15.02.500 - 15.02.510,
                     15.02.700 -
                     15.02.725,
2003-015 § 1        15.02.800 -
                     15.02.855, Appendix; Adding
                     15.02.005 -
                     15.02.020,
                     15.02.200,
                     15.02.300,
                     15.02.300, 15.02.400,
                     15.02.500 - 15.02.510,
                     15.02.600 -
                     15.02.620,
                     15.02.700 -
                     15.02.745,
                     15.02.800, Appendix
                     Repealing §§
2003-018 § 1        5.02.010 and
                     5.02.015
2003-018 § 2        5.02.410
2003-018 § 3        5.02.415
2003-018 § 4        5.02.420
2003-019 § 1        15.05.005 -
                     15.05.060
                     Adding
2004-003 § 1        13.03.400 -
                     13.03.415
2004-004 § 1        15.05.005 -
                     15.05.060
                     Adding
2004-005 § 1        15.02.900 -
                     15.02.915
                     Adding
2004-009 § 4        5.02.001 and
                     5.02.007
2004-010 §§ 1, 2   3.05.300
2004-012 § 1        3.01.100
2004-013 § 1        15.02.615
2004-015 § 2        9.10.055
2004-015 § 3        Adding
                     9.10.400
2004-015 § 4        Adding
                     9.10.405
2004-017 § 1        7.03.200
                     Repealing
2004-017 § 2        7.03.300 - 7.03.340; Adding
                     7.03.300 -
                     7.03.315
                     Adding
2004-018 § 1        11.14.005 -
                     11.14.040
2004-018 § 2        9.07.060
2005-004 §1         13.03.025
2005-005 §1         15.02.900 -
                     15.02.915
                     Repealing 17.01.005 (37-1. - 37-12., 37-14.1. - 37.23.,
                     37-27. - 37.31., 37-34. - 37-61., 37-63. -37-80., 37-83. -
                     37.127.); Adding
                     17.100.005 -
                     17.100.030,
                     17.110.005 -
                     17.110.025,
                     17.120.005 -
                     17.120.015,
                     17.200.005 -
                     17.200.020,
                     17.210.005 -
                     17.210.020,
                     17.220.005 -
                     17.220.020,
                     17.220.030,
                     17.220.035,
                     17.240.005 -
                     17.240.020,
                     17.250.005 -
                     17.250.030,
                     17.260.005 -
                     17.260.015,
                     17.260.025,
                     17.260.030,
                     17.260.040,
                     17.300.005 -
                     17.300.040,
                     17.310.005 -
                     17.310.030,
                     17.320.005 -
                     17.320.050,
                     17.400.005 -
                     17.400.030,
                     17.400.040 -
                     17.400.046,
2005-007 §1         17.400.050 -
                     17.400.100,
                     17.400.106 -
                     17.400.125,
                     17.500.005 -
                     17.500.030,
                     17.510.005 -
                     17.510.015,
                     17.520.005 -
                     17.520.040,
                     17.540.005 -
                     17.540.030,
                     17.550.005 -
                     17.550.030,
                     17.560.005 -
                     17.560.035,
                     17.570.005 -
                     17.570.025,
                     17.590.005 -
                     17.590.055,
                     17.595.005 -
                     17.595.045,
                     17.600.005 -
                     17.600.025,
                     17.610.005 -
                     17.610.045,
                     17.620.005 -
                     17.620.035,
                     17.630.005 -
                     17.630.040,
                     17.640.005 -
                     17.640.045,
                     17.650.005 -
                     17.650.030,
                     17.660.005 -
                     17.660.020,
                     17.700.005,
                     17.700.010
2005-008 §2         17.400.060
                     Adding
2005-009 §1         7.03.600 -
                     7.03.625
2005-009 §§2-4     7.03.220
2005-009 §5         Repealing and replacing
                     7.03.242
2005-012 §§1-10    9.10.055
2005-012 §11        9.10.200
2005-013 §1         Adding
                     3.04.320
2005-014 § 1        Repealing and replacing
                     13.02.015
                     Adding
2006-001 § 1        7.03.700 -
                     7.03.710
                     Adding
2006-002 § 1        9.12.003 -
                     9.12.070
2006-005 § 1        3.08.210
2006-006 § 1        11.01.220
2006-007 § 1        3.08.210
2006-008 § 2        9.10.055
2006-008 § 3        Adding
                     9.10.600
2006-009 § 1        Repealing 1.01.065, 3.01.010, 3.01.015, 3.01.025,
                     3.01.030, 3.01.105, 3.01.155, 3.05.065, 3.07.305
2006-009 § 2        1.01.010
2006-009 § 3        1.01.010
2006-009 § 4        3.01.100
2006-009 § 5        3.01.120
2006-009 § 6        3.01.125
2006-009 § 7        3.01.160
2006-009 § 8        3.02.010
2006-009 § 9        3.02.015
2006-009 § 11       3.05.015
2006-009 § 12       3.05.020
2006-009 § 13       3.05.040
2006-009 § 14       3.07.005
2006-009 § 15       3.07.205
2006-009 § 16       3.07.300
2006-009 § 17       3.10.015
2006-009 § 19       9.04.205
2006-009 § 20       9.10.010
2006-009 § 21       17.700.010
                     3.01.110,
                     3.01.150,
                     3.04.315,
                     3.05.025,
                     3.05.030,
                     3.06.050,
                     3.08.235,
                     3.08.265,
                     3.08.267,
                     3.09.020,
                     5.01.005,
                     5.01.020,
                     5.01.060,
                     5.01.090,
                     5.03.030,
                     5.03.055,
                     5.04.030,
                     5.04.065,
                     7.01.230,
                     7.03.035,
                     9.03.305,
                     9.04.200,
                     9.04.205,
                     9.04.220,
                     9.04.225,
                     9.04.230,
                     9.04.235,
                     9.05.025,
                     9.05.040,
                     9.05.045,
                     9.05.050,
                     9.05.055,
                     9.05.065,
                     9.06.015,
                     9.06.110,
                     9.09.015,
2006-009 § 22       11.01.240,
                     11.01.330,
                     11.01.365,
                     11.01.635,
                     11.10.005,
                     11.10.020,
                     11.10.025,
                     11.10.030,
                     11.10.060,
                     11.10.330,
                     11.13.125,
                     11.14.030,
                     11.14.035,
                     11.20.020,
                     11.20.025,
                     11.21.010,
                     11.21.105,
                     11.21.112,
                     11.21.140,
                     11.21.170,
                     11.21.200,
                     11.21.205,
                     11.21.220,
                     1121.225,
                     11.21.230,
                     11.21.240,
                     11.21.245,
                     11.21.300,
                     11.21.310,
                     11.21.315,
                     11.21.470,
                     11.26.025,
                     11.26.030,
                     13.03.140,
                     13.03.145,
                     15.02.710,
                     17.250.030
2006-011 § 1        3.05.070
2007-001 §§ 1,2    3.05.300
2007-002 § 1        5.02.215
2007-002 § 2        5.02.235
2007-002 § 3        5.02.265
2007-002 § 4        5.02.285
2007-002 § 5        7.03.035
2007-002 § 6        9.06.115
2007-002 § 7        9.08.130
2007-002 § 8        9.08.330
2007-002 § 9        9.08.375
2007-002 § 10       9.08.510
2007-002 § 11       9.08.650
2007-002 § 12       11.01.030
2007-002 § 13       11.01.335
2007-002 § 14       11.06.120
2007-002 § 15       11.06.135
2007-002 § 17       11.10.070
2007-002 § 18       15.02.610
2007-006 § 1        9.10.300
2007-009 § 1        1.0.006
2007-010 § 1        11.21.480
2008-002 §§ 1-3    1.01.035
2008-002 § 4        1.01.045
2008-002 § 5        1.01.055
                     Renumbering 1.02.005, 1.02.006, 1.02.010 as
2008-002 § 6        1.03.005,
                     1.03.006,
                     1.03.010
                     Adding
2008-002 § 7        1.02.005 -
                     1.02.050
2008-003 § 1        3.01.015
2008-004 § 1        15.02.1000 - 15.02.1015
2008-005 § 1        11.01.075
Res. 2008-R022       Removing 2009 and 2010 of Charter
                     Repealing
2008-007 § 3        15.02.200,
                     15.02.300, 15.02.400
2008-007½ § 1      3.08.205
2008-007½ § 2      3.08.210
2008-007½ § 3      3.08.215
2008-007½ § 4      3.08.220
2008-007½ § 5      3.08.222
2008-007½ § 6      3.08.225
2008-007½ § 7      Repealing and replacing
                     3.08.230
2008-007½ § 8      Adding
                     3.08.232
2008-007½ § 9      3.08.235
2008-007½ § 10     3.08.240
2008-007½ § 11     3.08.245
2008-007½ § 12     3.08.250
2008-007½ § 13     3.08.255
2008-007½ § 14     3.08.257
2008-007½ § 15     3.08.260
2008-007½ § 17     Adding
                     3.08.267
2008-007½ § 18     3.08.270
2008-007½ § 19     3.08.275
2008-007½ § 20     Adding
                     3.08.278
2008-007½ § 21     3.08.280
2008-007½ § 22     Deleting 3.08.285
2008-007½ § 23     Adding
                     3.08.287
2008-008 § 1        17.250.030
                     Repealing 9.11.005 - 9.11.085 and adding
2008-009 § 1        9.11.100 -
                     9.11.135
2008-009 § 2        Repealing 9.10.500 - 9.10.525
2009-001 § 2        17.220.035
2009-003 § 1        9.10.600
                     Adding
2009-004 § 1        15.02.1100 -
                     15.02.1125
                     Adding
2009-006 § 1        11.15.005 -
                     11.15.050
                     Adding
2009-009 § 1        5.03.005 –
                     5.03.060
2010-001 § 1        11.12.010
2010-004 § 1        3.01.010
2010-004 § 2        3.09.010 -
                     3.09.050
2010-005 § 1        3.09.200 -
                     3.09.215
2011-001 § 1        5.01.080
2011-002 § 1        7.03.500 -
                     7.03.520
2011-002 § 2        7.03.535
2011-002 § 3        7.03.550
                     Repealing and replacing
                     3.03.005 -
                     3.03.035,
                     3.03.100,
2011-005 § 1        3.03.200,
                     3.03.300,
                     3.03.400,
                     3.03.405,
                     3.03.500 -
                     3.03.510
2011-007 § 1        7.01.230
2011-008 §§ 1-4    Adding
                     3.03.515
                     Adding
2011-010 § 1        15.13.005 -
                     15.13.055
2012-003 § 1        11.02.105
                     15.01.025,
2012-004 § 1        15.01.045 -
                     15.01.105
2012-004 § 2        Adding
                     15.01.110
                     Adding
2012-004A § 1       15.12.005 -
                     15.12.045
2012-005 § 2        17.610.010
2012-005A § 2       Adding
                     9.02.400
                     Adding
2012-009 § 1        3.08.300 -
                     3.08.375
                     17.250.005,
2013-001 § 2        17.250.010,
                     17.320.025, and adding
                     17.250.035
                     Repealing and replacing 15.06.100 - 15.05.175 with
2013-003 § 1        15.06.100 -
                     15.06.180
                     17.220.015,
2013-004             17.320.020,
                     17.700.010
2013-005 § 2        17.400.100,
                     17.610.020
2013-006 § 1        11.16.005  -
                     11.16.045
2013-007 § 1        9.08.200  -
                     9.08.230
                     17.210.015 ,
                     17.220.015 ,
                     17.320.020 ,
                     17.400.046 ,
2013-008 § 1        17.400.106 ,
                     17.500.010 ,
                     17.550.005  -
                     17.550.030 ,
                     17.630.010 ,
                     17.700.010
                     1.01.065 ,
2013-009 §§ 4-6    9.04.005  -
                     9.04.150 ,
                     9.13.005
2013-010 § 1        17.320.025
2013-011 §§ 1, 2   7.03.305
2014-002 § 2        17.320.020  -
                     17.320.035
2014-003 § 1        Repealing 15.20.100 - 15.20.150
                     Adding
2014-003 § 2        15.02.100  -
                     15.02.150
2014-003 § 3        Repealing 15.04.005 - 15.04.080, Ch. 15.04 Appendix
2014-004 § 1        Repealing 9.02.005 - 9.02.075, 9.02.200 - 9.02.240,
                     9.02.300 - 9.02.325
                     Adding
2014-004 § 2        9.02.300 -
                     9.02.325
2014-005 § 1        9.10.600
                     Adding
2014-006 § 1        9.11.200  -
                     9.11.265
                     17.210.015 ,
2014-007 § 2        17.220.015 ,
                     17.700.010
2014-008 § 1        5.05.005 -
                     5.05.050
2015-003 § 1        5.03.040
2015-004 §§ 1, 2   11.15.010
2015-006 § 1        3.06.005 -
                     3.06.060
2015-007 § 2        15.02.1200
2016-001 § 2        17.210.020,
                     17.700.010
2016-006 § 1-3      9.08.705 -
                     9.08.725, repealing 9.10.035
                     Repealing and replacing 11.04.001 - 11.04.045 with
2016-008 §§ 1, 2   11.04.005 -
                     11.04.075
                     11.01.305, Repealing and replacing 11.07.005 - 11.07.215
2016-009 §§ 1-3    with
                     11.07.005 -
                     11.07.130
2016-010 §§ 1-3    5.03.030 -
                     5.03.040
2016-011 § 1        9.07.035
2016-012 § 1        Repealing 15.02.100 - 15.02.150
                     Adding
2016-012 § 2        15.02.100 -
                     15.02.155
                     Adding
2016-013 § 1        5.06.005 -
                     5.06.080
Res. 2016-R117       602 and
                     608 of Charter
2017-001 § 1        Repealing 9.02.005 - 9.02.075 and 9.02.200 - 9.02.240
                     Adding
2017-001 § 2        9.02.005 -
                     9.02.060
2017-002 § 2        17.320.025
2017-003 § 2        17.320.020
2017-007 § 2        17.210.015,
                     17.400.095
2017-009 § 1        Repealing 7.04.200 - 7.04.245, 7.04.255 - 7.04.310,
                     7.04.415
                     Repealing 9.01.005 - 9.01.065, 9.01.200 - 9.01.240,
2017-011 § 1        9.01.300 - 9.01.390, 9.01.400, 9.01.405, 9.01.500,
                     9.01.600
                     Adding
                     9.01.005 -
                     9.01.050,
                     9.01.300 -
                     9.01.335,
2017-011 § 2        9.01.400 -
                     9.01.410,
                     9.01.500,
                     9.01.505,
                     9.01.600,
                     9.01.700 -
                     9.01.770
                     17.400.100,
                     17.400.115,
2017-012 § 2        17.520.010,
                     17.520.015,
                     17.520.020
2017-013 § 2-7      15.14.005 - 15.14.030
2017-014 § 2        17.300.020
2017-015 § 1        9.04.015
2017-015 § 2        9.07.050
2017-017 § 2     17.400.095
                     Adding
                     11.17.005 -
                     11.17.025,
                     11.17.100 -
2017-018 § 2        11.17.185,
                     11.17.200 -
                     11.17.250,
                     11.17.300 -
                     11.17.315
2017-018 § 3        11.01.075
                     17.210.015,
2017-019 § 2        17.220.015,
                     17.700.010
                     11.17.005 -
                     11.17.025,
                     11.17.100 -
2017-020 § 2        11.17.185,
                     11.17.200 -
                     11.17.250,
                     11.17.300 -
                     11.17.315
2017-020 § 3        11.01.075
2018-001 § 2        17.320.020
2018-005 § 2        11.17.400
                     11.17.005 -
                     11.17.025,
                     11.17.100 -
                     11.17.185,
2018-007 § 2        11.17.200 -
                     11.17.250,
                     11.17.300 -
                     11.17.315,
                     11.17.400
2018-007 § 3        11.01.075
2018-008 § 1        Repealing and replacing 3.07.005 - 3.07.095
2018-009 § 1        15.02.1015
                     Adding
2018-010 § 1        11.32.005 -
                     11.32.145
                     17.220.015,
2018-011 § 2        17.400.015,
                     17.700.010
2018-012 § 2        17.300.025
2018-013 § 1        11.17.115
2018-015 § 2        17.210.015,
                     17.400.095
2018-016 § 1        3.01.100
                     Adding
2018-017 § 1        3.08.500 -
                     3.08.570
Res. 2018-R060       606 and
                     1500 of Charter
2019-001 § 1        11.20.025
2019-002 § 2        Adding
                     11.20.065
                     17.220.015,
                     17.320.020,
2019-003 § 2 (part) 17.520.010,
                     17.520.015,
                     17.520.035,
                     17.700.010
                     17.550.010,
2019-004 § 2 (part) 17.610.010,
                     17.610.020,
                     17.610.035
2019-005 § 1        11.04.010
2019-005 § 2        11.04.015
2019-006 § 2        Adding
                     17.260.040
2019-007 § 1 (part) Adding 15.02.1300 - 15.02.1365
2019-008 § 1        13.03.025
2019-009 § 2     17.320.025,
                     17.320.035
                     15.09.005 -
2019-010 § 1     15.09.045, Adding
                     15.09.050
                     Repealing and replacing
2019-012 § 2 (part) 13.03.200 -
                     13.03.225
2019-013 § 1        11.15.005
2019-013 § 2     11.15.010
2019-013 § 3        11.15.015
                     9.02.005 -
2019-014 § 2 (part) 9.02.060, repealing and renumbering
                     9.02.055
2019-015 § 1        Repealing 15.02.020, 15.02.110
                     Repealing 15.02.100, 15.02.500 - 15.02.510, 15.02.800,
2019-015 § 2        15.02.1000 - 15.02.1015, 15.02.1200, 15.02.1300 -
                     15.02.1365, Ch. 15.14
2019-015 § 3        15.02.100
2019-015 § 4        15.02.105
2019-015 § 5        15.02.115
2019-015 § 6        15.02.120
2019-015 § 7        15.02.125
2019-015 § 8        15.02.130
2019-015 § 9        15.02.135
2019-015 § 10       15.02.140
2019-015 § 11       15.02.145
2019-015 § 12       15.02.150
2019-015 § 13       15.02.155
2019-015 § 14       15.02.160
                     15.02.1100,
                     15.02.1105,
2019-015 § 15       15.02.1120 -
                     15.02.1150,
                     15.02.1160,
                     15.02.1180
2020-001 § 2        17.400.095
2020-002 § 2 (part) 17.400.035
2020-003 § 2 (part) 17.210.020,
                     17.320.020
2020-004 § 2        3.03.005,
                     3.03.040
2020-004 § 3        3.03.200
2020-004 § 4        3.03.300
2020-005 § 1 (part) 9.11.100 -
                     9.11.115
2020-008 § 1 (part) 3.08.300 -
                     3.08.375
2020-009 § 1 (part) 3.11.005 -
                     3.11.015
2020-012 § 2 (part) 17.320.020,
                     17.700
                     17.210.015,
                     17.210.020,
                     17.220.015,
                     17.220.020,
                     17.310.020,
                     17.320.015,
2020-013 § 2 (part) 17.320.020,
                     17.320.035,
                     17.400.070,
                     17.400.075,
                     17.400.106,
                     17.700.010
                     Repeals 17.400.035
2020-014 § 2        15.09.200 -
                     15.09.270
2020-015 § 2        15.09.300 -
                     15.09.370
2020-016 § 1        3.08.400
                     17.220.015,
2021-003             17.320.020,
                     17.700.010
                     15.03.005 -
2021-004 § 1     15.03.095, adding
                     15.03.005,
                     15.03.075
                     Adding
2021-006 § 2     15.06.500 -
                     15.06.545
2021-009 § 2        15.06.600 -
                     15.06.625
                     Adding
2021-010 § 2     5.07.005 -
                     5.07.060
2021-010 § 4        Repealing 11.18.010 - 11.18.030
2021-011 § 1     9.08.035
                     17.210.015,
                     17.210.020,
                     17.300.025,
                     17.300.030,
2021-012 § 3     17.300.035,
                     17.320.020,
                     17.320.035,
                     17.400.095,
                     17.400.100,
                     17.700.010
2021-013 § 1     15.02.500 -
                     15.02.560
2021-014 § 2     5.08.005 -
                     5.08.060
2021-016 § 2     17.610.010
2022-002 § 2     17.400.046
                     17.220.015,
2022-003 § 2     17.220.035,
                     17.320.020
                     3.04.400,
2022-005 § 3        3.04.405,
                     3.04.410
2022-006 § 1        3.05.010
2022-006 § 2        3.05.020
2022-007 § 3        15.02.100
2022-007 § 4        15.02.105
2022-007 § 5        15.02.115
2022-007 § 6        15.02.120
2022-007 § 7        15.02.125
2022-007 § 8        15.02.130
2022-007 § 9        15.02.135
2022-007 § 10       15.02.140
2022-007 § 11       15.02.145
2022-007 § 12       15.02.150
2022-007 § 13       15.02.155
2022-007 § 14       15.02.160
                     15.02.1100,
                     15.02.1105,
2022-007 § 15       15.02.1120 -
                     15.02.1150,
                     15.02.1160,
                     15.02.1180
                     17.210.020,
                     17.220.020,
                     17.220.035,
                     17.250.030,
                     17.260.015,
                     17.300.015,
                     17.300.020,
                     17.310.020,
                     17.320.005 -
                     17.320.050,
                     17.400.025,
2022-008             17.400.045,
                     17.400.070,
                     17.400.080,
                     17.400.090,
                     17.400.106 -
                     17.400.115,
                     17.520.015,
                     17.520.030,
                     17.550.010,
                     17.560.015,
                     17.610.020,
                     17.700.010
2022-009 § 2     9.02.005 -
                     9.02.060, Repealing 9.02.050, 9.02.060
                     Adding
2022-010 § 1        11.19.005 -
                     11.19.105
                     11.01.005 -
2022-012 § 1        11.01.090,
                     11.01.200 -
                     11.01.255
2023-001 § 1        Adding
                     9.10.700
2023-001 § 2        9.10.005
2023-001 § 3        9.10.055
2023-001 § 4        9.10.200
                     17.320.035,
2023-002             17.400.100,
                     17.610.020,
                     17.700.010
2023-003 § 1        Adding
                     11.34.005
2023-003 § 2        Adding
                     11.34.010
2023-003 § 3     Adding
                     11.34.015
2023-003 § 4        Adding
                     11.34.020
2023-003 § 5        Adding
                     11.34.025
2023-003 § 6     Adding
                     11.34.030
2023-003 § 7     Adding
                     11.34.035
2023-003 § 8        Adding
                     11.34.040
2023-003 § 9        Adding
                     11.34.045
2023-004 § 1        7.02.005
2023-005 § 2        17.400.095
                     Adding
2023-006 § 1     11.18.010 -
                     11.18.090
2023-006, §§ 2-4   9.10.055
2023-006, § 5       9.08.040
2023-004 § 1        7.02.005
2023-005 § 2        17.400.095
                     Adding
2023-006 § 1        11.18.010 -
                     11.18.090
2023-006, §§ 2-4   9.10.055
2023-006, § 5       9.08.040
2023-007, § 1       3.03.200
2023-008, § 1       11.32.025
                     17.200.010,
                     17.210.020,
                     17.260.040,
2024-001             17.300.025,
                     17.300.035,
                     17.300.045,
                     17.320.035,
                     17.400.100, Repealing 17.210.025
                     9.10.200, Adding
2024-002, § 2       9.10.205,
                     9.10.210
                     9.10.300,
2024-002, § 3       9.10.305, Adding
                     9.10.310
2024-002, § 4       9.10.400,
                     9.10.405
2024-002, § 5       9.10.600, Adding
                     9.10.610
                     Adding
2024-003, § 1       15.02.400 -
                     15.02.430
2024-004, § 1       3.01.130
2024-004, § 2       3.01.135
2024-004, § 3       3.01.145
2024-005             17.700.010
                     17.100.005 -
                     17.100.035,
                     17.110.005 -
                     17.110.025,
                     17.120.005 -
                     17.120.015,
                     17.200.005 -
                     17.200.020,
                     17.210.005 -
                     17.210.030,
                     17.220.005 -
                     17.220.035,
                     17.240.005 -
                     17.240.020,
                     17.250.005 -
                     17.250.035,
                     17.260.005 -
                     17.260.015,
                     17.260.025,
                     17.260.030,
                     17.260.040,
                     17.300.005 -
                     17.300.040,
                     17.310.005 -
                     17.310.030,
                     17.320.005 -
                     17.320.050,
                     17.400.005 -
                     17.400.030,
                     17.400.045 -
                     17.400.100,
                     17.400.106 -
                     17.400.125,
                     17.500.005 -
                     17.500.030,
2024-006             17.510.005 -
                     17.510.015,
                     17.520.005 -
                     17.520.040,
                     17.530.005 -
                     17.530.030,
                     17.540.005 -
                     17.540.030,
                     17.550.005 -
                     17.550.030,
                     17.560.005 -
                     17.560.035,
                     17.570.005 -
                     17.570.025,
                     17.590.005 -
                     17.590.055,
                     17.595.005 -
                     17.595.045,
                     17.600.005 -
                     17.600.025,
                     17.610.005 -
                     17.610.045,
                     17.620.005 -
                     17.620.035,
                     17.625.005 -
                     17.625.040,
                     17.630.005 -
                     17.630.040,
                     17.640.005 -
                     17.640.045,
                     17.650.005 -
                     17.650.030,
                     17.660.005 -
                     17.660.020,
                     17.700.005,
                     17.700.010
2024-007, § 1       3.01.005
                     7.02.310,
                     9.06.100 -
                     9.06.125,
                     9.06.135 -
                     9.06.170,
                     9.07.055,
                     11.01.230,
                     11.01.300 -
                     11.01.330,
                     11.01.355,
                     11.05.005 -
                     11.05.020,
                     11.05.035,
                     11.05.040,
                     11.05.050,
2025-001, § 2       11.05.055,
                     11.06.010,
                     11.06.115,
                     11.06.135,
                     11.09.015 -
                     11.09.035,
                     11.09.200,
                     11.09.320,
                     11.10.320,
                     11.11.010,
                     11.13.200,
                     11.15.050,
                     13.03.020,
                     15.02.610, Repealing 9.06.130, 11.01.500 - 11.01.545,
                     11.06.200 - 11.06.235, 11.08.005 - 11.08.050, 11.08.100 -
                     11.08.145
                     Repealing and replacing
2025-002             17.580.005 -
                     17.580.085,
                     17.700.010
                     17.210.020,
2025-003             17.220.030,
                     17.300.010
2025-005             15.02.025
2025-006             17.400.095
                     Repealing and replacing
                     15.10.005 -
                     15.10.095,
                     15.10.200 -
                     15.10.285,
                     15.10.300 -
                     15.10.320,
                     15.10.400 -
                     15.10.465,
                     15.10.600 -
2025-007             15.10.645,
                     15.10.700 -
                     15.10.790,
                     15.10.900 -
                     15.10.935,
                     15.10.940 -
                     15.10.950,
                     15.10.960,
                     15.10.970,
                     15.10.980,
                     15.10.985, Repealing 17.400.040, amending
                     17.700.010
                     17.210.015,
                     17.210.020,
                     17.220.015,
                     17.220.020,
                     17.300.020,
                     17.300.025,
                     17.300.030,
                     17.300.035,
                     17.310.020,
2025-008             17.320.035,
                     17.320.045,
                     17.400.100,
                     17.400.105,
                     17.400.115,
                     17.520.015,
                     17.610.020,
                     17.625.015,
                     17.625.040,
                     17.630.010,
                     17.700.010
2025-009             9.02.400
                     Amending
                     13.02.200,
                     13.02.205, repealing and replacing
                     13.02.210,
                     13.02.215, repealing
2025-010             13.02.220, Repealing and replacing
                     17.330.005 -
                     17.330.050, adding
                     17.330.055,
                     17.330.060, amending
                     17.550.010,
                     17.700.010
2025-011             3.12.005 -
                     3.12.015
2025-012 § 1        3.08.1000 -
                     3.08.1070
2025-013, § 1       15.02.105
2025-013, § 2       9.02.040
2025-014, § 1       9.01.800 -
                     9.01.815
2025-015, § 3       15.02.100
2025-015, § 4       15.02.105
2025-015, § 5       15.02.115
2025-015, § 6       15.02.120
2025-015, § 7       15.02.125
2025-015, § 8       15.02.130
2025-015, § 9       15.02.135
2025-015, § 10      15.02.140
2025-015, § 11      15.02.145
2025-015, § 12      15.02.150
2025-015, § 13      15.02.155
2025-015, § 14      15.02.160
                     Repealing and replacing
                     15.02.1100,
                     15.02.1105,
2025-015, § 15      15.02.1120 -
                     15.02.1150,
                     15.02.1160,
                     15.02.1180
                     Repealing and replacing
2025-016, § 2       9.02.005 -
                     9.02.065
                     
 
 
