CITY CODE
of
EL SEGUNDO, CALIFORNIA
2000
Code current through:
Ord. 1677, passed 9-16-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of El Segundo, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 1677, passed September 16, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1678
 
AN ORDINANCE APPROVING AND ADOPTING A FIRST AMENDMENT TO DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT NO. 5751, TO AMEND THE ALLOWABLE USES AND ITS CONCEPTUAL SITE PLAN AS
ALTERNATIVE NO. 4 FOR BEACH CITIES MEDIA CAMPUS
 
(Environmental Assessment No. EA-1391 and Amendment No. 1 to Development
Agreement No. DA 5751)
 
The City Council of the City of El Segundo does ordain as follows: SECTION 1:
 The City Council finds and declares as follows:
A.   On August 6, 2019, the City of El Segundo City Council approved
Environmental Assessment No. EA-1201, General Plan Amendment No. GPA 17-01,
Zone Change No. ZC 17-01, and Development Agreement No. DA 5751. This action
changed the land use designation and zoning of the property from Commercial
Center (C-4) to Urban Mixed Use South (MU-S), allowed a development concept
that included a mixture of alternatives for creative office, retail/
café, and studio and
production facility uses, and certified an Environmental Impact Report 
(EIR) for the development of the property and authorized the City to enter into
a development agreement with the property owner;
 
B.   Development Agreement No. 5751 and Conditions of Approval were originally
approved (EA-1201) by the City Council on August 6, 2019;
 
C.   Through the Development Agreement, the property owner voluntarily waived
its rights to develop the property with certain uses which
are allowed or conditionally allowed in the MU-S zone, and limited the FAR to
1.13, which is less than the 1.3 FAR allowed in the MU-S Zone;
 
D.   On August 20, 2025, Andrew Brady on behalf of property owner LA RE
DEVELOPMENT HOLDINGS, LLC (hereinafter Applicant) filed request to amend
certain section of Development Agreement No. 5751, including the allowed uses
at the site;
 
E.   The proposed Development Agreement (DA) Amendment modifies the allowed
uses to include a Professional Sports Team Headquarters and Training Facility
use and its Conceptual Site Plan as alternative no. 4;
 
F.   The amendment request was reviewed by the City’s Community Development
Department for, in part, consistency with the General Plan and conformity with the
El Segundo Municipal Code (ESMC);
 
G.   The City reviewed the amendments environmental impacts under the
California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code §§
21000, et seq., “CEQA”)
 
and the regulations promulgated thereunder (14 Cal. Code of Regulations
§§15000, et seq., the “CEQA Guidelines”);
H.   On October 6, 2025, public notices were mailed to all property owners and
occupants within a 300-foot radius from the site, providing a 10-
day time period for the submittal of comments in accordance with ESMC § 15-28-6
(A);
 
I.   On October 9, 2025, a public notice was published in the El Segundo Herald
newspaper, providing a 10-day time period for the submittal of comments in
accordance with ESMC § 15-28-6(A);
 
J.   The item was duly noticed for the October 23, 2025, Planning Commission
meeting. However, due to the lack of quorum this item was continued to be
considered by the Planning Commission on November 13, 2025;
 
K.   On November 13, 2025, the Planning Commission held a duly noticed public
hearing to receive public testimony and other evidence regarding the draft
ordinance including, without limitation, information provided to the Planning
Commission by city staff; and adopted Resolution No. 2973 recommending that the
City Council approve this Ordinance;
L.   On November 3, 2025 public notices were mailed to all property owners and
occupants within a 300-foot radius from the site, providing a 10-
day time period for the submittal of comments in accordance with ESMC Section
15-28-6(A);
 
M.   On November 6, 2025 a public notice was published in the El Segundo Herald
newspaper, providing a 10-day time period for the submittal of comments in
accordance with ESMC Section 15-28-6(A);
 
N.   On November 18, 2025 the City Council held a duly noticed public hearing
and considered the information provided by City staff and public testimony
regarding the Ordinance; and
 
O.   This Ordinance and its findings are made based upon the entire
administrative record including, without limitation, testimony and evidence
presented to the City Council at its December 3, 2025 hearing and the staff
report submitted by the Community Development Department.
 
SECTION 2: Factual Findings and Conclusions. The proposed amendments to
Development Agreement No. 5751 are listed in Exhibit A, attached hereto, and
incorporated herein by this reference.
 
SECTION 3: General Plan Findings. As required under Government Code § 65860,
the City Council finds as follows:
 
A.   The approved Development Agreement No. 5751 was found to be consistent with
the General Plan per Ordinance No. 1587. The proposed amendments do not alter
 
any of the General Plan findings made in the original approval. Approval of the
Development Agreement amendment will further the goals, objectives, and
policies of the General Plan and will not obstruct their attainment.
 
SECTION 4: Amendment to Development Agreement Findings. In accordance with
Government Code §§ 65867.5 and 65868 and Resolution No. 3268, adopted June 26,
1984, the City Council finds as follows:
A.   The Development Agreement Amendment is consistent with the General Plan of
El Segundo and there are no applicable Specific Plans. The amended Development
Agreement continues to be a 10-year agreement that provides the following
public benefits in exchange for vested development rights:
 
∙   Consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses, and programs
specified in the General Plan.
∙   Promotes a balance of land uses that provide for a range of employment
opportunities while maintaining compatibility with surrounding development.
∙   Encourages development that contributes to El Segundo’s role as a major
employment and business center in the South Bay.
∙   Foster land uses that enhance El Segundo's identity as a destination for
business, recreation, and entertainment.
∙   The Development Agreement amended uses are compatible with the uses
authorized in and regulations prescribed for the Mixed-Use South (MU-S) zone in
which the real property is located.
∙   The Development Agreement Amendment is in conformity with the public
convenience, general welfare, and good land use practice as it provides
expanded commercial opportunities in a synergistic manner with the previously
approved site plan review and adjacent land uses.
∙   The proposed amendment will not be detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare.
∙   The proposed amendment to the Development Agreement will not
adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of
property values.
∙   The development standards prescribed in the MU-S zone and development
agreement will result in the orderly development in the future. All mitigation
measures will be implemented at the time and place impacts occur.
 
SECTION 5: Environmental Assessment. In accordance with the provisions of the
California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”) and the State CEQA Guidelines,
the proposed Ordinance is exempt from further environmental review pursuant to
CEQA Guidelines §15060(c)(3), as the Ordinance does not constitute a “project”
within the meaning of CEQA §15378 and the action of amending the language has
no potential to result in a direct or reasonably foreseeable indirect physical
change to the environment.
In addition, the Ordinance is exempt under CEQA Guidelines §15061(b)
(3), the “common sense” exemption, as the action is limited to minor amendments
to the existing Development Agreement, does
not authorize or approve any physical development, and
there is no possibility that the action may result in a significant effect on the environment.
Any future development proposed pursuant to the Development Agreement would be
subject to separate site plan review pursuant to Development Agreement No.
5751, Section 4.15, and City Code Chapter 25 
(Site Plan Review). Pursuant to City Code § 15- 25-3, site plan review is a
discretionary action that requires separate environmental review in accordance
with CEQA and the CEQA Guidelines when a site plan review
application is submitted for a development project. Accordingly, no further environmental
review is required for the DA Amendment pursuant to CEQA Guidelines §15168(c)
(2).
 
SECTION 6: Approvals and Authorization. 
The City Council hereby approves and adopts
the First Amendment to Development Agreement No. 5751, attached to this ordinance as
Exhibit "A". Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, the Mayor is authorized to execute
the amendment on behalf of the City. The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed
to perform all acts and execute all documents needed to effectuate this
Ordinance.
SECTION 7: Reliance on Record. Each and every one of the findings and
determinations in this Ordinance are based on the competent and substantial
evidence, both oral and written, contained in the entire record relating to the
amendment. The findings and determinations constitute the independent findings
and determinations of the City Council
in all respects and are fully and completely
supported by substantial evidence in the record as a whole.
 
SECTION 8: Limitations. The City Council's analysis and evaluation of the
amendment is based on the best information currently available. It is
inevitable that in evaluating a amendment that absolute and perfect knowledge
of all possible aspects of the amendment will not exist. One of the major
limitations on analysis of the amendment is the City Council's knowledge of
future events. In all instances, best efforts have been made to form accurate
assumptions. Somewhat related to this are the limitations on the
City' s ability to solve what are in effect regional, state, and national problems and issues.
The City must work within the political framework within which it exists and
with the limitations inherent in that framework.
 
SECTION 9: Summaries of Information. 
All summaries of information in the findings which precede this section, are
based on the substantial evidence in the record.
The absence of any particular fact from any such summary is not an indication that a
particular finding, is not based in part on that fact.
 
SECTION 10: Effectiveness of ESMC.  Repeal or amendment of any provision of the
ESMC will not affect any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred before or
preclude prosecution and imposition of penalties for any violation occurring
before this
Ordinance' s effective date. Any such repealed part will remain in full force and effect for
sustaining action or prosecuting violations occurring before the effective date
of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 11: Recordation. The City Clerk, or designee, is directed to certify
the passage and adoption of this Ordinance; cause it to be entered into the
City of El Segundo’s book
of original ordinances; make a note of the passage and adoption in the records
of this meeting; and, within 15 days after the passage and adoption of this
Ordinance, cause it to be published or posted in accordance with California
law.
 
SECTION 12: Severability. If any part of this Ordinance or its application is
deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City Council intends
that such invalidity will not affect the effectiveness of the remaining
provisions or applications and, to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance
are severable.
SECTION 13: Effective Date. This Ordinance will become effective 30 days
following its passage and adoption.
 
PASSED AND ADOPTED this 3 rd day of December, 2025.
 
 
 
Chris Pimentel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
 
 
Susan Truax, City Clerk APPROVED AS TO FORM:
 
Mark D. Hensley, City Attorney
 
Certification
 
 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA    ) COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES   )   SS CITY OF EL SEGUNDO    )
 
I, Susan
Truax, City Clerk of the City of El Segundo, California, do hereby certify that the
whole number of members of the City Council of said City is five; that the
foregoing Ordinance No. 1678 was duly introduced by said City Council at a
regular meeting held on the 18 th day of November,
2025, and was duly passed and adopted by said City Council, approved and signed
by the Mayor, and attested to by the City Clerk, all at a regular meeting of
said Council held on the 3 rd day of December, 2025, and the same was so passed
and adopted by the following vote:
 
AYES:   Mayor Pimentel, Mayor Pro Tem Baldino, Council Member Giroux, and
Council Member Keldorf
NOES:    None
ABSENT:   Council Member Boyles
ABSTAIN: None
 
WITNESS MY HAND THE OFFICIAL SEAL OF SAID CITY this 3 rd     day of December
2025.
 
 
 
Susan Truax, City Clerk of the City of El Segundo, California
 
Exhibit A
 
Amendment No. 1 to Development Agreement (DA) No. 5751
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7350_1612x12228.jpg]
FIRST AMENDMENT TO DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
BEACH CITIES MEDIA CAMPUS (FORMER AIR PRODUCTS SITE)
 
THIS FIRST AMENDMENT TO DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT (the “Amendment”)
is dated as of    , 2025 by and between the CITY OF EL SEGUNDO, a municipal
corporation 
(the “City”), and LA RE DEVELOPMENT HOLDINGS, LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company (the “Developer”), collectively, the “Parties.”
RECITALS
A.   City and Rosecrans-Sepulveda Partners 4, LLC entered into a Development
Agreement dated August 20, 2019 
(the “Agreement”) and recorded on December 11, 2019 in the official records of
Los Angeles County as Instrument No. 20191380759.
B.   On or about September 15, 2025, pursuant to Sections 3.2 and 3.3 of the
Agreement, Rosecrans-
Sepulveda Partners 4, LLC assigned all of its rights, interests, duties,
obligations and requirements under the Agreement to Developer, and Developer assumed all
rights, interests, duties, obligations and requirements of Rosecrans-
Sepulveda Partners 4, LLC under the Agreement.
C.   The Parties now wish to amend the Agreement to allow for an additional
development alternative that would allow for professional sports team headquarters and
practice facility uses within the Project.
D.   Each of the initially capitalized terms used in this Amendment and not
otherwise defined in this Amendment shall have the meaning given to it in the Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and conditions set
forth herein and other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and
sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the Parties agree as follows:
1.   The definitions of “Beach Cities Media Campus,” “Media Campus,”
“Alternatives,” “Project,” and “Site Plan” set forth in Section 1 of the
Agreement are hereby deleted in their entirety and replaced with the following,
respectively:
“Beach Cities Media Campus” or “Media Campus” means development of the Property
with a development of a mixture of creative office, retail/café, and studio and
production facilities, professional sports team headquarters and training
facility that would consist of a maximum of: 240,000 square feet of creative
office/
professional sports team headquarters and training facility with the option to
incorporate a roof deck; 66,000 square feet of studio and production facilities
building; 7,000 square feet of retail/
café uses for a total of 313,000 square feet of
floor area with an associated FAR of 1.13 to 1; and the provision of parking
 
spaces in a combination of surface parking, underground parking, and a parking
structure all as shown in the Conceptual Site Plan attached hereto as Exhibit
B.
“Alternatives” means Alternatives 1, 2, 3, or 4 as described below:
Alternative 1 shall consist of the following development
components: (a) 25,000 square feet of retail space; (b) 100,000 square feet of
general office space with the option to
incorporate a roof deck; and (c) 188,000 square feet of studio
and production facilities, as shown in the Site Plan attached to the Agreement
as Exhibit C.
Alternative 2 shall consist of the following development components: (a)
100,000 square feet of research and
development; (b) 10,000 square feet of retail; and (c) 100,040 square feet of
creative office space with the option to
incorporate a roof deck, as shown in the Site Plan attached to the Agreement as
Exhibit D.
Alternative 3 shall consist of the following development
component: (a) 261,990 square feet of creative office space with the option to
incorporate a roof deck, as shown in the Site Plan attached to the Agreement as
Exhibit E.
Alternative 4 shall consist of the following development
component: (a) up to 65,000 square feet of professional sports
team headquarters and practice facilities uses with the option to incorporate a
roof deck; (b) 200,000 square feet of office
facility uses; and (c) 7,000 square feet of retail/cafe uses.
“Project” means the development of the Property for the Beach Cities Media
Campus or one of the Alternatives in substantial
conformance with the site plans attached to the Agreement and this
Amendment as Exhibits B through F, in accordance with the Project Approvals and
Applicable Rules.
“Site Plan” refers to the conceptual development plans for the Beach
Cities Media Campus and each of the four Alternatives as
shown on Exhibits B through F, attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference.
2.   Section 2.6 of the Development Agreement is hereby deleted in
its entirety and replaced with the following:
2.6 This Agreement is intended to provide flexible entitlements to
develop the Media Campus or one of the four Alternatives, within the parameters
set forth herein and subject to the terms and conditions
hereof, to meet the changing market demands that are likely to occur throughout
the Term of this Agreement.
 
3.   Section 4.13.1(a) of the Development Agreement is hereby deleted in
its entirety and replaced with the following:
a.   Minor Modifications include:
i.   A modification to the Site Plan for the Media Campus, or the Alternatives,
provided the Director determines, in his/her discretion, that the Site Plan is
substantially similar to the
approved Site Plans attached hereto as Exhibits B through F; the modification
complies with the Development Constraints; and there is no change which
would qualify as a Major Modification under section 4.13.2 below;
ii.   A different mix of retail space, general or creative office space,
studio and production facilities, research and development uses, or
professional sports team headquarters and practice facilities
uses provided that it meets the Development Constraints and the Director
determines that no subsequent or supplemental EIR is
required and any new impacts can be mitigated; and
iii.   Any other change that does not qualify as a Major Modification as
defined below.
4.   Exhibit F 
(“Assignment and Assumption Agreement”) to the Agreement is hereby redesignated
as Exhibit G.
5.   A new Exhibit F 
(“Site Plan for Alternative 4”), copy of which is attached hereto and
incorporated herein by this reference, is hereby added to the Agreement.
6.   Section 19 of the Agreement is deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following:
Notices. Any notice that a party is required or may desire to give the other
must be in writing and must be sent by: (i) personal delivery; (ii) deposit in
the United States Mail, postage prepaid; (iii) registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested; (iv) overnight delivery using a nationally recognized
overnight courier providing proof of delivery; or (v) electronic delivery,
evidenced by confirmed receipt, addressed as follows:
If to City:   City of El Segundo 350 Main Street
El Segundo, CA 90245 Attn: City Manager
Email: dgeorge@elsegundo.org
 
With a Copy to:   City of El Segundo
350 Main Street
El Segundo, CA 90245
Attn: Director of Planning and Building Safety
 
Email: mallen@elsegundo.org
 
With a Copy to:   Hensley Law Group
2600 W. Olive Street, Suite 500 Burbank, California 95105
Attn: Mark D. Hensley, Esq.
Email: mhensley@hensleylawgroup.com
 
 
To Developer:   LA RE DEVELOPMENT HOLDINGS, LLC
Attn: Tim Katt
1900 W Loops #1300
Houston, TX 77027
Email: tim.katt@transwestern.com
 
 
With a Copy to:   DLA Piper LLP (US)
Attn: Andrew Brady
2000 Avenue of the Stars Suite 400 Los Angeles, CA 90067
Email: Andrew.brady@us.dlapiper.com
 
 
7.   Recognition of Assignment. Pursuant to Sections 3.2 and 3.3 of the Agreement, all
rights duties and obligations under the Agreement were assigned from Rosecrans-
Sepulveda Partners, 4 LLC to LA RE Development Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited
liability company on or about September 15, 2025 
(“Assignment”). The Parties hereby recognize that LA RE Development Holdings,
LLC has assumed all rights, interests,
duties, obligations and requirements of Developer under the Agreement. The
Parties further recognize that the Assignment also includes an assignment and
assumption of
all rights, interests, duties and obligations to LA RE Development Holdings, LLC with
respect to entitlements, permits and approvals for the Project, and to any and
all
applications for permits, inclusive of all plans, submittals and fees submitted and paid
to City related to same. The Parties agree to hereafter work in good faith to
take any
reasonably required steps to ensure the assignment and assumption of all rights, duties,
obligations and requirements under the Agreement are fully and properly
effectuated.
8.   Ratification. Except as expressly amended by this Amendment, the Agreement
is in
full force and effect and is hereby ratified and confirmed by the Parties in all respects.
9.   Counterparts. This Amendment may be executed in one or more counterparts,
each of which shall be deemed an original, and all of which together shall be
deemed to be one and the same instrument. A facsimile transmission of an
original signature shall be deemed to be an original signature.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Amendment to be duly executed
as of the day and year first above written.
 
CITY:
The City of El Segundo, a municipal corporation. By:    
Chris Pimentel, Mayor DEVELOPER:
.
LA RE Development Holdings, LLC
 
By:    
Its:    
 
EXHIBIT F
SITE PLAN FOR ALTERNATIVE 4
30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60,200 GSF / 2 LEVEL
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CORPORATE HEADQUARTERS & PROFESSIONAL SPORTS TEAM FACILITY
 
 
 
44'-6"
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7353_1735x450.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CREATIVE OFFICE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200,000 GSF / 5 LEVELS
EXECUTIVE PARKING BELOW 120 SPACES
 
 
 
90'-0"
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRIVATE ROOF DECK
 
 
 
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7356_10507x6912.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7359_10540x6913.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1679
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLES 1 AND 8 OF THE EL SEGUNDO MUNICIPAL CODE TO
REGULATE ELECTRIC BICYCLES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, MOTORIZED BICYCLES,
MOTORIZED SCOOTERS, POCKET BIKES AND ANY OTHER ELECTRIC OR MOTORIZED CONVEYANCE
IN THE CITY
The City Council of the City of El Segundo does ordain as follows:
 
SECTION 1.   Findings. The City Council finds and declares as follows:
 
A.   Since 2022, the El Segundo Police Department has seen a significant
increase in community member complaints and traffic crashes involving e-bikes;
 
B.   Manufacturers such as Sur-Ron, Talaria, Segway, and E Ride Pro sell
electric off-highway motorcycles that are often inaccurately referred to as
electrical bicycles, commonly called “E-Bikes” and have often been sold and
advertised by retailers as such;
 
C.   Although California state law prohibits off-highway motorcycles from being
operated on public roadways or sidewalks (VC § 38025), illegal offroad electric
motorcycles are still being operated unlawfully on the City’s public roadways
and parks;
 
D.   The California Vehicle Code (“VC”) authorizes police officers to impound
vehicles for various reasons, such as street racing, DUIs, and driving without
a valid license, because the California Vehicle Code defines off-highway
motorcycles as a conveyance rather than a vehicle, El Segundo police officers
lack the authority to impound such conveyances;
 
E.   The City’s existing code is not up to date considering the proliferation
of off-highway motorcycles and electric bikes in the City;
 
F.   The California Constitution provides that a city may make and enforce
within its limits all local, police, sanitary and other ordinances and
regulations not in conflict with general law (Cal. Const. art. XI, § 7);
 
G.   The California Vehicle Code defines Bicycle (VC § 231), Off-Highway
Motorcycle (VC §§ 400, 436), Electric Bicycle (VC § 312.5), Motorized Bicycle
or MOPED (VC § 406), Motorized Scooter (VC § 407.5), and Pocket Bike (VC §
473);
 
H.   El Segundo Municipal Code (ESMC) section 8-1-1 provides that “[w]henever
any words or phrases used herein are not defined but are defined in the Vehicle
Code of the state and amendments thereto, those definitions shall apply”; and
 
I.   The City Council desires to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of El Segundo and the public.
SECTION 3: Environmental Review. Pursuant to the authority and criteria of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), it has been determined that the
adoption and implementation of this ordinance is not a project for purposes of
CEQA in that it is a general policy regarding the operation of off-highway
motorcycles, electric bicycles and motorized bicycles. Even if it were a
project, the proposed ordinance does not have the potential to cause
significant effects to the environment and, therefore, it is exempt from CEQA
pursuant to 14 Cal. Code Regs. § 15061(b)(3). This proposed ordinance would not
result in any development or changes to the physical environment.
 
SECTION 4. Section 8-4-24 of the El Segundo Municipal Code (“ESMC”) is amended
as follows:
 
8-4-24: COASTERS AND SKATEBOARDS SIDEWALKS IN BUSINESS DISTRICT, PUBLIC PARK OR
RECREATION AREA1 :
   
A.   Use Restricted: No person shall ride, operate,  coast or propel himself
themself  down, along, upon or over any sidewalk in or on any skateboard,
rollerblades, in-line skates, wagon, cart, hand wagon, coaster, bicycle, off-
highway motorcycle, electric bicycle, motorized bicycle, pocket bike, motorized
scooter, or any other electric or motorized conveyance, or other vehicle in any
business district, public park or recreation area.
   
B.   Exception: Skateboarding 1 and freestyle bicycling shall only be permitted
in areas designated by the city.
 
C.   This section is not intended to apply to or otherwise restrict electric or
motorized wheelchairs or 4-wheel mobility scooters being operated in a safe
manner by an individual with a disability, as that term is defined under the
Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.) and Appendix
II Federal Regulations.
 
 
1. See also title 10, chapter 4 of this code for provisions relative to
skateboard parks.
 
SECTION 5. Chapter 4 of Title 8 of the El Segundo Municipal Code (“ESMC”) is
amended to add the following section:
 
   “8-4-25: OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, ELECTRIC BICYCLES, AND OTHER BIKES AND
CONVEYANCES.
 
A.   It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate any bicycle, off-highway
motorcycle, electric bicycle, motor-driven cycle, pocket bike, motorized
scooter, or any other electric or motorized conveyance upon any street,
highway, path, lane or any area of the City in an unsafe manner. “Unsafe
manner” means operating in such a way as to constitute a danger to the
operator, a passenger, other motorists, other riders, or pedestrians in the
area.
 
B.   It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate any bicycle, off-highway
motorcycle, electric bicycle, motor-driven cycle, pocket bike, motorized
scooter, or any other electric or motorized conveyance upon any street, path,
lane or any area of the City while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage
or any drug or under the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any
drug.
 
C.   No person riding or operating a bicycle, off-highway motorcycle, electric
bicycle, motor-driven cycle, pocket bike, motorized scooter, or any other
electric or motorized conveyance shall transport another person upon such
vehicle or conveyance unless such passenger is seated upon a separate seat
attached to the bike or conveyance.
 
D.   If a juvenile is cited for violating this section, the City officer
issuing the citation may impound the bike or conveyance. The officer shall
provide written notice to the juvenile of the place to which the bike or
conveyance has been removed. Such impounded bike or conveyance may only be
released to an adult responsible for the juvenile upon payment of the impound
fee established by the City Council.”
 
SECTION 6. Section 1-2-4 (Provisions Punishable as Infractions) is amended to
add the following code sections to the list of violations punishable as
infractions:
 
8-4-25: Off-Highway Motorcycles, Electric Bicycles, and other Bikes and
Conveyances.
 
 
SECTION 7. Validity of Previous Code Sections. If the entire Ordinance or its
application is deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, any repeal
of the ESMC or other regulation by this Ordinance will be rendered void and
cause such ESMC provision or other regulation to remain in full force and
effect for all purposes.
 
SECTION 8. Enforceability. Repeal or amendment of any previous Code Sections
does not affect any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred before, or
preclude prosecution and imposition of penalties for any violation occurring
before this Ordinance’s effective date. Any such repealed part will remain in
full force and effect for sustaining action or prosecuting violations occurring
before the effective date of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 9. Severability. If any part of this Ordinance or its application is
deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City Council intends
that such invalidity will not affect the effectiveness of the remaining
provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are
severable.
 
SECTION 10. The City Clerk, or her duly appointed deputy, is directed to
certify the passage and adoption of this Ordinance; cause it to be entered into
the City of El Segundo’s book of original ordinances; make a note of the
passage and adoption in the records of this meeting; and, within fifteen (15)
days after the passage and adoption of this Ordinance, cause it to be published
or posted in accordance with California law.
 
SECTION 11. Effective Date. This Ordinance will become effective on the 31 st
day following its passage and adoption.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED this 3 rd day of December, 2025.
____________________________
Chris Pimentel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
 
________________________________
Susan Truax, City Clerk
 
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
 
 
________________________________
Mark D. Hensley, City Attorney
 
CERTIFICATION
 
 
 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA      )
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES   )   SS
CITY OF EL SEGUNDO      )
 
I, Susan Truax, City Clerk of the City of El Segundo, California, do hereby
certify that the whole number of members of the City Council of said City is
five; that the foregoing Ordinance No. 1679 was duly introduced by said City
Council at a regular meeting held on the 18 th day of November, 2025, and was
duly passed, and adopted by said City Council, approved and signed by the
Mayor, and attested to by the City Clerk, all at a regular meeting of said
Council held on the 3 rd day of December, 2025, and the same was so passed and
adopted by the following vote:
 
AYES:   Mayor Pimentel, Mayor Pro Tem Baldino, Council Member Giroux and
Council Member Keldorf
NOES:   None
ABSENT:   Council Member Boyles
ABSTAIN:   None
 
WITNESS MY HAND THE OFFICIAL SEAL OF SAID CITY this 3 rd day of December, 2025.
 
 
                                     
                      Susan Truax, City Clerk
of the City of El Segundo,
California
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1680
 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE 2025 EDITION OF THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE, 2025
CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE, 2025 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE, 2025 MECHANICAL
CODE, 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE, 2025 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE, 2025
CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE, 2025 CALIFORNIA
EXISTING BUILDING CODE, 2025 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE, 2025
CALIFORNIA WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE, 2024 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND
SPA CODE, 2024 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, WITH CERTAIN APPENDICES
AND AMENDMENTS AND AMENDING THE EL SEGUNDO MUNICIPAL CODE TO REFLECT SUCH
ADOPTION.
 
The City Council of the city of El Segundo does ordain as follows:
 
SECTION 1. Findings.
 
A.   Government Code § 50022.9 authorizes the City of El Segundo (the “City”)
to adopt, by reference, codes from another governmental
entity as the City’s own;
 
B.   The California Building Standards Codes (the “California Building Codes”)
established statewide codes and regulations for building construction and fire
safety and is published every three years by order of the California
Legislature;
 
C.   The 2025 California Building Codes are based upon the International Code
Council’s 2024 International Building Code;
 
D.   The 2025 California Building Codes were published on July 1, 2025 and will
become effective on January 1, 2026;
 
E.   California Health & Safety Code §§ 17958.5 and 18941.5 authorize cities
and counties to modify the California Building Code by adopting more
restrictive
standards and modifications if such standards and modifications are accompanied
by express findings that they are reasonably necessary because
of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions; and
 
F.   In accordance with Health & Safety Code § 17958.7, the City Council finds
that there are local climatic, geographic, and topographical conditions
justifying the various local amendments to the California Building Code
Standards Code as set forth in attached Resolution No. 5573 which is adopted by
the City Council and incorporated herein by this reference.
 
SECTION 2. Sections 13-1-1 and 13-1-2 of Chapter 1 of Title 13 of the
El Segundo Municipal Code (“ESMC”) are repealed and replaced by the following
to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
13-1-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE, 2025 Edition: 
Pursuant to
California Government Code Section 50022.2, the California Building Code, 2025 Edition,
published as Title 24, Part 2, of the California Code of Regulations,
including Appendices F, H, I, and J (“CBC”) is adopted by reference,
subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth in Section 13-1-2.
One true copy of the CBC is on file in the office of the Building Official and
is available for public inspection as required by law.
 
13-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE:
The California Building Code adopted pursuant to Section 13-1-1 is hereby
amended as follows:
 
Section 105.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
105.1 Permit Required.
Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or
to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first
make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.
Parking lots shall not be paved, improved, striped, or restriped unless a
separate permit for each parking lot has first been obtained from the building
official.
Exception: A separate permit shall not be required to pave, improve, stripe,
or restripe a parking lot when such work is included in the scope of another
project for which a building permit has been issued and when the design of such
parking lot was included in the plan check review of such project
 
Subsection 14 is added to Section 105.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC as follows:
105.2 Work exempt from permit.
Building:
14. Block wall and concrete fences not over 3 feet 6 inches high.
 
Section 105.3.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
 
105.3.2 Expiration of Plan Check.
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been
abandoned 180 days 12 months after the date of filing, unless such application
has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the
building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for
additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested
in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 4 & 5] Time
limitation shall be in accordance with the California Administrative Code,
Chapter 7, Section 7-129.
 
Section 105.8 Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
105.8 Responsibility of permittee.
Building permits shall be presumed by the city to incorporate all of the work
that the applicant, the applicant’s agent, employees and/or contractors
shall carry out. Said proposed work shall be in accordance with the approved
plans and with all requirements of this code and any other laws or regulations
applicable thereto. No city approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from
the responsibility of complying with the provisions of this code nor shall any
vested rights be created for any work performed in violation of this code.
 
Section 109.4 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance.
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be
subject to a fee in addition to the normally established permit fee, equal to
100% of such normally established permit fee, or as otherwise determined by the
building official.
 
Section 109.6.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
109.6.1 Plan check fees refund.
No portion of the plan check fee shall be refunded unless plan review has not been
performed,
in which case 80 percent of the plan check fee shall be refunded upon
written application for refund submitted
by the person who made original payment
of such fee and with the written consent of the owner of the real property
on which the work was proposed to be done. The Building Official shall
determine, in such official’s discretion, whether an applicant
is qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from the date of
the submittal for plan check, no plan check
fees shall be refunded. In the event subsequent
application for plan check is made by a person who has received a refund, the
full amount of all required fees shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this
chapter.
 
Section 109.6.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows
 
109.6.2 Permit fees refund.
In the event any person shall have obtained a building permit and no portion of the
work or construction covered by such permit shall have commenced, nor any
inspection performed by any City employee, and notice of abandonment has been
received from the owner of the real property on which such work would have been
performed, the permittee, upon presentation to the Building Official of a
written request for refund, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to
80 percent of the building permit fee actually paid for such permit. The
Building Official shall determine, in such official’s discretion,
whether an applicant is qualified to receive
a refund. After 12 months have elapsed from the date of the issuance of the permit,
no permit fees shall be refunded. In the event subsequent application
for a permit
is made by a person who has received a refund, the full amount of all required fees
shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this chapter.
Exception:
1.   If a permit has been issued for a project located in an area outside the
jurisdiction of the City, 100 percent of the permit and plan checking fee may
be refunded.
2.   If a duplicate permit has been erroneously issued, 100 percent of the
duplicated permit and plan checking fee may be refunded.
 
Section 109.7 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
109.7 Re-inspections.
A re-inspection fee in the amount set by City Council resolution
may be assessed for each inspection or re-
inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called
is incomplete or when required corrections are not made. This section is not
to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job
is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as
controlling the practice of calling for inspections
before the job is ready for such inspection or re- inspection. Re-inspection
fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise
available on the work site, the approved plans are not
readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which
inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of
the building official. In instances where re-inspection fees have been
assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until required
fees have been paid.
 
Section 110.1.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
110.1.1 Setback Certification required.
A California State licensed surveyor is required to certify the location and setbacks
of all new construction prior to the first foundation inspection. A copy of the
certification
shall be available to the Building Division inspector for the job file prior to
the first inspection.
Exception:   Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out
the provisions of this section, the Building Official shall have the authority to
grant modifications for individual cases.
Section 113.3 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
113.3 Board of Appeals.
The board of appeals consists of members of the Planning Commission. The term
of a board of appeals member will coincide with the term of service
as a Planning Commissioner and will terminate
should the member cease serving as a Planning Commissioner. The building
official is the secretary to the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules
and regulations for conducting its investigations and will
render all its decisions and findings on contested matters,
in writing to the building official, with a duplicate copy for any appellant or
contestant affected by such decision or finding and may recommend to the City
Council appropriate new legislation.
Three members of the board constitute a quorum. The Planning Chairperson is the
board’s chairperson and in the chairperson’s absence the board will select a
temporary chairperson.
The city will assess a filing fee set by City Council resolution, or a higher
amount set by resolution, at the time that an appellant file appeal of any
order, decisions, or determination made by the building official relative to
the application and interpretation of this code. The filing fee is refundable
should the appellant prevail in a decision by the board. The appeal must be
taken by filing a written notice of appeal, in letterform,
to the board of appeals. The board’s decision constitutes the city’s final
decision.
 
Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the CBC, a new definition is added to read as
follows:
MID-RISE BUILDING. A building four or more stories high but not exceeding 75
feet in height and not defined as a high-
rise building by section 202 of the California
Building Code. Height measurements shall be made from the underside of the roof
or floor above the topmost space that may be occupied to the lowest fire apparatus
access road level.
 
Section 456 of Chapter 4 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
Section 456 Mid-Rise Buildings.
The provisions of this section shall apply to buildings or structures defined
in Section 202 as mid-rise buildings. All mid-rise buildings shall meet the
requirements of Section 918 of the El Segundo Fire Code and any other applicable
fire and life safety provisions.
 
Section 903.2 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is amended and Sections 903.2.1 through
903.2.21 are deleted, to read as follows:
903.2 Where Required.
A.   New Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, an approved automatic
sprinkler system in new buildings and structures shall be required for all
occupancies.
Exception: New detached buildings under one thousand (1,000) square feet
subject to approval of the Building Official or Fire Official.
B.   Existing Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any work to an
existing building which removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the exterior
perimeter wall height as defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and alterations
will require the existing building to be fully sprinklered throughout.
 
Section 903.2.22 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
903.2.22 Structures in the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area. An
automatic sprinkler system must be provided throughout every facility or
building hereafter constructed within the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area.
 
903.2.22.1 Existing Buildings. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any work to an existing building which
removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the exterior perimeter wall height as
defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and alterations will require the existing
building to be fully sprinklered throughout.
 
Section 903.3.5.3 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems.
The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed
90% of the water supply capacity.
 
Section 903.3.8 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is deleted in its entirety and replaced
to read as follows:
903.3.8 Limited Area Sprinkler Systems.
When a fire sprinkler system is required, it shall be provided throughout the
building.
Exception: Protection for specific appliances and/or hazards.
 
Section 903.3.10 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
903.3.10 Floor Control Valves.
Floor control valves and waterflow detection assemblies shall be installed at
each floor where any of the following occur:
1.   Buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than
30 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
2.   Buildings that are three or more stories in height.
3.   Buildings that are two or more stories below the highest level of fire
department access.
Exception: Group R-2 and R-3.1 occupancies floor control valves and water flow
detection assemblies shall not be required.
 
Section 909.11 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is deleted in its entirety and replaced
to read as follows:
909.11 General. 
The smoke-control system shall be supplied with two sources of power. Primary
power shall be from the normal building power systems. Secondary power shall be
from an approved standby source complying Section 1203 of this code. The
standby power source and its transfer switches shall be in a room separate from
the normal power transformers and switchgear and ventilated directly
to and from the exterior. The room shall be enclosed with not less than 1- hour
fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
Transfer to full standby power shall be automatic and within 60 seconds
of failure of the primary power. The systems shall comply with the City of El
Segundo Electrical Code.
Exception: The secondary power is not required for pressurized enclosures in
buildings of less than 5 floors used for human occupancy.
 
Section 1206.6 is added to Chapter 12 of the 2025 Edition of the CBC to read as
follows:
1206.6: RESIDENTIAL NOISE INSULATION STANDARDS (Airport Noise Sources)
 
1206.6.01 Noise Insulation Requirements for New Construction.
 
1206.6.02 Purpose and Scope. The purpose of this section is to establish
minimum noise insulation performance standards for new residential dwelling units
and additions of habitable rooms to existing residential dwelling units to
protect public health, safety, and welfare from the effects of excessive noise,
including without limitation, indoor quality of life, speech
interference, and sleep disruption.
 
1206.6.03 Applicability. 
This section applies to all newly constructed residences and habitable room
additions to existing residence
 
1206.6.04 Definitions. 
For purposes of this section, the following words must have the following
meaning:
 
“Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)” means the noise measure defined in 21
Code of California Regulations § 5001(d), and any successor regulation or
amendment.
“Habitable Room” means a room that is a space in a structure
for living, sleeping,
eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility
space, garages, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
“LAX” means Los Angeles International Airport. 
“Noise Impact Boundary for LAX”
means the area around LAX as defined in 21 California code of regulations
§ 5001(1), and any successor regulation or amendment.
The city’s building safety
department must at all times maintain a current map of the noise impact boundary.
The latest published map by LAWA located at the Building Safety Counter shall be
used as the basis for determination. 
“Residence” means any occupancy group R building as used in El Segundo title 13
of the El Segundo municipal code.
 
1206.6.05 Standards.
Any new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing
residence that is within the noise impact boundary for LAX must be designed to
ensure that internal noise levels due to LAX do not exceed 45 dB CNEL. This
standard may be satisfied in two ways: (1) by performing the acoustical
analysis described in section 1206.6.06, below, or (2) by employing the
prescribed construction methods described in section 1206.6.07, below.
 
1206.6.06: Acoustical Analysis.
A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more
habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum noise
insulation performance standards established in this section if it includes an
acoustical analysis demonstrating that the proposed design will ensure that
internal noise levels due to LAX aircraft noise will not exceed 45 dB CNEL. The
acoustical analysis shall be proven to meet the standard by providing post-
construction/pre-occupancy acoustic measurement to verify compliance with the
45 dB CNEL standard. The Building Official has the discretion to implement
policies that meet the intent of this code section.
A.   The acoustical analysis must be prepared by a person experienced in
the field of acoustical engineering. The analysis must consider and include:
the topographical relationship between LAX aircraft noise sources and the
dwelling site, the characteristics of those noise sources, predicted noise
spectra and levels at the exterior of the dwelling site, the basis for this
prediction (measured or obtained from published data), the noise insulation
measures to be employed, and the effectiveness of the proposed noise insulation
measures.
B.   If the interior allowable noise levels are to be met by requiring that
windows be unopenable or closed, the design for the structure must also
specify a ventilation or air-
conditioning system to provide a habitable interior environment, having at
least 2 air exchanges per hour for the affected
rooms. The ventilation system must not compromise the interior room noise
reduction.
 
1206.6.07 Prescribed Construction Methods.
A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more
habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum noise
insulation performance standards established in this section if the design
incorporates the following construction methods.
 
Construction Methods in the 70 dB CNEL and Greater Noise Zone
 
1206.6.08 Exterior Walls.
New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be constructed
as follows:
A.   Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
B.   Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum /g-inch thickness, brick veneer,
masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal siding must
be installed over ½-inch minimum solid sheathing.
C.   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per square
foot must require an interior supporting stud-
wall that is finished with at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or
plaster.
D.   Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool and must
be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
E.   Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
F.   Interior wall finsh must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or
5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster.
 
1206.6.09 Exterior Windows.
A.   Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40
dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic
feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
B.   Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms
must:
1.   Have a sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB, or
2.   Must be 5/8-inch laminated glass with STC rating of 40 dB and must be  set
in non-hardening glazing materials, or
3.   Must be glass block at least 3½ inches thick.
C.   The total areas of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed 20%
of the wall area.
 
1206.6.10 Exterior Doors.
A.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and edge
seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC 40
dB.
B.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to aircraft
noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a minimum STC rating of
35 dB.
C.   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must not be allowed in walls that
are directly exposed to aircraft noise. Sliding glass doors in walls that are
not directly exposed must have an STC rating of at least 40 dB.
D.   Access doors from attached garage to the interior of a residence
must have an STC rating of at least 30 dB.
 
1206.6.11 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
A.   Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered
on their top surface with minimum ½-inch solid sheathing and any roof covering
allowed by this code.
B.   Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool with
a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
C.   Attic ventilation must be:
1.   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are fitted with
transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating flexible ducting
or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated fiberglass sound
absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree bend in the
duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior
through the duct into the attic, or
2.   Noise control louver vents, or
3.   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
4.   Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at least 5/
8- inch thick. Ceiling materials must be mounted on resilient channels.
5.   Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed
light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line or at
any point that provides at least a 4-inch space between the skylight glazing
and the secondary glazing and must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic or
laminated glass. The weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted
by the building code. The size of skylights must be no more than 20 percent of
the roof area of the room.
 
1206.6.12 Ventilation.
A.   A ventilation system must be provided
that will provide at least the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply
requirements of this code in each habitable room without opening any window,
door or other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated
flexible glass fiber ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any two
points of connection.
B.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
 
1206.6.13 Fireplaces.
Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that is
operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of the firebox.
 
1206.6.14 Wall and Ceiling Openings.
Openings in the shell of the residence
that degrade its ability to achieve an interior
CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed are prohibited
unless access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-conditioning, or
other openings are designed to maintain the 45 dB CNEL (or less) standard
in the room to which they provide access.
 
Construction Methods In The 65 dB CNEL To 70 dB CNEL Noise Zone
 
1206.6.15 Exterior Walls.
New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be constructed
as follows:
A.   Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
B.   Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7 /8-inch thickness, brick veneer,
masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal siding must
be installed over 1 /2-inch solid sheathing.
C.   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot
will require an interior studwall that is finished with at least 5/8-inch thick
gypsum wallboard or plaster.
D.   Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool and must
be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
E.   Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
F.   Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wallboard or
plaster.
 
1206.6.16   Exterior Windows.
A.   Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of
at least STC 35 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5
cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
B.   Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms
must be at least ¼-inch thick and must be set in non-hardening glazing
materials.
C.   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed 20%
of the floor area.
 
1206.6.17 Exterior Doors.
A.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and edge
seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC 35
dB.
B.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to
aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a minimum STC
rating of 30 dB
C.   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must have glass that is 1/4-inch
thick.
D.   Access doors from a garage to a habitable room must have an STC rating of
at least 30 dB.
 
1206.6.18 Roof Ceiling Construction.
A.   Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered on
their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof covering
allowed by this code
B.   Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
C.   Attic ventilation must be:
1.   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are fitted
with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating flexible
ducting or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated fiberglass sound
absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-
degree bend in the duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the
exterior through the duct into the attic, or
2.   Noise control louver vents, or
3.   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
4.   Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at least 5/
8-inch thick.
5.   Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed
light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line and
must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated glass.
The weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted by the building
code.
1206.6.19 Floors.
The floor of the lowest habitable rooms must be concrete slab on grade or wood
framed floors.
 
1206.6.20   Ventilation.
A.   A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of at least 2 air
exchanges in each affected habitable room without opening any window, door or
other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be
insulated flexible glass fiber ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any
two points of connection.
B.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type with
no ducted connection to the exterior.
 
1206.6.21 Fireplaces.
Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that is
operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of the firebox.
 
 
1206.6.22 Wall and Ceiling Openings.
Openings in the shell of the residence
that degrade its ability to achieve an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less
when all doors and windows are closed are prohibited. Any access panels, pet
doors, mail delivery drops, air-conditioning, or other openings must be
designed to maintain the 45 dB CNEL or less standard in the room to which they
provide access.
 
Section 1507.3.1 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1507.3.1 Deck requirements.
Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only over solid-structural sheathing
boards.
 
Section 1613.8 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
1613.8 Amendments to ASCE 7.
The provisions of Section 1613.8 shall be permitted as an amendment to the
relevant provisions of ASCE 7.
Section 1613.8.1 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
1613.8.1 Values for Vertical Combinations.
Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.2.3.1 Exception 3 as follows:
3.   Detached one- and two-family dwellings up to two stories in height of
light frame construction.
 
Section 1613.8.2 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
1613.8.2 Wood Diaphragms.
 
Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.11.2.2.3 as follows:
12.11.2.2.3 Wood Diaphragms.
The anchorage of concrete or masonry structural walls to wood diaphragms shall
be in accordance with AWC SDPWS 4.1.5.1 and this section. Continuous ties
required by this section shall be in addition to the diaphragm sheathing. In
wood diaphragms, the continuous ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm
sheathing. Anchorage shall not be accomplished by use of toe nails or nails
subject to withdrawal, nor shall wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain
bending or cross-grain tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall not be considered
effective as providing ties or struts required by this section.
For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, wood diaphragms
supporting concrete or masonry walls shall comply with the following:
1.   The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40 feet. Added chords of
diaphragms may be used to form sub diaphragms to transmit the anchorage forces
to the main continuous crossties.
2.   The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the depth of the
subdiaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm shear.
 
Section 1613.8.3 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
1613.8.3 Structural Separation.
 Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.12.3 Equation 12.12-1 as follows:
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/ (12-12-
IMAGES/0-0-0-7384_3527x1748.jpg]                                           1) 
Section 1613.9 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
1613.9 Seismic Design Provisions for Hillside Buildings.
 
1613.9.1 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum regulations for the design
and construction of new buildings and additions to existing buildings when
constructing such buildings on or into slopes steeper than one unit vertical in
three units horizontal (33.3%). These regulations establish minimum standards
for seismic force resistance to reduce the risk of injury or loss of life in
the event of earthquakes.
 
1613.9.2 Scope.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of the lateral-force-
resisting system for hillside buildings at and below the base level diaphragm.
The design of the lateral-force-resisting system above the base level diaphragm
shall be in accordance with the provisions for seismic and wind design as
required elsewhere in this division.
Exception: Non-habitable accessory buildings and decks not supporting or
supported from the main building are exempt from these regulations.
 
1613.9.3 Definitions.
For the purposes of this section certain terms are defined as follows:
BASE LEVEL DIAPHRAGM is the floor at, or closest to, the top of the highest
level of the foundation.
DIAPHRAGM ANCHORS are assemblies that connect a diaphragm to the adjacent
foundation at the uphill diaphragm edge.
DOWNHILL DIRECTION is the descending direction of the slope approximately
perpendicular to the slope contours.
FOUNDATION is concrete or masonry which supports a building, including
footings, stem walls, retaining walls, and grade beams.
FOUNDATION EXTENDING IN THE DOWNHILL DIRECTION is a foundation running downhill
and approximately perpendicular to the uphill foundation.
HILLSIDE BUILDING is any building or portion thereof constructed on or into a
slope steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%). If only
a portion of the building is supported on or into the slope, these regulations
apply to the entire building.
PRIMARY ANCHORS are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a direct
connection as described in Sections 1613.9.5 and 1613.9.7.3 between the
diaphragm and the uphill foundation.
SECONDARY ANCHORS are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a redundant
diaphragm to foundation connection, as described in Sections 1613.9.6 and
1613.9.7.4.
UPHILL DIAPHRAGM EDGE is the edge of the diaphragm adjacent and closest to the
highest ground level at the perimeter of the diaphragm.
UPHILL FOUNDATION is the foundation parallel and closest to the uphill
diaphragm edge.
 
1613.9.4 Analysis and Design.
 
1613.9.4.1 General.
Every hillside building within the scope of this section shall be analyzed,
designed, and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this division.
When the code-prescribed wind design produces greater effects, the wind design
shall govern, but detailing requirements and limitations prescribed in this and
referenced sections shall be followed.
 
1613.9.4.2 Base Level Diaphragm-Downhill Direction.
The following provisions shall apply to the seismic analysis and design of the
connections for the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction.
 
1613.9.4.2.1 Base for Lateral Force Design Defined.
For seismic forces acting in the downhill direction, the base of the building
shall be the floor at or closest to the top of the highest level of the
foundation.
 
1613.9.4.2.2 Base Shear.
In developing the base shear for seismic design, the response modification
coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall and building frame systems.
The total base shear shall include the forces tributary to the base level
diaphragm including forces from the base level diaphragm.
 
1613.9.5 Base Shear Resistance-Primary Anchors.
 
1613.9.5.1 General. 
The base shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted through primary
anchors from diaphragm struts provided in the base level diaphragm to the
foundation.
 
1613.9.5.2 Location of Primary Anchors.
A primary anchor and diaphragm strut shall be provided in line with each
foundation extending in the downhill direction. Primary anchors and diaphragm
struts shall also be provided where interior vertical lateral-force-resisting
elements occur above and in contact with the base level diaphragm. The spacing
of primary anchors and diaphragm struts or collectors shall in no case exceed
30 feet (9144 mm).
1613.9.5.3 Design of Primary Anchors and Diaphragm Struts. 
Primary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of Section 1613.6.8.
 
1613.9.5.4 Limitations.
The following lateral-force-resisting elements shall not be designed to resist
seismic forces below the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction:
1.   Wood structural panel wall sheathing,
2.   Cement plaster and lath,
3.   Gypsum wallboard, and
4.   Tension only braced frames.
Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of Section
2205.2.1.2 may be used to transfer forces from the primary anchors and
diaphragm struts to the foundation provided lateral forces do not induce
flexural stresses in any member of the frame or in the diaphragm struts.
Deflections of frames shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal
members when the frame is not rectangular.
 
1613.9.6 Base Shear Resistance-Secondary Anchors.
 
1613.9.6.1 General.
In addition to the primary anchors required by Section 1613.7.5 1613.6.5, the
base shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted through secondary
anchors in the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in the base
level diaphragm.
Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending in
the downhill direction spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm) on center
extend up to and are directly connected to the base level diaphragm for at
least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
 
1613.9.6.2 Secondary Anchor Capacity and Spacing.
Secondary anchors at the base level diaphragm shall be designed for a minimum
force equal to the base shear, including forces tributary to the base level
diaphragm, but not less than 600 pounds per lineal foot (8.76 kN/m) based on
Allowable Stress Design (ASD) levels. The secondary anchors shall be uniformly
distributed along the uphill diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a maximum of 4
feet (1219 mm) on center.
 
1613.9.6.3 Design.
Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with
Section 1613.9.8.
1613.9.7 Diaphragms below the Base Level-Downhill Direction.
The following provisions shall apply to the lateral analysis and design of the
connections for all diaphragms below the base level diaphragm in the downhill
direction.
 
1613.9.7.1 Diaphragm Defined.
Every floor level below the base level diaphragm shall be designed as a
diaphragm.
 
1613.9.7.2 Design Force.
Each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall be designed for all
tributary loads at that level using a minimum seismic force factor not less
than the base shear coefficient.
 
1613.9.7.3 Design Force Resistance-Primary Anchors.
The design force described in Section 1613.9.7.2 shall be resisted through
primary anchors from diaphragm struts provided in each diaphragm to the
foundation. Primary anchors shall be provided and designed in accordance with
the requirements and limitations of Section 1613.9.5.
 
1613.9.7.4 Design Force Resistance-Secondary Anchors.
 
1613.9.7.4.1 General.
In addition to the primary anchors required in Section 1613.9.7.3, the design
force in the downhill direction shall be resisted through secondary anchors in
the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in each diaphragm below the
base level.
Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending in
the downhill direction, spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm) on center,
extend up to and are directly connected to each diaphragm below the base level
for at least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
 
1613.9.7.4.2 Secondary Anchor Capacity. 
Secondary anchors at each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall be
designed for a minimum force equal to the design force but not less than 300
pounds per lineal foot (4.38 kN/m) based on Allowable Stress Design (ASD)
levels. The secondary anchors shall be uniformly distributed along the uphill
diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
 
1613.9.7.4.3 Design.
Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with
Section 1613.9.8.
 
1613.9.8 Primary and Secondary Anchorage and Diaphragm Strut Design. 
Primary and secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in
accordance with the following provisions:
1.   Fasteners. All bolted fasteners used to develop connections to wood
members shall be provided with square plate washers at all bolt heads and nuts.
Washers shall be minimum 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm
by 76 mm) in size. Nuts shall be tightened to finger tight plus one half (1/2)
wrench turn prior to covering the framing.
2.   Fastening. The diaphragm to foundation anchorage shall not be accomplished
by the use of toenailing, nails subject to withdrawal, or wood in cross-grain
bending or cross-grain tension.
3.   Size of Wood Members. Wood diaphragm struts collectors, and other wood
members connected to primary anchors shall not be less than 3 inch (76 mm)
nominal width. The effects of eccentricity on wood members shall be evaluated
as required per Item 9.
4.   Design. Primary and secondary anchorage, including diaphragm struts,
splices, and collectors shall be designed for 125% of the tributary force.
5.   Allowable Stress Increase. The one-third allowable stress increase
permitted under Section 1605.3.2 shall not be taken when the working
(allowable) stress design method is used.
6.   Steel Element of Structural Wall Anchorage System. The strength design
forces for steel elements of the structural wall anchorage system, with the
exception of anchor bolts and reinforcing steel, shall be increased by 1.4
times the forces otherwise required.
7.   Primary Anchors. The load path for primary anchors and diaphragm struts
shall be fully developed into the diaphragm and into the foundation. The
foundation must be shown to be adequate to resist the concentrated loads from
the primary anchors.
8.   Secondary Anchors. The load path for secondary anchors and diaphragm
struts shall be fully developed in the diaphragm but need not be developed
beyond the connection to the foundation.
9.   Symmetry. All lateral force foundation anchorage and diaphragm strut
connections shall be symmetrical. Eccentric connections may be permitted when
demonstrated by calculation or tests that all components of force have been
provided for in the structural analysis or tests.
10.   Wood Ledgers. Wood ledgers shall not be used to resist cross-grain
bending or cross-grain tension.
 
1613.9.9 Lateral-Force-Resisting Elements Normal to the Downhill Direction.
 
1613.9.9.1 General.
In the direction normal to the downhill direction, lateral-force-resisting
elements shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this section.
 
1613.9.9.2 Base Shear.
In developing the base shear for seismic design, the response modification
coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall and building frame systems.
 
1613.9.9.3 Vertical Distribution of Seismic Forces.
For seismic forces acting normal to the downhill direction the distribution of
seismic forces over the height of the building using Section 12.8.3 of ASCE 7
shall be determined using the height measured from the top of the lowest level
of the building foundation.
 
1613.9.9.4 Drift Limitations.
The story drift below the base level diaphragm shall not exceed 0.007 times the
story height at strength design force level. The total drift from the base
level diaphragm to the top of the foundation shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19 mm).
Where the story height or the height from the base level diaphragm to the top
of the foundation varies because of a stepped footing or story offset, the
height shall be measured from the average height of the top of the foundation.
The story drift shall not be reduced by the effect of horizontal diaphragm
stiffness.
 
1613.9.9.5 Distribution of Lateral Forces.
 
1613.9.9.5.1 General.
The design lateral force shall be distributed to lateral-force-resisting
elements of varying heights in accordance with the stiffness of each individual
element.
 
1613.9.9.5.2 Wood Structural Panel Sheathed Walls.
The stiffness of a stepped wood structural panel shear wall may be determined
by dividing the wall into adjacent rectangular elements, subject to the same
top of wall deflection. Deflections of shear walls may be estimated by AWC
SDPWS Section 4.3.2. Sheathing and fastening requirements for the stiffest
section shall be used for the entire wall. Each section of wall shall be
anchored for shear and uplift at each step. The minimum horizontal length of a
step shall be 8 feet (2438 mm) and the maximum vertical height of a step shall
be 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm).
 
1613.9.9.5.3 Reinforced Concrete or Masonry Shear Walls.
Reinforced concrete or masonry shear walls shall have forces distributed in
proportion to the rigidity of each section of the wall.
 
1613.9.9.6 Limitations.
The following lateral force-resisting-elements shall not be designed to resist
lateral forces below the base level diaphragm in the direction normal to the
downhill direction:
1.   Cement plaster and lath,
2.   Gypsum wallboard, and
3.   Tension-only braced frames.
Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of Section
2205.2.1.2 of this Code may be designed as lateral-force-resisting elements in
the direction normal to the downhill direction, provided lateral forces do not
induce flexural stresses in any member of the frame. Deflections of frames
shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal members when the frame is
not rectangular.
 
1613.9.10 Specific Design Provisions.
 
1613.9.10.1 Footings and Grade Beams.
All footings and grade beams shall comply with the following:
1.   Grade beams shall extend at least 12 inches (305 mm) below the lowest
adjacent grade and provide a minimum 24 inch (610 mm) distance horizontally
from the bottom outside face of the grade beam to the face of the descending
slope.
2.   Continuous footings shall be reinforced with at least two No. 4
reinforcing bars at the top and two No. 4 reinforcing bars at the bottom.
3.   All main footing and grade beam reinforcement steel shall be bent into the
intersecting footing and fully developed around each corner and intersection.
4.   All concrete stem walls shall extend from the foundation and reinforced as
required for concrete or masonry walls.
 
1613.9.10.2 Protection against Decay and Termites.
All wood to earth separation shall comply with the following:
1.   Where a footing or grade beam extends across a descending slope, the stem
wall, grade beam, or footing shall extend up to a minimum 18 inches (457 mm)
above the highest adjacent grade.
Exception: At paved garage and doorway entrances to the building, the stem wall
need only extend to the finished concrete slab, provided the wood framing is
protected with a moisture proof barrier.
2.   Wood ledgers supporting a vertical load of more than 100 pounds per lineal
foot (1.46 kN/m) based on Allowable Stress Design (ASD) levels and located
within 48 inches (1219 mm) of adjacent grade are prohibited. Galvanized steel
ledgers and anchor bolts, with or without wood nailers, or treated or decay
resistant sill plates supported on a concrete or masonry seat, may be used.
 
1613.9.10.3 Sill Plates.
All sill plates and anchorage shall comply with the following:
1.   All wood framed walls, including nonbearing walls, when resting on a
footing, foundation, or grade beam stem wall, shall be supported on wood sill
plates bearing on a level surface.
2.   Power-driven fasteners shall not be used to anchor sill plates except at
interior nonbearing walls not designed as shear walls.
 
1613.9.10.4 Column Base Plate Anchorage.
The base of isolated wood posts (not framed into a stud wall) supporting a
vertical load of 4,000 pounds (17.8 kN) based on Allowable Stress Design (ASD)
levels or more and the base plate for a steel column shall comply with the
following:
1.   When the post or column is supported on a pedestal extending above the top
of a footing or grade beam, the pedestal shall be designed and reinforced as
required for concrete or masonry columns. The pedestal shall be reinforced with
a minimum of four No. 4 bars extending to the bottom of the footing or grade
beam. The top of exterior pedestals shall be sloped for positive drainage.
2.   The base plate anchor bolts or the embedded portion of the post base, and
the vertical reinforcing bars for the pedestal, shall be confined with two No.
4 or three No. 3 ties within the top 5 inches (127 mm) of the concrete or
masonry pedestal. The base plate anchor bolts shall be embedded a minimum of 20
bolt diameters into the concrete or masonry pedestal. The base plate anchor
bolts and post bases shall be galvanized and each anchor bolt shall have at
least 2 galvanized nuts above the base plate.
 
1613.9.10.5 Steel Beam to Column Supports.
All steel beam to column supports shall be positively braced in each direction.
Steel beams shall have stiffener plates installed on each side of the beam web
at the column. The stiffener plates shall be welded to each beam flange and the
beam web. Each brace connection or structural member shall consist of at least
two 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) diameter machine bolts.
 
Section 1613.10 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
 
1613.10 Suspended Ceilings.
Minimum design and installation standards for suspended ceilings shall be
determined in accordance with the requirements of Section 2506.2.1 of this Code
and this section.
 
1613.10.1 Scope.
This part contains special requirements for suspended ceilings and lighting
systems. Provisions of Section 13.5.6 of ASCE 7 shall apply except as modified
herein.
 
1613.10.2 General.
The suspended ceilings and lighting systems shall be limited to 6 feet (1828
mm) below the structural deck unless the lateral bracing is designed by a
licensed engineer or architect.
 
1613.10.3 Sprinkler Heads. 
All sprinkler heads (drops) except fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/
ceiling assemblies, shall be designed to allow for free movement of the
sprinkler pipes with oversize rings, sleeves or adaptors through the ceiling
tile. Sprinkler heads and other penetrations shall have a 2 inch (50mm)
oversize ring, sleeve, or adapter through the ceiling tile to allow for free
movement of at least 1 inch (25mm) in all horizontal directions. Alternatively,
a swing joint that can accommodate 1 inch (25 mm) of ceiling movement in all
horizontal directions is permitted to be provided at the top of the sprinkler
head extension.
Sprinkler heads penetrating fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling
assemblies shall comply with Section 714 of this Code.
 
1613.10.4 Special Requirements for Means of Egress.
Suspended ceiling assemblies located along means of egress serving an occupant
load of 30 or more shall comply with the following provisions.
 
1613.10.4.1 General.
Ceiling suspension systems shall be connected and braced with vertical hangers
attached directly to the structural deck along the means of egress serving an
occupant load of 30 or more and at lobbies accessory to Group A Occupancies.
Spacing of vertical hangers shall not exceed 2 feet (610 mm) on center along
the entire length of the suspended ceiling assembly located along the means of
egress or at the lobby.
 
1613.10.4.2 Assembly Device.
All lay-in panels shall be secured to the suspension ceiling assembly with two
hold-down clips minimum for each tile within a 4-foot (1219 mm) radius of the
exit lights and exit signs.
 
1613.10.4.3 Emergency Systems.
Independent supports and braces shall be provided for light fixtures required
for exit illumination. Power supply for exit illumination shall comply with the
requirements of Section 1008.3, 1008.2.4 of this Code.
 
1613.10.4.4 Supports for Appendage.
Separate support from the structural deck shall be provided for all appendages
such as light fixtures, air diffusers, exit signs, and similar elements.
 
Section 1704.6 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1704.6 Structural Observations.
Where required by the provisions of Section 1704.6.1, the owner or the owner’s
authorized agent shall employ a structural observer to perform structural
observations.
Structural observation does not include or waive the responsibility for the
inspections in Section 110 or the special inspections in Section 1705 or other
sections of this code. The structural observer shall be one of the following
individuals:
1.   The registered design professional responsible for the structural design,
or
2.   A registered   design   professional   designated   by the registered   design
professional responsible for the structural design.
Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural observer shall submit
to the building official a written statement identifying the frequency and
extent of structural observations.
The owner or owner’s authorized agent shall coordinate and call a preconstruction
meeting between the structural observer, contractors, affected subcontractors and
special inspectors. The structural observer shall preside over the meeting. The
purpose of the meeting shall be to identify the major structural elements and
connections that affect the vertical and lateral load resisting systems of the
structure and to review scheduling of the required observations. A record of
the meeting shall be included in the report submitted to the Building Official.
Observed deficiencies shall be reported in writing to the owner or owner’s
authorized agent, special inspector, contractor and the Building Official.
Upon the form prescribed by the Building Official, the structural observer
shall submit to the Building Official a written statement at each significant
construction stage stating
that the site visits have been made and identifying any reported deficiencies which,
to the best of the structural observer’s knowledge, have not been resolved.
A final report by the structural observer which states that all observed
deficiencies have been resolved is required before acceptance of the work by
the Building Official.
 
Section 1704.6.1 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1704.6.1 Structural observations for seismic resistance.
Structural observations shall be provided for those structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, where one or more of the
following conditions exist:
1.   The structure is classified as Risk Category III or IV in accordance with
Table 1604.5.
2.   The height of the structure is greater than 75 feet (22860 mm) above the
base.
3.   The structure is classified as Risk Category I or II in accordance with
Table 1604.5, and a lateral design is required for the structure or portion
thereof.
Exception: One-story wood framed Group R-3 and Group U Occupancies less than
2,000 square feet in area, provided the adjacent grade is not steeper
than 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% sloped), assigned to Seismic
Design Category D.
4.   When so designated by the registered design professional responsible for
the structural design.
5.   When such observation is specifically required by the building official.
 
Section 1705.3 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1705.3 Concrete Construction.
The special inspections and tests for concrete construction shall be performed
in accordance with this section and Table 1705.3.
Exceptions:   Special inspections and tests shall not be required for:
1.   Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less above grade
plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the structural design of
the footing isbased on a specified compressive strength, f’c, no greater than
2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa) regardless of the compressive
strength specified in the construction documents or used in the footing
construction.
2.   Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three stories or less
above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock where:
2.1.   The footings support walls of light-frame construction;
2.2.   The footings are designed in accordance with Table 1809.7; or
2.3.   The structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive
strength, f’c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa),
regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents
or used in the footing construction.
3.   Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground, including
prestressed slabs on grade, where the effective prestress in the concrete is
less than 150 psi (1.03 Mpa).
3.1.   Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.
 
Exception 3 of Section 1705.13 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1705.13 Special inspections for seismic resistance.
Special inspections for seismic resistance shall be required as specified in
Sections 1705.13.1 through 1705.13.9, unless exempted by the exceptions of
Section 1704.2.
Exception: The special inspections specified in Sections 1705.13.1 through
1705.13.9 are not required for structures designed and constructed in accordance
with one of the following:
1.   The structure consists of light-
frame construction; the design spectral response acceleration at short periods,
SDS, as determined in Section 1613.2.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building
height of the structure does not exceed 35 feet (10 668 mm)
2.   The seismic force-resisting system of the structure consists of reinforced
masonry or reinforced concrete; the design spectral response acceleration at
short periods, SDS, as determined in Section 1613.2.4, does not exceed 0.5; and
the building height of the structure does not exceed 25 feet (7620 mm)
3.   The structure is a detached one- or two-family dwelling not exceeding two
stories above grade plane, is not assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F
and does not have any of the following horizontal or vertical irregularities in
accordance with Section 12.3 of ASCE 7:
3.1.   Torsional or extreme torsional irregularity.
3.2.   Nonparallel systems irregularity.
3.3.   Stiffness-soft story or stiffness-extreme soft story irregularity.
3.4.   Discontinuity in lateral strength-weak story irregularity.
 
Section 1807.1.4 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1807.1.4 Permanent wood foundation systems.
Permanent wood foundation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance
with AWC PWF. Lumber and plywood shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1
(Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B and Section 5.2) and shall be
identified in accordance with Section 2303.1.9.1. Permanent wood foundation
systems shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D,
E or F.
 
Section 1807.1.6 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
 
1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls.
Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported
at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed
in accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall
not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
 
Section 1809.3 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1809.3 Stepped footings.
The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings
shall be
permitted to have a slope not exceeding 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal 
(10- percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change
the
elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the surface of the ground slopes
more than 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, the stepping
requirement shall also apply to the top surface of grade beams supporting
walls. Footings shall be reinforced with four No. 4 bars. Two bars shall be
place at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure 1809.3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7387_6692x4109.jpg]
FIGURE 1809.3 - STEPPED FOOTING
 
Section 1809.7 and Table 1809.7 of the 2025 CBC are amended to read as follows:
1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction.
Where a specific design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings
supporting walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed
in accordance with Table 1809.7. Prescriptive footings in Table 1809.7 shall
not exceed one story above grade plane for structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category D, E or F.
 
TABLE 1809.7 PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF LIGHT FRAME
CONSTRUCTION a, b, c, d, e
 
NUMBER OF FLOORS SUPPORTED BY THE FOOTING f WIDTH OF        THICKNESS OF
                                            FOOTING (inches)FOOTING (inches)
1                                           12               6
2                                           15               6
3                                           18               8
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
a.   Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.
b.   The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the
elevation of the top of the footing.
c.   Not Adopted.
d.   See Section 1908 for additional requirements for concrete footings of
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.
e.   For thickness of foundation walls, see Section 1807.1.6.
f.   Footing shall be permitted to support a roof addition to the
stipulated number of
floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required for supporting one
floor.
g.   Not Adopted.
 
Section 1809.12 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1809.12 Timber footings.
Timber footings shall be permitted for buildings of Type V construction and as
otherwise approved by the building official. Such footings shall be treated in
accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B). Treated
timbers are not required where placed entirely below permanent water level or
where used as capping for wood piles that project above the water level
over submerged or marsh lands. The compressive stresses perpendicular to grain
in untreated timber footing supported upon treated piles shall not exceed 70
percent of the allowable stresses for the species and grade of timber
as specified in the ANSI/AWC NDS. Timber footings shall not be used in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
 
Section 1810.3.2.4 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1810.3.2.4 Timber.
Timber deep foundation elements shall be designed as piles or poles in
accordance with ANSI/AWC NDS. Round timber elements shall conform to ASTM D 25.
Sawn timber elements shall conform to DOC PS-20. Timber shall not be used in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
 
Section 1905.1 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1905.1 General. 
In addition to the provisions of ACI 318, structural concrete shall comply with
the requirements of Section 1905. The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as
indicated in Sections 1905.1.1 through 1905.1.11.
 
Section 1905.6.2 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1905.6.2 Seismic Design Category C, D, E, and F.
Structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E, or F shall not have
elements of structural plain concrete except as follows:
1.    Structural plain concrete basement, foundation, or other walls below the
basement as defined in ASCE/SEI 7 are permitted in detached one- and two-family
dwellings three stories or less in height constructed with stud bearing walls.
In dwellings assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, the height of the wall
shall not exceed 8 feet (2438 mm), the thickness shall not be less than 7 ½
inches (190 mm), and the wall shall retain no more than 4 feet (1219 mm) of
unbalanced fill. Walls shall have reinforcement in accordance with 14.6.1 of
ACI 318. Concrete used for fill with a minimum cement context of 2 sacks of
Portland or cementitious material per cubic yard.
2.     Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns are
permitted, provided that the projection of the footing beyond the face of the
supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.
   Exception: In detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less
in height, the projection of the footing beyond the face of the supported
member is permitted to exceed the footing thickness.
3.   Plain concrete footings supporting walls are permitted, provided that the
footings have at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars shall
not be smaller than No. 4 and shall have a total area of not less than 0.002
times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing. For footings that exceed 8
inches (202 mm) in thickness, n Not fewer than one bar shall be provided at the
top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement shall be provided at
corners and intersections.
   Exceptions:
1.   In Seismic Design Categories A, B, and C, d Detached one- and two-family
dwellings three stories or less in height and constructed with stud-bearing
walls are permitted to have plain concrete footings without longitudinal
reinforcement with at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars not
smaller than No. 4 and a total area of less than 0.002 times the gross cross-
sectional care area of the footing.
2.   For foundation systems consisting of a plain concrete footing and a plain
concrete stemwall, a minimum of one bar shall be provided at the top of the
stemwall and at the bottom of the footing.
3.   Where a slab ground is cast monolithically with the footing, one No. 5 bar
is permitted to be located at either the top of the slab or the bottom of the
footing.
 
Section 1905.8 is hereby added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
1905.8 ACI 318, Section 18.7.5.
Modify ACI 318, Section 18.7.5, by adding Section 18.7.5.8 and 18.7.5.9 as
follows:
18.7.5.8 Where the calculated point of contraflexure is not within the middle
half of the member clear height, provide transverse reinforcement as specified
in ACI 318 Sections 18.7.5.1, Items (a) through (c), over the full height of
the member.
 
18.7.5.9 - At any section where the design strength, Pn, of the column is less
than the sum of the shears Ve computed in accordance with ACI 318 Sections
18.7.6.1 and 18.6.5.1 for all the beams framing into the column above the level
under consideration, transverse reinforcement as specified in ACI 318 Sections
18.7.5.1 through 18.7.5.3 shall be provided. For beams framing into opposite
sides of the column, the moment components are permitted to be assumed to be of
opposite sign. For the determination of the design strength, Pn, of the column,
these moments are permitted to be assumed to result from the deformation of the
frame in any one principal axis.
 
Section 1905.9 is hereby added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
1905.9 ACI 318, Section 18.10.4.
Modify ACI 318, Section 18.10.4, by adding Section 18.10.4.7 as follows:
18.10.4.7 - Walls and portions of walls with Pu > 0.35Po shall not be
considered to contribute to the calculated shear strength of the structure for
resisting earthquake-induced forces. Such walls shall conform to the
requirements of ACI 318 Section 18.14.
 
Section 1905.10 is hereby added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
1905.10 ACI 318, Section 18.12.6.
Modify ACI 318, by adding Section 18.12.6.2 as follows:
18.12.6.2 Collector and boundary elements in topping slabs placed over precast
floor and roof elements shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) or 6 db in
thickness, where db is the diameter of the largest reinforcement in the topping
slab.
 
Section 2304.10.2 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2304.10.2 Fastener requirements.
Connections for wood members shall be designed in accordance with the
appropriate methodology in Section 2302.1. The number and size of fasteners
connecting wood members shall not be less than that set forth in Table 2304.10.2.
Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.2 shall not be used to resist or transfer
seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the
allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the
building official.
 
Section 2304.12.2.8 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2304.12.2.8 Wood used in retaining walls and cribs.
Wood installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative treated in accordance
with AWPA U1 for soil and fresh water use. Wood shall not be used in retaining
or crib walls for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
 
Section 2305.4 is added to Chapter 23 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
2305.4 Quality of Nails.
In Seismic Design Category D, E or F, mechanically driven nails used in wood
structural panel shear walls shall meet the same dimensions as that required
for hand-driven nails, including diameter, minimum length and minimum head
diameter. Clipped head or box nails are not permitted in new construction. The
allowable design value for clipped head nails in existing construction may be taken
at no more than the nail-head-area ratio of that of the same size hand-driven
nails.
 
Section 2305.5 is added to Chapter 23 of the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
2305.5 Hold-down connectors.
In Seismic Design Category D, E or F, hold-down connectors shall be designed to
resist shear wall overturning moments using approved cyclic load values or 75
percent of the allowable seismic load values that do not consider cyclic
loading of the product. Connector bolts into wood framing shall require steel
plate washers on the post on the opposite side of the anchorage device. Plate
size shall be a minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by
76 mm by 76 mm) in size. Hold-down connectors shall be tightened to finger
tight plus one half (1/2) wrench turn just prior to covering the wall framing.
 
Section 2306.2 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2306.2 Wood-frame diaphragms.
Wood-frame diaphragms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC
SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples,
requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear
values set forth in Table 2306.2(1) or 2306.2(2) shall only be permitted for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.
Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing members
with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and
approved by the building official.
The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.2(1) and 2306.2
(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design.
Wood structural panel diaphragms used to resist seismic forces in structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F shall be applied directly to the
framing members.
Exception:   Wood structural panel diaphragms are permitted to be fastened over
solid lumber planking or laminated decking, provided the panel joints and
lumber planking or laminated decking joints do not coincide.
 
Section 2306.3 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2306.3 Wood-frame shear walls.
Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC
SDPWS. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F,
application of Tables 4.3A and 4.3B of AWC SDPWS shall include the following:
1.   Wood structural panel thickness for shear walls shall not be less than 3/
8-inch thick and studs shall not be spaced at more than 16 inches on center.
2.   The maximum nominal unit shear capacities for 3/8 -
inch wood structural panels resisting seismic forces in structures assigned
to Seismic Design Category D, E or F is 400 pounds per linear foot (plf).
Exception: Other nominal unit shear capacities may be permitted if such values
are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building official.
3.   Nails shall be placed not less than 1/2 inch in from the panel edges and
not less than 3/8 inch from the edge of the connecting members for shear
greater than 350 plf using ASD or 500 plf using LRFD. Nails shall be placed not
less than 3/8 inch from panel edges and not less than 1/
4 inch from the edge of the connecting members for shears of 350 plf or less
using ASD or 500 plf or less using LRFD.
4.   Table 4.3B application is not allowed for structures assigned to Seismic Design
Category D, E, or F.
For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, application of Table 4.3C
of AWC SDPWS shall not be used below the top level in a multi-level building.
Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and
limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth
in Table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall only be permitted for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.
Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing members
with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and
approved by the building official.
The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3
(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying
with ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood
Siding in the AWC SDPWS.
 
Section 2307.2 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
2307.2 Wood-frame shear walls.
Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Section 2306.3 as applicable.
 
Table 2308.10.1 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7424_9361x10599.jpg]
 
Section 2308.10.5.1 and Figure 2308.10.5.1 of the 2025 CBC are amended to read
as follows:
2308.10.5.1 Alternate braced wall (ABW).
An ABW shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure
2308.10.5.1. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less
than 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm).
Each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 3/8-inch (3.2 mm) minimum-
thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized
box nails in accordance with Table 2304.10.2 and blocked at wood structural
panel edges. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, each
panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm)
wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on
panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports. Two anchor bolts installed in
accordance with Section 2308.7.1 shall be provided in each panel. Anchor bolts
shall be placed at each panel outside quarter points. Each panel end stud shall
have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation, capable of providing an
approved uplift capacity of not less than 1,800 pounds (8006 N). The hold-down
device shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommendations. The ABW shall be supported directly on a foundation or on
floor framing supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the
entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with
not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is
required to have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by
12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing or turned-down slab edge is
permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This continuous footing or
turned-down slab edge shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top
and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped 15 inches (381 mm) with the
reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly under the
braced wall line.
Where the ABW is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, the wood
structural panel sheathing shall be provided on both faces, three anchor bolts
shall be placed at one-quarter points and tie-down device uplift capacity shall
be not less than 3,000 pounds (13 344 N).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7433_9241x4763.jpg]
 
Section 2308.10.5.2 and Figure 2308.10.5.2 of the 2025 CBC are amended to read
as follows:
2308.10.5.2 Portal frame with hold-downs (PFH).
A PFH shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure
2308.10.5.2. The adjacent door or window opening shall have a full-length
header.
In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 16
inches (406 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each panel
shall be sheathed on one face with a single layer of 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) minimum-
thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized
box nails in accordance with Figure 2308.10.5.2. The wood structural panel
sheathing shall extend up over the solid sawn or glued-laminated header and
shall be nailed in accordance with Figure 2308.10.5.2. A built-up header
consisting of at least two 2-inch by 12-inch (51 mm by 305 mm) boards, fastened
in accordance with Item 24 of Table 2304.10.2 shall be permitted to be used. A
spacer, if used, shall be placed on the side of the built-up beam opposite the
wood structural panel sheathing. The header shall extend between the inside
faces of the first full-length outer studs of each panel. The clear span of the
header between the inner studs of each panel shall be not less than 6 feet
(1829 mm) and not more than 18 feet (5486 mm) in length. A strap with an uplift
capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4,400 N) shall fasten the header to the
inner studs opposite the sheathing. One anchor bolt not less than 5/8 inch
(15.9 mm) diameter and installed in accordance with Section 2308.7.1 shall be
provided in the center of each sill plate. The studs at each end of the panel
shall have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift
capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds (15 570 N).
Where a panel is located on one side of the opening, the header shall extend
between the inside face of the first full-length stud of the panel and the
bearing studs at the other end of the opening. A strap with an uplift capacity
of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N) shall fasten the header to the bearing
studs. The bearing studs shall also have a hold-down device fastened to the
foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N). The
hold-down devices shall be an embedded strap type, installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s recommendations. The PFH panels shall be supported directly
on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall
line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top
and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater
than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm)
continuous footing is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This
continuous footing shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and
bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped not less than 24 inches (610 mm)
with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly
under the braced wall line. Where a PFH is installed at the first story of two-
story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 24 inches (610
mm).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7442_9241x6473.jpg]
 
Section 2308.10.8.1 of Chapter 23 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as
follows:
2308.10.8.1 Foundation requirements.
Braced wall lines shall be supported by continuous foundations.
Exception: For structures with a maximum plan dimension not more than 50 feet
(15240 mm), continuous foundations are required at exterior walls only for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.
For structures in Seismic Design Categories D and E, exterior braced wall
panels shall be in the same plane vertically with the foundation or the portion
of the structure containing the offset shall be designed in accordance with
accepted engineering practice and Section 2308.3.
 
Section 2308.10.9 of the 2025 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2308.10.9 Attachment of sheathing.
Fastening of braced wall panel sheathing shall be not less than that prescribed
in Tables 2308.10.1 and 2304.10.2. Wall sheathing shall not be attached to
framing members by adhesives. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.2 shall not
be used to
resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category
D, E or F.
Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when
the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by
the building official.
All braced wall panels shall extend to the roof sheathing and shall be attached
to parallel roof rafters or blocking above with framing clips (18 gauge
minimum) spaced at maximum 24 inches 
(6096 mm) on center with four 8d nails per leg (total eight 8d nails per clip).
Braced wall panels shall be laterally braced at each top corner and at maximum
24 inches (6096 mm) intervals along the top plate of discontinuous vertical
framing.
 
Section 3114 of the 2025 CBC is amended as follows:
SECTION 3114
 
INTERMODAL SHIPPING CONTAINERS
 
3114.1 General. The provisions of Section 3114 and other applicable sections of
this code shall apply to intermodal shipping containers that are repurposed for
use as buildings or structures or as a part of buildings or structures.
Exceptions:
1.   Not adopted.
2.   Stationary storage battery arrays located in intermodal shipping
containers complying with Chapter 12 of the California Fire Code.
3.   Intermodal shipping containers that are listed as equipment complying with
the standard for equipment, such as air chillers, engine generators, modular
datacenters, and other similar equipment.
4.   Intermodal shipping containers housing or supporting experimental
equipment are exempt from the requirements of Section 3115 provided they comply
with all of the following:
4.1.   Single-unit stand-alone intermodal shipping containers shall be
supported at grade level and used only for occupancies as specified under Risk
Category I in Table 1604.5;
4.2.   Single-unit stand-alone intermodal shipping containers shall be located
a minimum of 8 feet from adjacent structures and are not connected to a fuel
gas system or fuel gas utility; and
4.3.   In hurricane-prone regions and flood hazard areas, single-unit stand-
alone intermodal shipping containers are designed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of Chapter 16.
4.4.   Intermodal shipping containers approved as temporary structures
complying with Section 3103.
5.   [HCD] shipping containers constructed or converted off-site that meet the
definition of Factory-built Housing in Health and Safety Code Section 19971 or
Commercial Modular(s) as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18001.8
shall be approved by the Department of Housing and Community Development.
6.   Single-unit stand-alone intermodal shipping containers used as temporary
storage or construction trailer on active construction sites. Construction
support facilities for uses and activities not directly associated with the
actual processes of construction, including but not limited to, offices,
meeting rooms, plan rooms, other administrative or support functions shall not
be exempt from Section 3114.
 
3114.8.4 Detailed design procedure. A structural analysis meeting the
requirements of this section shall be provided to the building official to
demonstrate the structural adequacy of the intermodal shipping containers.
Exception: Structures using an intermodal shipping container that meet the
limitation of Section 3114.8.5.1 and designed in accordance with the simplified
procedure in Section 3114.8.5.
 
3114.8.5.2 Structural design assumptions. Where permitted by Section
3114.8.5.1, single-unit stand-alone, intermodal shipping containers shall be
designed using the following assumptions for the profile steel panel lateral-
force resisting system side walls and end walls:
1.   The appropriate detailing requirements contained in Chapters 16 through
23.
2.   Response modification coefficient, R = 2,
3.   Over strength factor, ?0 = 2.5,
4.   Deflection amplification factor, Cd = 2, and
5.   Limits on structural height, hn = 9.5 feet (2900 mm).
 
Section J101.3 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J101.3 Hazards.
1.   Whenever the building official determines that any land or any existing
excavation or fill has, from any cause, become a menace to life or limb, or
endangers public or private property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability
of public or private property, the owner or other person in legal control of
the property concerned
shall, upon receipt of a written notice thereof from the building official,
correct such condition in accordance with the provisions of this appendix
and the requirements and conditions set forth in the notice so as to eliminate
such condition. The owner or other person in legal control of the property
shall immediately comply with the provisions set forth in the notice and shall
complete
the work within 180 days from the date of the notice unless a shorter period of time
for completion has been specified in the notice in which case the owner shall
comply with the shorter period of time. Upon written application and good cause
shown, the building official may approve the request for an extension of time
to complete the work required by the notice.
2.   If the above condition is not eliminated within the specified time period,
the
building official may file with the Office of the Los Angeles County Recorder a
certificate stating that the property is deemed substandard and that the owner
thereof has been so notified to correct the substandard condition. Said
certificate shall specify the conditions creating the substandard
classification.
3.   When the above conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of the
building official, upon receiving a sixty-dollar fee from the owner
or his agent, the
building official shall file with the Office of the Los Angeles County Recorder, within
a reasonable period of time, a certificate specifying that the conditions creating the
substandard classification have been corrected and that the property
is no longer considered substandard.
 
Section J101.4 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J101.4 Safety Precautions.
1.   General.
a)   If at any stage of work on an excavation or fill, the building official
determines that the work has become or is likely to become dangerous to any
person, or is likely to endanger any property, public or private, the building
official must be authorized to require safety precautions to be immediately
taken by the property owner as a condition to continuing such permitted work or
to require cessation thereof forthwith unless and until it is made safe and to
amend the plans for such work.
b)   Safety precautions may include, without limitation, specifying a flatter
exposed slope or construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
terracing, compaction, cribbing, retaining walls or buttress fills, slough
walls, desilting basins, check dams, benching, wire mesh and guniting, rock
fences, revetments or diversion walls.
c)   Upon the determination of the building official that such safety
precautions during grading are necessary, the building official must provide a
notice and order to the permittee to implement same. After receiving such
notice, oral or written, it is unlawful for the permittee or any person to
proceed with such work contrary to such order.
2.   Removal of Ground Cover.
a)   The existing vegetative ground cover of any watershed in any hillside area
cannot be destroyed, removed or damaged except for routine maintenance pursuant
to lawful grading, use or occupancy of the property or to clear hazardous
vegetation near structures and roads.
b)   Whenever ground cover is removed or damaged pursuant to a validly issued
grading permit, the permittee must restore and maintain the affected area with
an approved ground cover or must accomplish such other erosion control
protection measures as may be approved by the building official. Such erosion
control must be completed within thirty days after cessation of the grading
work or other work pursuant to a validly issued building permit.
3.   Maintenance of Protective Devices.
All devices used to protect hillside areas from erosion or landslide damage
including, without limitation, retaining walls, cribbing, terracing, surface
and subsurface drainage structures, interceptor drains, check dams, and riprap
must be maintained in good condition and repair as approved by the building
official at the time of completion of construction thereof.
 
Section J101.5 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J101.5 Protection of Utilities
The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed and
that requires a grading permit must be responsible for the prevention of damage
to any public utilities or services.
 
Section J101.6 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J101.6 Protection of Adjacent Properties
The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed and
that requires a grading permit is responsible for the prevention of damage to
adjacent property and no person must excavate on land sufficiently close to the
property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public or private property without supporting and protecting such
property from
settling, cracking or other damage that might result. Special precautions approved
by the building official must be made to prevent imported or exported materials
from being deposited on the adjacent public way and/or drainage courses. A 30-
day excavation notice must be provided as required by California Civil Code
Section 829-834 when the excavation is of sufficient depth and proximity to
adjacent lot structures.
 
Section J101.7 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J101.7 Storm water control measures.
The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed
and that requires a grading permit under Section J103 shall put into effect and
maintain all precautionary measures necessary to protect adjacent water courses
and public private property from damage by erosion, flooding, and deposition of
mud, debris and construction-related pollutants originating from the site
during, and after, grading and related construction activities. Furthermore,
the owner and permittee shall be responsible for putting into effect and
maintaining appropriate measures necessary to prevent any change in cross-
lot surface drainage that may adversely affect any adjoining property
as a result of grading and/or construction- related activities. Such measures
to prevent any adverse cross-lot surface drainage effects on adjoining property
shall be required whether shown on approved grading plans or not.
 
Section J101.8 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J101.8 Conditions of approval.
In granting any permit under this code, the building official may include such
conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or
hazard to public or private property. Such conditions may include, but shall
not be limited to:
1.   Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of this
code.
2.   Requirements for fencing of excavations or fills which would otherwise be
hazardous.
 
Section J101.9 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J101.9 Rules and regulations.
 
J101.9.1 Rules. The permissive provisions of this chapter shall not be presumed
to waive any regulations imposed by other statutes or other ordinances of the
State of California or the City of El Segundo.
 
J101.9.2 Regulations. If two or more pertinent regulations are not identical,
those regulations shall prevail which are more restrictive or which afford
greater safety to life, limb, health, property or welfare. For the purposes of
these regulations, grading permits shall be considered as building permits and
shall be subject to the administrative provisions of this code, unless
otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter.
 
Section J103.2 is amended to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J103.2 Exemptions.
A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
1.   When approved by the building official, grading in an isolated, self-
contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such
grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
2.   Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code where
the excavation is limited to within the volume of the proposed structure.
3.   Cemetery graves.
4.   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
5.   Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.
6.   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand,
aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do
not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil
and adjoining properties.
7.   Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered
soils engineer or engineering geologist. This shall not exempt grading of
access roads or pads created for exploratory excavations. Exploratory
excavations must not create a hazardous condition to adjacent properties or the
public in accordance with Section J101.3. Exploratory excavations must be
restored to existing conditions, unless approved by the building official.
8.   An excavation that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m^) and complies
with one of the following conditions:
(a)    is less than 2 feet (0.6 m) in depth.
(b)    does not create a cut slope greater than 5 feet (1.5 m) measured
vertically upward from the cut surface to the surface of the natural grade and
is not steeper than 2 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
9.   A fill not intended to support a structure that does not obstruct a
drainage course and complies with one of the following conditions:
(a)    is less than 1 foot (0.3 m) in depth and is placed on natural terrain
with a slope flatter than 5 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (20 percent
slope).
(b)    is less than 3 feet (0.9 m) in depth at its deepest point measured
vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does not
exceed 50 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than 2 units
horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
(c)    is less than 5 feet (1.5 m) in depth at its deepest point measured
vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does not
exceed 20 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than 2 units
horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
 
Section J103.3 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J103.3 Permit issuance.
1.   The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do
only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the
permit or on the grading plans and specifications approved by the building
official at the time of issuance.
2.   Jurisdiction of other agencies. Permits issued under the requirements of
this chapter shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for securing
required permits for work to be accomplished which is regulated by any other
code, department or division of the governing agency.
3.   Conditions of permit. The building official, upon recommendation of the
city traffic and transportation administrator, may impose such regulations with
respect to access routes to and from grading sites in hillside areas as the
building official shall determine are required in the interest of safety
precautions involving pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
4.   Consent of adjacent property owner. Whenever any excavation or fill
requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permit applicant
shall obtain the written consent or legal easements or other property rights of
the adjacent property owner or their authorized representative, and shall file
a signed and duly notarized copy of such consent with the building official,
and no permit for such grading work may be issued unless and until all
necessary consent documents are so filed. The consent shall be in a form
acceptable to the building official.
 
Section J103.4 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J103.4 Grading fees.
1.   Fees for grading plan check and for grading permits shall be established
or modified by resolution of the city council. The schedule of such fees shall
remain on file and be available in the office of the building official. The
building official shall, with the approval of the city manager, recommend
changes to the council when the costs to provide grading plan check and grading
inspection services make it appropriate.
2.   The applicant shall pay a plan check fee prior to acceptance of grading
plans and specifications for checking by the city. The plan check fee shall be
based on the total volume of the excavation and fill, on the site. The grading
plan check fee shall be recalculated each time the grading plan volume of
excavation and fill exceeds the volume used to determine the original plan
check fee, and the applicant shall pay the difference between the revised and
original fee before the revised grading plans are accepted for review by the
city. The original grading plan check fee includes the cost to the applicant
for the original submittal plus two additional submittals of corrected grading
plans and specifications. When required by the building official, the applicant
shall pay a supplemental grading plan check fee in accordance with the fee
resolution established by the city council.
3.   Whenever the applicant submits a grading plan for plan check that is
substantially different in design of the earthwork as compared to previously
submitted grading plans, the submittal shall be considered an original and a
new grading plan check fee shall be determined and paid to the city as provided
in this section.
4.   The applicant shall pay a grading permit fee prior to the issuance of a
grading permit by the city. The fee shall be based on the total volume of
excavation and fill, on the site. If, during grading operations, the plans and
specifications for the grading project are revised increasing the volume of
excavation, fill, or a combination thereof above the volume that was used to
determine the grading permit fee, the applicant shall pay to the city the
difference between the original grading permit fee and the recalculated fee
before work may resume under the grading permit.
5.   Whenever grading operations are commenced without an approved grading
permit, a penalty shall be added to all unpaid fees for grading plan check and
grading permits. The penalty shall be three hundred percent of all fees due the
city.
 
Section J104.2.1 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J104.2.1 Grading Designation.
Grading in hilly terrain and all grading in excess of 2,500 cubic yards shall
be performed in accordance with the approved
grading plan prepared by a registered civil engineer
and shall be designated as “engineered grading.” Grading involving
less than 2,500 cubic yards and not located in an area of mountainous
terrain shall be designated as “regular grading” unless the permittee chooses
to have the grading performed as engineered grading, or the building official
determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case
grading shall conform to the requirements for engineered grading.
 
Section J104.2.2 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J104.2.2 Regular grading requirements.
In addition to the provisions of Section 106, and Section 104.2, Chapter 1,
Division II, an application for a regular grading permit shall be accompanied
by plans in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work.
The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner, and the
name of the person who prepared the plan. If the slope of the grade exceeds 3
units horizontal to 1 unit vertical or as required by the building official,
the plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual
licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications. The plan shall
include the following information:
1.   General vicinity of the proposed site.
2.   Limits and depths of cut and fill.
3.   Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed, and
the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet (4.6 m) of the
proposed grading.
4.   Contours, flow areas, elevations, or slopes which define existing and
proposed drainage patterns.
5.   Storm water provisions in accordance with the requirements of Appendix J
and Title 5 Chapter 4 of the City of El Segundo Municipal Code.
6.   Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities, and
recorded public and private easements and use restricted use areas.
7.   Location of all Special Flood Hazard Areas as designated and defined in
Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations.
 
Section J104.2.3 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J104.2.3 Engineered grading requirements.
In addition to the provisions of Chapter 1 Division II, Section 107 and
Appendix J Section J104.2, an application for an engineered grading permit
shall be accompanied by plans and specifications and supporting data consisting
of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans and
specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the
state to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the building
official. Specifications shall contain information covering structures and
material requirements. Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in
detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant
laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans
shall give location of the work, the name and address of the owner, and the
person by whom they were prepared. The plans shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following information:
1.   General vicinity of the proposed site.
2.   Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of
terrain and area drainage.
3.   Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finish contours to be achieved by the
grading, proposed drainage channels, and related structures.
4.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls,
cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a
part of, the proposed work. A map showing the drainage area and the estimated
runoff of the area served by any drains shall also be provided.
5.   Location of any existing or proposed buildings or structures on the
property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or
structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet (4.6 m) of the
property or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations.
6.   Recommendations in the geotechnical engineering report and the engineering
geology report shall be incorporated into the grading plans or specifications.
When approved by the building official, specific recommendations contained in
the geotechnical engineering report and the engineering geology report, that
are applicable to grading, may be included by reference.
7.   The dates of the geotechnical engineering and engineering geology reports
together with the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the firms or
individuals who prepared the reports.
8.   A statement of the earthwork quantities of materials to be excavated and/
or filled. Earthwork quantities shall include quantities for geotechnical and
geological remediation. In addition, a statement of material to be imported or
exported from the site.
9.   A statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for work
covered by the permit.
10.   A statement signed by the owner acknowledging that a field engineer,
geotechnical engineer and engineering geologist, when appropriate, will be
employed to perform the services required by this code, whenever approval of
the plans and issuance of the permit are to be based on the condition that such
professional persons be so employed. These acknowledgments shall be on a form
furnished by the building official.
11.   Storm water provisions are required to be shown on the grading plan in
accordance with Appendix J Section J and Title 5 Chapter 4 of the ESMC.
12.   A drainage plan for that portion of a lot or parcel to be utilized as a
building site (building pad), including elevation of floors with respect to
finish site grade and locations of existing and proposed stoops, slabs, fences
or other features that may affect drainage.
13.   Location and type of any existing or proposed private sewage disposal
system.
14.   Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities, and
recorded public and private easements.
15.   Location of all recorded floodways.
16.   Location of all Special Flood Hazard Areas as designated and defined in
Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations.
 
Section J109.5 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows:
J109.5 Disposal.
All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest
practicable street, storm drain, or natural watercourse drainage way approved
by the building official or other appropriate governmental agency jurisdiction
provided it is a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground
in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-erosive down
drains or other devices. Desilting basins, filter barriers or other methods, as
approved by the building official, shall be utilized to remove sediments from
surface waters before such waters are allowed to enter streets, storm drains,
or natural watercourses. If the drainage device discharges onto natural ground,
riprap or a similar energy dissipater may be required. Building pads shall have
a minimum drainage gradient of 2 percent
toward approved drainage facilities, a public street or drainage structure approved
to receive storm waters unless waived by the building official. A lesser slope
may
be approved by the building official for sites graded in relatively flat terrain, or
where special drainage provisions are made, when the building
official finds such modification will not result in unfavorable drainage
conditions.
 
Section J113 is added to the 2025 CBC to read as follows: SECTION J113
NATIONAL POLLUTANT   DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) COMPLIANCE
J113.1 General.
All grading plans and permits shall comply with the provisions of this section
for NPDES compliance including the owner of any property on which grading has
been performed and which requires a grading permit under Appendix J Section
J103. Sites which have been graded and which require a grading permit under
Appendix J Section J103 are subject to penalties and fines per Appendix J Section
J113.4. All best management practices
shall be installed before grading begins or as instructed in writing by the
building official for unpermitted grading as defined by Section J 103.3. As
grading progresses, all best management practices shall be updated as necessary
to prevent erosion and control structures related pollutants from discharging
from the site. All best management practices shall be maintained in good
working order to the satisfaction of the building official unless final grading
approval has been granted by the building official and all permanent drainage
and erosion control systems, if required, are in place.
 
J113.2 Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP).
When requested by the building official, no grading permit shall be issued
unless the plans for such work include a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
with details of best management practices, including desilting basins or other
temporary drainage or control measures, or both, as may be necessary
to control structures- related pollutants which originate from the site as a
result of structures related activities. For unpermitted grading as defined by
Section J103.3 upon written request a SWPPP in compliance with the provisions
of this section and Section J106.4.3 for NPDES compliance shall be submitted to
the building official.
 
J113.3 Wet weather erosion control plans (WWECP).
In addition to the SWPPP required in Appendix J Section J113.2, where a grading
permit is issued and it appears that the grading will not be completed prior to
November 1, then on or before October 1 the owner of the site on which the grading
is being performed
shall file or cause to be filed with the building official a WWECP which
includes specific best management practices to minimize the transport of
sediment and protect public and private property from the effects of erosion,
flooding or the deposition of mud, debris or structures related pollutants.
The best management practices shown on the WWECP shall be installed on or
before October 15. The plans shall be revised annually or as required by the
building official to reflect the current site conditions. The WWECP shall
be accompanied by an application for plan checking services
and plan check fees equal in amount to 10 percent of the original grading
permit fee.”
 
SECTION 3. Sections 13-2-1 and 13-2-2 of Chapter 2 of Title 13 of the ESMC are
repealed and replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 2
RESIDENTIAL CODE
13-2-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE, 2025 Edition: 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2, the California Building
Code, 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 2.5, of the California Code of
Regulations, including Appendix CI (“CRC”) is adopted by reference, subject to
the amendments, additions and deletions set forth in Section 13-1-2.
One true copy of the CRC is on file in the office of the Building Official
and is available for public inspection as required by law.
 
13-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE:
The California Residential Code adopted pursuant to Section 13-2-
1 is hereby amended as follows:
 
Subsection 11 is added to R105.2 of the 2025 CRC:
R105.2 Work exempt from permit.
Building:
11.   Block wall and concrete fences not over 3 feet 6 inches high.
 
Section R105.3.2 of the 2025 CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:
R105.3.2 Expiration of Plan Check.
An application for a permit for any proposed work is deemed to have been
abandoned 12 months after the application date. Unless otherwise provided,
after expiration of the application, the City will not issue a permit until the
plans are rechecked and approved and a new fee is paid.
Exception: The Building Official may grant extensions of time for additional
periods not exceeding 90 days each if a permit applicant submits in writing
sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or circumstances precluded the
securing of the permit within the allocated time.
 
Section R105.8.1 of Chapter 1 of the 2025 CRC is added to read as follows:
R105.8.1 Responsibility of permittee.
Building permits shall be presumed by the city to incorporate all of the work
that the applicant, the applicant’s agent, employees and/or contractors
shall carry out. Said proposed work shall be in accordance with the approved
plans and with all requirements of this code and any other laws or regulations
applicable thereto. No city approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from
the responsibility of complying with the provisions of this code nor shall any
vested rights be created for any work performed in violation of this code.
 
Section R108.5.1 of Chapter 1 of the 2025 CRC is added to read as follows:
R108.5.1 Plan check fees refund.
No portion of the plan check fee shall be refunded unless plan review has not been
performed,
in which case 80 percent of the plan check fee shall be refunded upon
written application for refund submitted
by the person who made original payment
of such fee and with the written consent of the owner of the real property
on which the work was proposed to be done. The Building Official shall
determine, in such official’s discretion, whether an applicant
is qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from the date of
the submittal for plan check, no plan check
fees shall be refunded. In the event subsequent
application for plan check is made by a person who has received a refund, the
full amount of all required fees shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this
chapter.
 
Section R108.5.2 of Chapter 1 of the 2025 CRC is added to read as follows:
R108.5.2 Permit fees refund.
In the event any person shall have obtained a building permit and no portion of
the work or construction covered by such permit shall have commenced, nor any
inspection performed by any City employee, and notice of abandonment has been
received from the owner of the real property on which such work would have been
performed, the permittee, upon presentation to the Building Official of a
written request for refund, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to
80 percent of the building permit fee actually paid for such permit. The
Building Official shall determine, in such official’s discretion, whether an
applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 12 months have elapsed from
the date of the issuance of the permit, no permit fees shall be refunded. In
the event subsequent application for a permit is made by a person who has
received a refund, the full amount of all required fees shall be paid as
elsewhere provided in this chapter.
Exception:
1.   If a permit has been issued for a project located in an area outside the
jurisdiction of the City, 100 percent of the permit and plan checking fee may
be refunded.
2.   If a duplicate permit has been erroneously issued, 100 percent of the
duplicated permit and plan checking fee may be refunded
 
Section R108.6 of Chapter 1 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance.
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be
subject to a fee in addition to the normally established permit fee, equal to
100%
of such normally established permit fee, or as otherwise determined by the building
official.
 
Section R109.1.7 of Chapter 1 of the 2025 CRC is added to read as follows:
R109.1.7 Setback Certification required.
A California State licensed surveyor is required to certify the location and setbacks
of all new construction prior to the first foundation inspection. A copy of the
certification
shall be available to the Building Division inspector for the job file prior to
the first inspection
Exception: Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out
the provisions of this section, the Building Official shall have the authority to
grant modifications for individual cases.
 
Section R109.5 of Chapter 1 of the 2025 CRC is hereby added to read as follows:
R109.5 Re-inspections.
A re-inspection fee in the amount set by the City Council resolution may be
assessed for each inspection or re-inspection
when such portion of work for which inspection is called is incomplete or when
required corrections called are not made. This section is not to be interpreted
as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to
comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of
calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-
inspection. Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card
is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are
not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the
date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans
requiring the approval of the building official. In instances where re-
inspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will
be performed until the required fees have been paid.
 
Section R112.3 of Chapter 1 of the 2025 CRC is hereby amended to read as
follows:
R112.3 Board of Appeals.
The board of appeals consists of members of the Planning Commission. The term
of a board of appeals member will coincide
with the term of service as a Planning Commissioner and will terminate
should the member cease serving as a Planning
Commissioner. The building official is the secretary
to the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its investigations and will render all its decisions
and findings on contested matters, in writing to the building official, with a
duplicate copy for any appellant or contestant affected by such decision or
finding and may recommend to the city council appropriate new legislation.
Three members of the board constitute a quorum. The Planning Chairperson is the
board’s chairperson and in the chairperson’s absence the board will select a
temporary chairperson.
The city will assess a filing fee set by City Council resolution, at the time
that an appellant files appeal of any order, decisions, or determination made
by the building official relative to the application
and interpretation of this code. The filing fee is refundable should the
appellant prevail in a decision by the board. The
appeal must be taken by filing a written notice of appeal, in letterform,
to the board of appeals. The board’s decision constitutes the city’s final
decision.
 
Section R301.1.3.2 of Chapter 3 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R301.1.3.2 Wood-frame structures greater than two stories.
The building official shall require construction documents to be approved and
stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of
wood- frame construction more than two stories and basement in height located
in Seismic Design Category A, B or C. Notwithstanding other sections
of law; the law establishing these provisions is found in Business
and Professions Code Section 5537 and 6737.1.
The building official shall require construction documents to be approved and
stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of
wood- frame construction more than one story in height or with a basement
located in Seismic Design Category Do, D1.D2.
 
Section R301.1.5 is added to Chapter 3 of the 2025 CRC to read as follows:
R301.1.5 Seismic design provisions for buildings constructed on or into slopes
steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3 percent slope).
The design and construction of new buildings and additions to existing
buildings when constructed on or into slopes steeper than one unit vertical in
three units horizontal (33.3 percent slope) shall comply with Section 1613.6 of
the Building Code.
 
Section R309.1 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R309.1 Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
A.   New Buildings and Structures: Unless otherwise prohibited by law, approved
automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be required
for all occupancies.
B.   Existing Buildings and Structures: Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any
work to an existing building which removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the
exterior perimeter wall height as defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and
alterations will require the existing building to be fully sprinklered
throughout.
 
R309.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems.
An approved automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in
townhouses.
Exception: Deleted.
 
R309.1.1 Design and installation.
Automatic fire sprinkler systems for townhouses shall be designed and installed
in accordance with Section R309, NFPA 13 or NFPA 13D.
 
Section R330.1 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R330.1 General.
Energy storage systems (ESS) shall comply with the provisions of this section .
and the El Segundo Fire Code.
Exceptions: Deleted.
 
Section R330.4 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R330.4 Locations.
ESS shall be installed only in the following locations:
1.   Detached garages and detached accessory structures.
2.   Deleted.
3.   Outdoors or on the exterior side of exterior walls located not less than 3
feet (914 mm) from doors and windows directly entering the dwelling unit,
including accessory dwelling units.
4.   Deleted.
 
Section R330.5 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R330.5 Energy Ratings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7657_9331x4724.jpg]ESS installations exceeding the permitted
individual or aggregate ratings shall be installed in accordance with Section
1207 of the El Segundo Fire Code.
 
Section R330.7 of the 2025 CRC is deleted in its entirety:
 
Section R341 is added to the 2025 CRC to read as follows:
R341 RESIDENTIAL NOISE INSULATION STANDARDS (Airport Noise Sources)
 
R341.1 Noise Insulation Requirements for New Construction.
 
R341.2 Purpose and Scope.
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum noise insulation
performance standards for new residential dwelling units and additions of
habitable rooms to existing residential dwelling units to protect public
health, safety, and welfare from the effects of excessive noise, including
without limitation, indoor quality of life, speech interference, and sleep
disruption.
 
R341.3 Applicability.
This section applies to all newly constructed residences and habitable room
additions to existing residences.
 
R341.4 Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following words must have the following
meaning:
“Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)” means the noise measure defined in 21
Code of California Regulations § 5001(d), and any successor regulation or
amendment.
“Habitable Room” means a room that is a space in a structure for living,
sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage or utility space, garages, and similar areas are not considered
habitable space.
“LAX” means Los Angeles International Airport.
“Noise Impact Boundary for LAX” means the area around LAX as defined in 21
California code of regulations § 5001(1), and any successor regulation or
amendment. The city’s building safety department must at all times maintain a
current map of the noise impact boundary. The latest published map by LAWA
located at the Building Safety Counter shall be used as the basis for
determination.
“Residence” means any occupancy group R building as used in El Segundo Title 13
of the El Segundo municipal code.
 
R341.5 Standards.
Any new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing
residence that is within the noise impact boundary for LAX must be designed to
ensure that internal noise levels due to LAX do not exceed 45 dB CNEL. This
standard may be satisfied in two ways: (1) by performing the acoustical
analysis described in section R341.1207.6.06, below, or (2) by employing the
prescribed construction methods described in section R341.1207.6.07, below.
 
R341.6 Acoustical Analysis.
A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more
habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum noise
insulation performance standards established in this section if it includes an
acoustical analysis demonstrating that the proposed design will ensure that
internal noise levels due to LAX aircraft noise will not exceed 45 dB CNEL. The
acoustical analysis shall be proven to meet the standard by providing post-
construction/pre-occupancy acoustic measurement to verify compliance with the
45 dB CNEL standard. The Building Official has the discretion to implement
policies that meet the intent of this code section.
A.   The acoustical analysis must be prepared by a person experienced in the
field of acoustical engineering. The analysis must consider and include: the
topographical relationship between LAX aircraft noise sources and the dwelling
site, the characteristics of those noise sources, predicted noise spectra and
levels at the exterior of the dwelling site, the basis for this prediction
(measured or obtained from published data), the noise insulation measures to be
employed, and the effectiveness of the proposed noise insulation measures.
B.   If the interior allowable noise levels are to be met by requiring that
windows be unopenable or closed, the design for the structure must also specify
a ventilation or air-conditioning system to provide a habitable interior
environment, having at least 2 air exchanges per hour for the affected rooms.
The ventilation system must not compromise the interior room noise reduction.
 
R341.7 Prescribed Construction Methods.
A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more
habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum noise
insulation performance standards established in this section if the design
incorporates the following construction methods.
 
Construction Methods in the 70 dB CNEL and Greater Noise Zone
R341.8 Exterior Walls.
New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be constructed
as follows:
A.   Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
B.   Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer,
masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal siding must
be installed over 1/2-inch minimum solid sheathing.
C.   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot
must require an interior supporting stud-wall that is finished with at least 5/
8-inch-thick gypsum wall board or plaster.
D.   Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool and must
be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
E.   Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
F.   Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch-thick gypsum wall board or
plaster.
 
R341.9 Exterior Windows.
A.   Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40
dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per
minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
B.   Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms
must:
1.   Have a sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB, or
2.   Must be 5/8-inch laminated glass with STC rating of 40 dB and must be set
in non-hardening glazing materials, or
3.   Must be glass block at least 3 1/2 inches thick.
C.   The total areas of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed 20%
of the wall area.
 
R341.10 Exterior Doors.
A.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and edge
seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC 40
dB.
B.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to
aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a minimum STC
rating of 35 dB.
C.   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must not be allowed in walls that
are directly exposed to aircraft noise. Sliding glass doors in walls that are
not directly exposed must have an STC rating of at least 40 dB.
D.   Access doors from attached garage to the interior of a residence must have
an STC rating of at least 30 dB.
 
R341.11 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
A.   Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered on
their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof covering
allowed by this code.
B.   Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool with
a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
C.   Attic ventilation must be:
1.   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are fitted with
transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating flexible ducting
or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch-thick coated fiberglass sound
absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree bend in the duct so
that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior through the duct into
the attic, or
2.   Noise control louver vents, or
3.   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
4.   Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at least 5/
8-inch thick. Ceiling materials must be mounted on resilient channels.
5.   Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed
light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line or at any
point that provides at least a 4-inch space between the skylight glazing and
the secondary glazing and must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic or
laminated glass. The weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted
by the building code. The size of skylights must be no more than 20 percent of
the roof area of the room.
R341.12 Ventilation.
A.   A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the
exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated flexible glass fiber ducting
that is at least 10 feet long between any two points of connection.
B.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type with
no ducted connection to the exterior.
 
R341.13 Fireplaces.
Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that is
operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
R341.14 Wall and Ceiling Openings.
Openings in the shell of the residence that degrade its ability to achieve an
interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed are
prohibited unless access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-
conditioning, or other openings are designed to maintain the 45 dB CNEL (or
less) standard in the room to which they provide access.
 
Construction Methods In The 65 dB CNEL To 70 dB CNEL Noise Zone
R341.15 Exterior Walls.
New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be constructed
as follows:
A.   Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
B.   Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer,
masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal siding must
be installed over 1/2-inch solid sheathing.
C.   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot
will require an interior stud wall that is finished with at least 5/8-inch-
thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
D.   Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool and must
be installed continuously throughout the stud space. Exterior solid sheathing
must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
E.   Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch-thick gypsum wallboard or
plaster.
 
R341.16 Exterior Windows.
A.   Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 35
dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per
minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
B.   Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms
must be at least 1/4-inch thick and must be set in non-hardening glazing
materials.
C.   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed 20%
of the floor area.
R341.17 Exterior Doors.
A.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and edge
seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC 35
dB.
B.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to
aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a minimum STC
rating of 30 dB.
C.   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must have glass that is 1/4-inch
thick.
D.   Access doors from a garage to a habitable room must have an STC rating of
at least 30 dB.
R341.18 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
A.   Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered on
their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof covering
allowed by this code.
B.   Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool with
a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
C.   Attic ventilation must be:
1.   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are fitted with
transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating flexible ducting
or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch-thick coated fiberglass sound
absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree bend in the duct so
that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior through the duct into
the attic, or
2.   Noise control louver vents, or
3.   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
D.   Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at least 5/
8-inch thick.
E.   Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed
light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line and must
be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated glass. The
weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted by the building code.
R341.19 Floors.
The floor of the lowest habitable rooms must be concrete slab on grade or wood
framed floors.
R341.20 Ventilation.
A.   A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of at least 2 air
exchanges in each affected habitable room without opening any window, door or
other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated
flexible glass fiber ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any two
points of connection.
B.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type with
no ducted connection to the exterior.
R341.21 Fireplaces.
Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that is
operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
R341.22 Wall and Ceiling Openings. Openings in the shell of the residence that
degrade its ability to achieve an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when
all doors and windows are closed are prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors,
mail delivery drops, air-conditioning, or other openings must be designed to
maintain the 45 dB CNEL or less standard in the room to which they provide
access.
 
Section R401.1 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R401.1 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the
foundation and foundation spaces for buildings. In addition to the provisions
of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in flood hazard
areas as established by Table R301.2 shall meet the provisions of Section R306.
Wood foundations shall be designed and installed in accordance with AWC PWF.
Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be used for
wood foundations only in the following situations:
1.   In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof.
2.   When interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at intervals
not exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm).
Wood foundations in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2 shall not be
permitted.
Exception: In non-occupied, single-story, detached storage sheds and similar
uses other than carport or garage, provided the gross floor area does not
exceed 200 square feet, the plate height does not exceed 12 feet in height
above the grade plane at any point, and the maximum roof projection does not
exceed 24 inches.
 
Section R403.1.3.6 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows
R403.1.3.6 Isolated concrete footings.
In detached one- and two-family dwellings located in Seismic Design Category A,
B, or C that are three stories or less in height and constructed with stud
bearing walls, isolated plain concrete footings supporting columns or pedestals
are permitted.
 
Section R403.1.5 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R403.1.5 Slope.
The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings
shall not have a slope exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-
percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change
the elevation of the top surface of the footings
or where the slope of the bottom surface of the footings will exceed one unit
vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
For structures located in Seismic Design Categories D0,D1or D2,stepped footings
shall be reinforced with four No. 4 rebar. Two bars shall be placed at the top
and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure R403.1.5.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7859_7729x4983.jpg]
FIGURE R403.1.5 - STEPPED FOOTING
 
Section R404.2 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R404.2 Wood foundation walls.
Wood foundation walls shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of
Sections R404.2.1 through R404.2.6 and with the details shown in Figures R403.1
(2) and R403.1(3). Wood foundation walls shall not be used for structures
located in Seismic Design Category Do. D1or D2.
 
Section R503.2.4 is added to Chapter 5 of the 2025 CRC to read as follows:
R503.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms.
Openings in horizontal diaphragms with a dimension perpendicular
to the joist that is greater than 4 feet (1.2 m) shall be constructed in
accordance with Figure R503.2.4.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7862_8401x5069.jpg]
a.   Blockings shall be provided beyond headers.
b.   Metal ties not less than 0.058 inch [1.47 mm (16 galvanized gage)] by 1.5
inches (38 mm) wide with eight 16d common nails on each side of the header-
joist intersection. The metal ties shall have a minimum yield of 33,000 psi
(227 MPa).
c.   Openings in diaphragms shall be further limited in accordance with Section
R301.2.2.2.6.
FIGURE R503.2.4
 
OPENINGS IN HORIZONTAL DIAPHRAGMS
 
Table R602.3(1) lines 20, 21,24, 34-37 of the 2025 CRC are amended to read as
follows:
TABLE R602.3(1)—continued
 
FASTENING SCHEDULE
                                                                                                                               Spacing
Item Description of Building Elements          Number and Type of Fastenera,b,c                                                and
                                                                                                                               Location
                                               3-8d box (2½” x 0.113”); or
                                               2-8d common (2½” x 0.131”); or                                             Face
20 k 1” x 6” sheathing to each bearing     2-10d box (3” x 0.128”); or                                                 nail
                                               2 staples, 1” crown, 16 ga.,
                                               1¾” long
                                               3-8d box (2½” x 0.113”); or
                                               3-8d common (2½” x 0.131”); or
                                               3-10d box (3” x 0.128”); or
                                               3 staples, 1” crown, 16 ga.,
     1” x 8” and wider sheathing to each   1¾” long                                                                     Face
21 k bearing                                   Wider than 1” x 8”                                                          nail
                                               4-8d box (2½” x 0.113”); or
                                               3-8d common (2½” x 0.131”); or
                                               3-10d box (3” x 0.128”); or
                                               4 staples, 1” crown, 16 ga.,
                                               1¾” long
Floor
                                               3-8d box (2½” x 0.113”); or
                                               2-8d common (2½” x 0.131”); or                                             Face
24 k 1” x 6” subfloor or less to each joist3-10d box (3” x 0.128”); or                                                 nail
                                               2 staples, 1” crown, 16 ga.,
                                               1¾” long
Other wall sheathingg
34 k ½” structural cellulosic fiberboard    1½” x 0.120” galvanized roofing nail, 7/16” head diameter, or 1¼” long316 ga.
     sheathing                                 staple with 7/16” or 1” crown
35 k 25/32” structural cellulosic fiberboard 1¾” x 0.120” galvanized roofing nail, 7/16” head diameter, or 1¼” long316 ga.
     sheathing                                 staple with 7/16” or 1” crown
36 k ½” gypsum sheathing d                  1½” x 0.120” galvanized roofing nail, 7/16” head diameter, or 1¼” long717 ga.;
                                               staple galvanized, 1½” long; 7/16” or 1” crown or 1¼” screws, Type W or S
37 k “ gypsum sheathing d                    1¾” galvanized roofing nail, 7/16” head diameter, or 1¼” long, 16 ga.;  7 7
                                               staple galvanized, 1½” long; 7/16” or 1” crown or 1¼” screws, Type W or S
TABLE R602.3(1) – continued
 
FASTENING SCHEDULE
a.   Nails are smooth-common, box or deformed shanks except where otherwise
stated. Nails used for framing and sheathing connections are carbon steel and
shall have mini mum average bending yield strengths as shown: 80 ksi for shank
diameter of 0.192 inch (20d common nail), 90 ksi for shank diameters larger
than 0.142 inch but not larger than 0.177 inch, and 100 ksi for shank diameters
of 0.142 inch or less. Connections using nails and staples of other materials,
such as stainless steel, shall be designed by accepted engineering practice or
approved under Section R104.2.2.
b.   RSRS-01 is a Roof Sheathing Ring Shank nail meeting the specifications in
ASTM F1667.
c.   Nails shall be spaced at not more than 6 inches on center at all supports
where spans are 48 inches or greater.
d.   Four-foot by 8-foot or 4-foot by 9-foot panels shall be applied
vertically.
e.   Spacing of fasteners not included in this table shall be based on Table
R602.3(2).
f.   For wood structural panel roof sheathing attached to gable end roof
framing and to intermediate supports within 48 inches of roof edges and ridges,
nails shall be spaced at 4 inches on center where the ultimate design wind
speed is greater than 130 mph in Exposure B or greater than 110 mph in Exposure
C. Fastener spacing applies where roof framing specific gravity is 0.42 or
larger. Where roof framing specific gravity is greater than or equal to 0.35
but less than 0.42 in accordance with AWC NDS, fastening of roof sheathing
shall be with RSRS-03 (2 1/2" × 0.131" × 0.281" head) nails.
g.   Gypsum sheathing shall conform to ASTM C1396 and shall be installed in
accordance with ASTM C1280 or GA 253. Fiberboard sheathing shall conform to
ASTM C208.
h.   Spacing of fasteners on floor sheathing panel edges applies to panel edges
supported by framing members and required blocking and at floor perimeters
only. Spacing of fasteners on roof sheathing panel edges applies to panel edges
supported by framing members and required blocking. Blocking of roof or floor
sheathing panel edges perpendicular to the framing members need not be provided
except as required by other provisions of this code. Floor perimeter shall be
supported by framing members or solid blocking.
i.   Where a rafter is fastened to an adjacent parallel ceiling joist in
accordance with this schedule, provide two toe nails on one side of the rafter
and toe nails from the ceiling joist to top plate in accordance with this
schedule. The toe nail on the opposite side of the rafter shall not be
required.
j.   Use of staples in braced wall panels shall be prohibited in Seismic Design
Category D0, D1 or D2.
k.   Use of staples in roof, floor, and braced wall panels shall be prohibited
in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2.
 
Table R602.3(2) footnote “b” of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
b.   Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16-inch on diameter except
as noted. Use of staples in roof, floor, subfloor, and braced wall panels shall
be prohibited in Seismic Design Category D0,D1,or D2.
 
Section R602.3.2 exception and Table R602.3.2 of the 2025 CRC is amended to
read as follows:
Exception: In other than Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2 , a single top
plate used as an alternative to a double top plate shall comply with the
following:
1.   The single top plate shall be tied at corners, intersecting walls, and at
in-line splices in straight wall lines in accordance with Table R602.3.2.
2.   The rafters or joists shall be centered over the studs with a tolerance of
not more than 1 inch (25 mm).
3.   Omission of the top plate is permitted over headers where the headers are
adequately tied to adjacent wall sections in accordance with Table R602.3.2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7887_9428x2736.jpg]
 
Section R602.10.2.3 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R602.10.2.3 Minimum number of braced wall panels. Braced wall lines with a
length of 16 feet 
(4877 mm) or less shall have a minimum of two braced wall panels of any length
or one braced wall panel equal to 48 inches (1219 mm) or more. Braced wall
lines greater than 16 feet (4877 mm) shall have a minimum of two
braced wall panels. In Seismic Design Category Do,D1,or D2,no braced wall panel
shall have a contributing length less than 48 inches in length or as required
in Section R602.10.3, whichever is greater.
 
Table R602.10.3(3) of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7890_9325x9751.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7893_9361x10542.jpg]
a.   Linear interpolation shall be permitted.
b.   Interpolation of bracing length between the Sds values associated with the
seismic design categories shall be permitted when a site-specific Sds value is
determined in accordance with Section 1613.2 of the California Building Code.
c.   Where the braced wall line length is greater than 50 feet, braced wall
lines shall be permitted to be divided into shorter segments having lengths of
50 feet or less, and the amount of bracing within each segment shall be in
accordance with this table.
d.   Method LIB shall have gypsum board fastened to not less than one side with
nails or screws in accordance with Table R602.3(1) for exterior sheathing or
Table R702.3.5 for interior gypsum board. Spacing of fasteners at panel edges
shall not exceed 8 inches.
e.   Methods PFG and CS-SFB do not apply in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1
and D2.
f.   Methods PFH, PFG and ABW are only permitted on a single story or a first
of two stories.
g.   Where more than one bracing method is used, mixing methods shall be in
accordance with Section R602.10.4.1.
h.   One- and two- family dwellings in Seismic Design Category D2 exceeding two
stories shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.
i.   Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:1 in SDC
D0, D1 and D2. Methods DWB, SFB, PBS, HPS, and CS-SFB are not permitted in D0,
D1 and D2.
 
Table R602.10.4 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7914_9361x11415.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7917_9361x7460.jpg]
a.   Adhesive attachment of wall sheathing, including Method GB, shall not be
permitted in Seismic Design Categories C, D0, D1 and D2.
b.   Applies to panels next to garage door opening where supporting gable end
wall or roof load only. Shall only be used on one wall of the garage. In
Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, roof covering dead load shall not
exceed 3 psf.
c.   Garage openings adjacent to a Method CS-G panel shall be provided with a
header in accordance with Table R602.7(1). A full-height clear opening shall
not be permitted adjacent to a Method CS-G panel.
d.   Method CS-SFB does not apply in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.
e.   Method applies to detached one- and two- family dwellings in Seismic
Design Categories D0 through D2 only.
f.   Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:1 in SDC
D0, D1 and D2. Methods LIB, DWB, SFB, PBS, HPS, and PFG are not permitted in
SDC D0, D1 and D2.
g.   Use of stapes in braced wall panels shall be prohibited in SDC D0, D1 and
D2.
 
Table R602.10.5 of the 2025 Edition of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7934_9361x11127.jpg]For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304. 8 mm,
1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
NP = Not Permitted.
a.   Linear interpolation shall be permitted.
b.   Use the actual length where it is greater than or equal to the minimum
length.
c.   Max imum header height for PFH is 10 feet in accordance with Figure
R602.10.6.2, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12 feet with
pony wall.
d.   Maximum header height for PFG is 10 feet in accordance with Figure
R602.10.6.3, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12 feet with
pony wall.
e.   Maximum header height for CS-PF is 10 feet in accordance with Figure
R602.10.6.4, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12 feet with
pony wall.
 
Figure R602.10.6.1 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7951_9361x11617.jpg]
 
Figure R602.10.6.2 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7954_9361x6356.jpg]
 
Figure R602.10.6.4 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7957_9303x9469.jpg]
 
Section R606.12.2.2.3 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R606.12.2.2.3 Reinforcement requirements for masonry elements.
Masonry elements listed in Section R606.12.2.2.2 shall be reinforced in either
the horizontal or vertical direction as shown in Figure R606.11(2) and in
accordance with the following:
1.   Horizontal reinforcement. Horizontal joint reinforcement shall consist of
least one No. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm). Horizontal
reinforcement shall be provided within 16 inches (406 mm) of the top and bottom
of these masonry elements.
2.   Vertical reinforcement. Vertical reinforcement shall consist of at least
one No. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm). Vertical reinforcement
shall be within 8 inches (406mm) of the ends of masonry walls.
 
Section R803.2.4 is added to Chapter 8 of the 2025 CRC to read as follows:
R803.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms.
Openings in horizontal diaphragms shall conform with Section R503.2.4.
 
Section 905.3.1 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R905.3.1 Sheathing requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only
over solid sheathing.
Exception: Spaced lumber shall be permitted in Seismic Design Categories A, B,
and C.
 
Section R1001.3.1 of the 2025 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R1001.3.1 Vertical reinforcing.
For chimneys up to 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, four No. 4 continuous
vertical bars
adequately anchored into the concrete foundation shall be placed between wythes
of solid masonry or within the cells of hollow unit masonry and grouted in
accordance with Section R609. Grout shall be prevented from bonding with the
flue liner so that the flue liner is free to move with thermal expansion.
For chimneys more than 40 inches 
(1016 mm) wide, two additional No. 4 vertical bars adequately anchored into the
concrete foundation shall be provided for each additional flue incorporated
into the chimney or for each additional 40 inches (1016 mm) in width or
fraction thereof.”
 
SECTION 4.  Section 13-3-1 of Chapter 3 of Title 13 of the ESMC is repealed and
replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
13-3-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE, 2025 Edition:
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2, the California
Electrical Code, 2025 Edition, published as Title 24, Part 3, of the California
Code of Regulations, including all Annexes except H, (“CEC”) is adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions
set forth in Section 13-3-2. One true copy of the CEC, is on file in
the office of the Building Official and is available for public
inspection as required by law.”
 
SECTION 5. Sections 13-4-1 and 13-4-2 of Chapter 4 of Title 13 of the ESMC are
repealed replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
13-4-1 ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE, 2025 EDITION.
Pursuant to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California Mechanical
Code, 2025 Edition, published as Title 24, Part 4, of the California Code
of Regulations, including all Appendices except A and E (“CMC”) is adopted
by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth
below. One true copy of the CMC, is on file in the office of the Building
Official and is available for public inspection as required by law.
 
13-4-2 AMENDMENTS TO THE MECHANICAL CODE.
Section 104.0 of the CMC is hereby amended to read as follows:
CMC Section 104.0 Permits, is deleted in its entirety. The 2025 California Building Code,
as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal
Code, will govern the administration of the CMC.
 
Section 104.5 of the CMC is hereby amended to read as follows:
CMC Section 104.5 Fees, is deleted in its entirety. The 2025 California
Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal
Code, will govern the administration of the CMC.”
 
Section 107.0 of the CMC is hereby amended as follows:
CMC Section 107.0, Board of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety. The 2025
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the CMC.
 
SECTION 6.  Sections 13-5-1 and 13-5-2 of Chapter 5 of Title 13 of the ESMC are
repealed and replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
“CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING CODE
13-5-1 ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE, 2025 EDITION.
Pursuant to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California
Plumbing Code, 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 5, of the California
Code of Regulations, including all Appendices except for C, F, and L (“CPC”)
is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions
set forth below. One true copy of the CPC, is on file in the office of the
Building Official and is available for public inspection as required by law.
 
13-5-2 AMENDMENTS TO THE PLUMBING CODE.
Section 104.4 of the CPC is amended to read as follows:
CPC Section 104.4 Permit Issuance, is deleted in its entirety. The 2025
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the CPC.
 
Section 104.5 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
CPC Section 104.5 Fees, is deleted in its entirety. The 2025 California Building Code, as
incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code, will govern the administration
of the CPC.”
 
Section 107.0 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
CPC Section 107.0, Board of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety. The 2025
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the CPC.
 
Section 1211.8 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
1211.8 Seismic Gas Shutoff Valves.
 
1211.8.1 Scope. A seismic gas shutoff valve shall be installed in compliance
with the requirements of this section on each gas fuel line in the following:
 
1211.8.1.1 Any new building or structure.
 
1211.8.1.2 Any building or structure which is altered or expanded when such
alteration or addition is valued at more than $250,000.
 
1211.8.1.3 When an individual condominium unit is sold in a building that has
multiple gas lines, then the requirements of this section shall apply only to
the line or lines serving the condominium unit that has been sold.
 
1211.8.2 Maintenance. Where the installation of a seismic gas shutoff valve is
required by this section in any building or structure, that seismic gas shutoff
valve shall be maintained for the life of that building or structure or shall
be replaced with a valve complying with the requirements of this section.
 
1211.8.3 General Requirements. Where the installation of a seismic gas shutoff
valve on a fuel line is required by this section, that valve must:
 
1211.8.3.1 Be mounted rigidly to the exterior of the building or structure
containing the fuel line unless the Building Official determines that the
seismic gas shutoff valve has been tested and listed for an alternate method of
installation.
 
1211.8.3.2 Be installed downstream of the gas utility meter, except that a
valve may be installed upstream of the gas utility meter at the discretion of
the gas utility if the valve would otherwise meet the requirements of this
section.
 
1211.8.3.3 Be listed by an approved testing laboratory and certified by the
Office of the State Architect.
 
1211.8.3.4 Have a thirty-year warranty which warrants that the valve is free
from defects and will continue to properly operate for thirty (30) years from
the date of operation.
 
1211.8.4 Critical Facilities. The requirements of this section shall not apply
to any building that is used by any public agency for the provision of
emergency services, including fire, police, and similar public safety services,
provided the following:
a.   That the building or structure has available 24-hour, year-round
maintenance staffing; and
b.   That the gas piping system contained in the building or structure is
designed to withstand seismic effects of earthquakes.
1211.8.5 Definitions. For purposes of this section, certain terms shall be
defined as follows:
 
1211.8.5.1 DOWNSTREAM OF THE GAS UTILITY METER. Shall refer to all customer
owned gas piping.
 
1211.8.5.2 SEISMIC GAS SHUTOFF VALVE. A system consisting of a seismic sensing
means and actuating means designed to automatically actuate a companion gas
shutoff means installed in a gas piping system in order to shut off the gas
downstream of the location of the gas shutoff means in the event of a severe
seismic disturbance. The system may consist of separable components or may
incorporate all functions in a single body. The terms “seismically activated
gas shutoff valves” and “earthquake sensitive gas shutoff valves,” are
synonymous.
 
1211.8.5.3 UPSTREAM OF THE GAS UTILITY METER. Shall refer to all gas piping
installed by the utility up to and including the meter and the utility’s bypass
toe at the connection to the customer owned piping.
 
SECTION 7. Sections 13-6-1 of Chapter 6 of Title 13 of the ESMC is repealed and
replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 6
ENERGY CODE
13-6-1 ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE, 2025 EDITION.
Pursuant to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California
Energy Code, 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 6, of the California
Code of Regulations, (“CEC”) is adopted by reference,
subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One
true copy of the CEC, is on file in the office of the Building Official and is
available for public inspection as required by law.”
 
SECTION 8. Sections 13-7-1 and 13-7-2 of Chapter 7 of Title 13 of the ESMC are
repealed and replaced by the following read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
13-7-1 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, 2024 EDITION.
Pursuant to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, the International Property
Maintenance Code 
(IPMC), 2024 Edition, promulgated and published by the International
Code Council, adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions
set forth below. One true copy of the IPMC, is on file in the office of the
Building Official and is available for public inspection as required by law.
 
13-7-2 AMENDMENTS TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
Section 106.1 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:
IPMC Section 106.1 General, is deleted in its entirety. The 2025
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code, will govern
the administration of the IPMC.
 
Sections [A]106.2 through 106.4 of the IPMC are hereby deleted.
 
SECTION 9. Sections 13-8-1 and 13-8-2 of Chapter 8 of Title 13 of the ESMC are
repealed and replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 8
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
13-8-1 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE, 2024 EDITION.
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8,
the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (“ISPSC”), 2024 Edition,
promulgated and published by the International Code Council, adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below.
One true copy of the ISPSC is on file in the office of the Building Official
and is available for public inspection as required by law.
 
Section 13-8-2 AMENDMENTS TO THE SWIMMNG POOL AND SPA CODE:
Section [A]112.1 Membership of board, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the ISPSC.
 
Section [A]102.9 of the 2024 ISPSC is amended to read as follows:
[A]102.9 The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any
provisions of the California Swimming Pool Safety Act 
(El Segundo Residential Code Appendix CI), or any other local, state or federal
law.
 
Section 301.1.2 is added to the 2024 ISPSC to read as follows:
301.1.2 Conflicts. 
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the Swimming Pool
Safety Act, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024 Edition, the 2025
California Building Code, or the 2025 California Residential Code, the
Building Official shall implement the most restrictive measures cited.
 
Section 305 “Barrier Requirements”, in the 2025 ISPSC is deleted in its
entirety.”
 
SECTION 10. Sections 13-10-1 and 13-10-2 of Chapter 10 of Title 13 of the ESMC
are repealed and replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 10
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
13-10-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE, 2025 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Existing Building Code (“CEBC”), 2025 Edition, published at title
24, part 10, of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference,
subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true
copy of the CEBC is on file in the office of the Building Official and is
available for public inspection as required by law.
 
13-10-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
Section 1.8.8. of the CEBC is hereby amended as follows:
CEBC 1.8.8 APPEALS BOARD, is deleted in its entirety. The 2025 California
Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code, will govern
the administration of the CEBC.
 
SECTION 11. Sections 13-11-1 and 13-11-2 of Chapter 11 of Title 13 of the ESMC
are repealed and replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 11
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
13-11-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE, 2025 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Green Building Standards Code, 2025 Edition, published as title 24,
part 11, of the California Code of Regulations (“CGBSC”) is adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below.
One true copy of the CGBSC is on file in the office of the Building Official
and is available for public inspection as required by law.
 
13-11-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE:
Section 101.13 is added to the 2025 Edition of the California Green Building
Standards Code to read as follows:
101.13 Board of Appeals. The 2025 California Building Code, as incorporated
into the El Segundo Municipal Code, will govern the administration of the
CGBSC.
 
SECTION 12. Section 13-19-1 of Chapter 19 of Title 13 of the ESMC are repealed
and replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 19
SOLAR REQUIRMENTS
13-19-1: RESERVED.
 
SECTION 13. Sections 13-23-1 of Chapter 23 of Title 13 of the ESMC are repealed
and replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
13-23-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE, 2025 EDITION.
 
CHAPTER 23
HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
13-23-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE, 2025 EDITION.
Pursuant to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California
Historical Building Code 
(“CHBC”), 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 8, of the California Code
of Regulations is adopted by reference. One true copy of the CHBC, is on file in the office
of the Building Official and is available for public inspection as required
by law.”
 
SECTION 14. Section 13-24-1 of Chapter 24 of Title 13 of the ESMC are added
to read as follows:
CHAPTER 24
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE
13-24-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE, 2025 EDITION.
Pursuant to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California
Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
(“CWUI”), 2025 Edition, published at Title 24, Part 7, of the California Code
of Regulations is adopted by reference. One true copy of the CWUI, is on file in the office
of the Building Official and is available for public inspection as required
by law.”
 
SECTION 15. Effect of Ordinance on Past Actions and Obligations. The adoption
of this Ordinance will not affect any civil action initiated or criminal
prosecution for ESMC violations committed prior to this Ordinance’s effective
date; will not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid prior to this
Ordinance’s effective date; and will not affect the validity of any bond or
cash deposit posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to the ESMC, prior to this
Ordinance’s effective date.
 
SECTION 16. Consistency; Repeal of Prior Codes. Prior City ordinances
in conflict with this Ordinance, in whole or in part, are superseded and
expressly repealed.
 
SECTION 17. Environmental Assessment. The City Council determines that this
ordinance is exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act
(California Public Resources Code §§ 21000, et seq., “CEQA”) and the
regulations promulgated thereunder (14 California Code of Regulations §§ 15000,
et seq., the “CEQA Guidelines”) because it consists only of minor revisions and
clarifications to an existing code of construction-related regulations and
specification of procedures related thereto and will not have the effect of
deleting or substantially changing any regulatory standards or findings
required therefor, and therefore does not have the potential to cause
significant effects on the environment. In addition, this ordinance is an
action being taken for enhanced protection of the environment and is exempt
from further review under CEQA Guidelines § 15308. Also, there is no
possibility that the ordinance may have a significant effect on the environment
(14 Cal. Code Regs. § 15061(b)(3)), and it will not result in a direct or
reasonably foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment (14 Cal.
Code Regs. § 15060(c)(2)).
 
SECTION 18. Construction. This Ordinance must be broadly construed to achieve
the purposes stated in this Ordinance. It is the City Council’s intent
that the provisions of this Ordinance be interpreted or implemented by the City
and others in a manner that facilitates the purposes set forth in this
Ordinance.
 
SECTION 19. Savings Clause. Repeal of any provision of the ESMC or any other
city ordinance herein will not affect any penalty, forfeiture, or liability
incurred before, or preclude prosecution and imposition of penalties for any
violation occurring before, this Ordinance’s effective date. Any such repealed
part will remain in full force and effect for sustaining action or prosecuting
violations occurring before the effective date of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 20. Severability. 
If any part of this Ordinance or its application is deemed invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the city council intends that such invalidity will
not affect the effectiveness of the remaining provisions or applications and,
to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are severable.
 
SECTION 21. Publication.  The City Clerk is directed to certify the passage
and adoption of this Ordinance; cause it to be entered into the City of El
Segundo’s book of original ordinances;
make a note of the passage and adoption in the records of this meeting; and,
within fifteen 15 days after the passage and adoption of this Ordinance, cause
it to be published or posted in accordance with California law.
 
SECTION 22.  Effective Date. This Ordinance will become effective on the 31 st
day following its passage and adoption.
 
SECTION 23. Filing with Building Standards Commission. The City Clerk is
directed to transmit a certified
copy of this Ordinance with the California Building Standards Commission.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED this 3rd day of December, 2025.
____________________________
Chris Pimentel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
________________________________
Susan Truax, City Clerk
 
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
 
 
________________________________
Mark D. Hensley, City Attorney
CERTIFICATION
 
 
 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA      )
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES   )   SS
CITY OF EL SEGUNDO      )
 
I, Susan Truax, City Clerk of the City of El Segundo, California, do hereby
certify that the whole number of members of the City Council of said City is
five; that the foregoing Ordinance No. 1680 was duly introduced by said City
Council at a regular meeting held on the 18 th day of November, 2025, and was
duly passed, and adopted by said City Council, approved and signed by the
Mayor, and attested to by the City Clerk, all at a regular meeting of said
Council held on the 3 rd day of December, 2025, and the same was so passed and
adopted by the following vote:
 
AYES:   Mayor Pimentel, Mayor Pro Tem Baldino, Council Member Giroux, and
Council Member Keldorf
NOES:   None
ABSENT:   Council Member Boyles
ABSTAIN:   None
 
WITNESS MY HAND THE OFFICIAL SEAL OF SAID CITY this 3 rd day of December, 2025.
 
 
                                     
                      Susan Truax, City Clerk
of the City of El Segundo,
California
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1681
Page of 1
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1681
 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE 2025 EDITION OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE (PART 9 OF
TITLE 24 OF THE CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS) WITH CERTAIN APPENDICES AND
AMENDMENTS AND AMENDING THE EL SEGUNDO MUNICIPAL CODE TO REFLECT SUCH ADOPTION.
 
The City Council of the city of El Segundo does ordain as follows:
 
SECTION 1. Findings.
 
A.   Government Code § 50022.9 authorizes the City of El Segundo (the “City”)
to adopt, by reference, codes from another governmental entity as the City’s
own;
 
B.   The California Building Standards Codes (the “California Building Codes”)
established statewide codes and regulations for building construction and fire
safety and is published every three years by order of the California
Legislature;
 
C.   The 2025 California Building Codes are based upon the International Code
Council’s 2024 International Building Code;
 
D.   The 2025 California Building Codes were published on July 1, 2025 and will
become effective on January 1, 2026;
 
E.   California Health & Safety Code §§ 17958.5 and 18941.5 authorize cities
and counties to modify the California Building Code by adopting more
restrictive standards and modifications if such standards and modifications are
accompanied by express findings that they are reasonably necessary because of
local climatic, geological or topographical conditions; and
 
F.   In accordance with Health & Safety Code § 17958.7, the City Council finds
that there are local climatic, geographic, and topographical conditions
justifying the various local amendments to the California Building Code
Standards Code as set forth in attached Resolution No. 5573. which is adopted
by the City Council and incorporated herein by this reference.
 
SECTION 2. Sections 13-9-1 and 13-9-2 of Chapter 9 of Title 13 of the ESMC are
repealed and replaced by the following to read as follows:
 
CHAPTER 9
FIRE CODE
 
13-9-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE, 2025 EDITION.
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Fire Code (“CFC”), 2025 Edition, published as Title 24, Part 9, of
the California Code of Regulations, including Appendices B, C, P, BB, and CC,
is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set
forth below. One true copy of the CFC is on file in the office of the Fire Code
Official and is available for public inspection as required by law.
Section 13-9-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE FIRE CODE:
Section 1.11.4.1 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
1.11.4.1 Fees. The fire department is authorized to collect fees for permits,
fire inspections and other services, including the review of plans, annual fire
inspections and new business inspections. Fees shall be paid by the applicant
prior to issuance of permits. Fire department fees shall be subject to change
based upon the producer’s price index.
 
Section 104.1.1 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
104.1.1 Authority of the Fire Chief and Fire Department.
1.   The Fire Chief is authorized and directed to enforce all applicable State
fire laws and provisions of this ordinance and to perform such duties as
directed by the El Segundo City Council.
2.   The Fire Chief is authorized to administer, interpret, and enforce this
ordinance. Under the Fire Chief’s direction, the El Segundo Fire Department is
authorized to enforce ordinances of the City of El Segundo pertaining to the
following:
2.1.   The prevention of fires.
2.2.   The suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous fires.
2.3.   The storage, use, and handling of hazardous materials.
2.4.   The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual, and other private
fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
2.5.   The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
2.6.   The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards
on land, in buildings, structures and other property, including those under
construction.
2.7.   The maintenance of means of egress.
2.8.   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire and
unauthorized releases of hazardous materials.
3.   The following persons are hereby authorized to interpret and enforce the
provisions of this ordinance and to make arrests and issue citations as
authorized by law:
3.1.   The Fire Chief, Peace Officers and Public Officers of the El Segundo
Fire Department.
3.2.   The Police Chief and any police officer serving the city of El Segundo.
3.3.   Officers of the California Highway Patrol.
3.4.   Code Officers of El Segundo Code Enforcement Department.
Section 104.1.2 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
104.1.2 Operating Guidelines. The El Segundo Fire Department Fire Prevention
Standard Operating Guidelines has been created and adopted to serve as
instructions and interpretations of the adopted Fire Code. The El Segundo Fire
Department Fire Prevention Standard Operating Guidelines shall be a published
document, amended from time to time to provide current instruction and
interpretation.
Section 104.1.4 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
104.1.4 Financial Responsibility. Any person who personally, or through
another, willfully, negligently, or in violation of law, sets a fire, allows a
fire to be set, or allows a fire kindled or attended by him/her to escape from
his/her control, allows any hazardous material to be handled, stored, disposed
of or transported in a manner not in accordance with this Code, State law or
nationally recognized Standards, allows any hazardous material to escape from
his/her control, allows continuation of a violation of this Code is liable for
the expense of fighting the fire or for the expenses incurred during a
hazardous materials incident, and such expense will be a charge against that
person.
 
Section 104.11.4 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
104.11.4 Authority of Peace Officers. In enforcing the provisions of the
California Fire Code, California Building Code, California Health & Safety
Code, California Penal Code, California Vehicle Code and the El Segundo
Municipal Code and such laws, orders, rules and regulations, variances and
standards in connection therewith, the Fire Marshal and Fire Prevention
Specialist are hereby given the powers of peace officers.
 
Section 105.2 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
105.2 Application for Permit. Applications for permits will be made to the fire
prevention office in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire code
official. Applications for permits must be accompanied by such plans as
required by the fire code official. Any applicable permit and/or plan check
fees must be paid at the time of application for the permit and/or plan review.
 
Section 108.4 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. A person who commences any work
before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee in addition
the normally established plan check fee, equal to 100% of such normally
established permit fee, or as otherwise determined by the fire code official.
 
Section 108.7 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
108.7 Cost Recovery. Fire suppression, investigation, rescue, or emergency
medical costs are recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety Code
Sections 13009 and 13009.1, as may be amended from time to time. Additionally,
any person who negligently, intentionally or in violation of law causes an
emergency response, including, but not limited to, a traffic accident, spill of
toxic or flammable fluids or chemicals is liable for the costs of securing such
emergency, including those costs pursuant to Government Code Section 53150 et
seq., as may be amended from time to time. Any expense incurred by the El
Segundo Fire Department for securing such emergency shall constitute a debt of
such person and shall be collectable by the city of El Segundo in the same
manner as in the case of an obligation under contract, express or implied.
Section 109.2.1 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
109.2.1 Inspection requests. It is the duty of the holder of the permit or
their duly authorized agent to notify the fire code official when work is ready
for inspection. It is the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and
means for inspection of such work that are required by this code. Every request
for inspection must be filed not less than three working days before such
inspection is desired. Such request must be in writing and all inspection fees
paid prior to requesting.
Section 112.5 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
112.5 Filing fee and application. The City will assess a fee in an amount set
by resolution at the time that an appellant files an appeal of any order,
decisions, or determination made by the fire code official relative to the
application and interpretation of this Code. The fee is refundable should the
appellant prevail in a decision by the Board. The appeal must be taken by
filing a written notice of appeal, in letterform, to the Board of Appeals. The
Board’s decision constitutes the City’s final decision.
Section 113.4 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
113.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code
or fail to comply with any of its requirements or who shall erect, install,
alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under
provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of not more than $1,000 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding 6 months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served constitutes a separate offense.
Section 202, definition of “Fire Chief” in the 2025 CFC is amended to read as
follows:
FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the El Segundo Fire Department or the Fire
Chief’s designee.
Section 202, definition of “Low-Rise Building” is added to the 2025 CFC to read
as follows:
LOW-RISE BUILDING. Is any building that is less than four stories in height
from the lowest level of fire department access.
Section 202, definition of “Mid-Rise Building” is added to the 2025 CFC to read
as follows:
MID-RISE BUILDING. A building four or more stories high but not exceeding 75
feet in height and not defined as a high-rise building by section 202 of the
California Building Code. Height measurements shall be made from the underside
of the roof or floor above the topmost space that may be occupied to the lowest
fire apparatus access road level.
 
Section 311.5, “Placards” of the 2025 California Fire Code is deleted in its
entirety.
Section 503.6.1 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
503.6.1 Automatic opener. New motorized gates shall be provided with means to
be automatically opened remotely by emergency vehicle in accordance with El
Segundo Fire Department Guidelines, as may be amended from time to time.
Exception: Gates serving individual one- and two-family dwelling parcels.
Section 507.2.1 of the 2025 CFC to amended to read as follows:
507.2.1 Private fire hydrants. When required, private on-site fire hydrants
shall be in accordance with the location and spacing specified for public
streets and hydrants for similar occupancies. All private hydrants shall be
installed in accordance with NFPA 24, Installation of Private Fire Service
Mains and their Appurtenances, unless required to meet public standards.
Private hydrants shall be painted red. When alternate materials or methods of
protection, as approved by the chief are provided, these requirements may be
modified or waived.
 
Section 510.4.2.10 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
510.4.2.10 Building conduit and pathway survivability. All new buildings shall
be constructed with not less than a two inch (2”) dedicated conduit raceway or
other method approved by the fire code official for future expandability, or
the installation of an Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System. The raceway
shall meet pathway survivability requirements in NFPA 1221 and shall be
installed from the lowest floor level to the roof.
 
510.4.2.9.10.1 Identification. The raceway and junction boxes shall be labeled
“Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System use only.”
 
Section 511 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
Section 511 Mid-Rise Buildings.
Section 511.1 General.
511.1.1 Scope. In addition to other applicable provisions of this code, other
laws and regulations, and any policies of the fire code official, the
provisions of this article applies to every mid-rise building, of any type
construction, newly constructed after the adoption of this Code, or which
undergoes a complete renovation that requires the complete vacancy of the
building.
Exceptions: The following structures, while defined as mid-rise buildings, are
not subject to this article:
1.   Buildings used exclusively as open parking garage;
2.   Buildings where all floors above the third floor (9,144 mm) level are used
exclusively as open parking garage;
3.   Buildings such as power plants, lookout towers, steeples, grain houses,
and similar structures with non-continuous human occupancy, when so determined
by the fire code official;
4.   Buildings used exclusively for jails, prisons, and hospitals.
511.1.2 Definitions. For definitions of MID-RISE BUILDING and BUILDING ACCESS,
see Section 202.
 
511.2 Building Access.
 
511.2.1 Building Access. Building access must be provided and approved by the
fire code official.
 
511.3 Fire and Life Safety Requirements.
 
511.3.1 Automatic Fire Sprinklers. Every mid-rise building must be protected
throughout by an automatic fire sprinkler system that is designed and installed
in conformance with NFPA 13. A shut-off valve and a water flow alarm device
must be provided for each floor.
 
511.3.2 Standpipes. Every mid-rise building must be provided with a class I
standpipe system in each required stairway. The standpipe system must be
interconnected with the fire sprinkler system. The system must consist of 2 ½-
inch hose valves provided for each floor level above or below grade. Two hose
outlets must also be located on the roof, outside of each stair shaft enclosure
that penetrates the roof. Hose connections must be located in the exit
vestibule, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
 
511.3.3 Smoke Detection. Smoke detectors must be provided in accordance with
this section. Smoke detectors must be connected to an automatic fire alarm
system installed in accordance with NFPA 72. The actuation of any detector
required by this section will operate the emergency voice alarm signaling
system and will place into operation all equipment necessary to prevent the
circulation of smoke through air return and exhaust ductwork.
511.3.3.1 Location. Smoke detectors must be located as follows:
1.   In every elevator machinery room and in all elevator lobbies. Elevator
lobby detectors must be connected to an alarm verification zone or be listed as
a releasing device.
2.   In the main return-air and exhaust-air plenum of each air- conditioning
system. Such device must be located in a serviceable area downstream of the
last duct inlet.
3.   At each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or more stories
from a return-air duct or plenum of an air conditioning system. In Group R-
1 and R-2 Occupancies, an approved smoke detector may be used in each return-
air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cubic feet per minute and serving not
more than 10 air inlet openings.
4.   For Group R-1 and R-2 Occupancies, in all corridors serving as a means of
egress for an occupant load for 10 or more.
511.3.4 Smoke Control. A passive or active smoke control system must be
provided for all mid-rise buildings whenever a complete floor is in excess of
55 feet (16.764 mm) from the lowest point of Fire Department access. Such
system must be mechanical and must be designed, installed, and tested to be in
compliance with Section 909.
511.3.5 Fire Alarm System. An approved and listed, automatic and manual, fully
addressable and electronically supervised fire alarm system must be provided in
conformance with this code and any policies of the Fire Prevention Division.
511.3.6 Emergency voice alarm signaling system. The operation of any automatic
or manual fire alarm initiating device must automatically sound an alert tone
followed by a pre-recorded voice instruction giving appropriate information and
direction on a general or selective basis to the entire building, occupied and
normally non-occupied areas.
511.3.6.1 Manual override. A manual override for emergency voice communication
must be provided for all paging zones.
511.4 Central Control Station.
511.4.1 General. A central control station room for fire department-operations
must be provided. The location and accessibility of the central control station
room must be approved by the fire department. The room must be separated from
the remainder of the building by not less than one-hour, fire resistive
occupancy separation. The room must be a minimum of 200 square feet with a
minimum dimension of 8 feet. It must contain the following as a minimum:
1.   The voice alarm and public address panels.
2.   The fire alarm graphic annunciator panel.
3.   Elevator annunciator panel when the building exceeds 55 feet in height.
4.   Status indicators and controls of air handling systems.
5.   Controls for unlocking stairwell doors.
6.   Annunciator panels for emergency and stand-by power status.
7.   Annunciator panels for fire pump status.
8.   Complete building plans set.
9.   Work table.
10.   Elevator control switches for switching of emergency power.
511.4.2 Annunciation identification. Control panels in the central control
station must be permanently identified as to function. Water flow, automatic
fire detection and manually activated fire alarms, supervisory and trouble
signals must be monitored by an approved central monitoring station and
annunciated in the central control station by means of an audible and visual
indicator. For the purposes of annunciation, zoning must be in accordance with
the following:
1.   When the system serves more than one building, each building must be
considered separately.
2.   Each floor must be considered a separate zone.
3.   When one or more risers serve the same floor, each riser must be
considered a separate zone.
511.5 Elevators.
 
511.5.1 Standards. Elevators and elevator lobbies must be provided and must
comply with the California Building Code and the following:
 
511.5.2 General. At least one elevator cab must be assigned for Fire Department
use, which serves all floors of the building. All provisions hereinafter are in
reference to said elevator cab(s).
 
511.5.2.1 Size. The size of the elevator cab must have dimensions as specified
in Section 915.5.2.1.1.
 
511.5.2.1.1 Ambulance Stretcher. The elevator cab must be provided with
adequate dimensions to accommodate an ambulance type stretcher in accordance
with the provisions of Section 3002.4a.1 of California Building Code.
 
511.6 Standby Power.
 
511.6.1 General. An on-site standby power system conforming to the City of El
Segundo Electrical Code must be provided. In the event of failure of the normal
power source, the standby power system must provide an alternate source of
electrical power to serve at least the designated loads as set forth in Section
511.6.2 at full power. The system may consist of an on-site generator or a
system of batteries, or both. The installation must be in accordance with this
code, nationally recognized standards, and any policies of the fire code
official.
 
511.6.2 Loads. The power load requirements for sizing the standby power system
must include, without limitation to the following:
1.   Exit signs and exit path illumination;
2.   Fire alarm system;
3.   Elevator(s) assigned for fire department use;
4.   Electrically driven fire pumps (if provided);
5.   Smoke control systems;
6.   Stairwell pressurization;
7.   Lighting circuits supplying all elevator cabs, elevator lobbies, generator
room, fire pump room, and other areas designated by the fire code official.
 
511.6.3 Fuel Supplies. On-site fuel supplies for prime movers of a standby
power generator must be sufficient for at least 12 hours at the generator’s
listed full load. Where fuel supplies require automatic transfer into a primary
tank from a secondary fuel storage tank, the fuel transfer system must be
provided with redundant fuel pumps to insure reliability. The fuel supply tank
provided must be capable of storing at least 200% of the calculated amount of
fuel needed.
511.7 Emergency Electrical System.
511.7.1 General. Electrical systems and equipment specified in Section 915.6
are classed as emergency systems and must be installed in accordance with this
code, NFPA 110, NFPA 111 and policies of the fire code official. Such systems
must operate within 10 seconds of failure to normal power supply. Such
emergency power supply may be separate from the standby power required for fire
pumps and elevators assigned for fire department use.
 
511.7.2 Emergency Systems. The following are classed as emergency systems:
1.   Exit signs and means of egress illumination.
2.   Fire alarm system.
3.   Fire detection system.
4.   Sprinkler alarm system.
5.   Elevator cab lighting.
6.   Smoke control systems.
511.8 Means of Egress.
 
511.8.1 General. Means of egress must comply with the provisions of Section
915.8.
 
511.8.1 Stairway enclosures. All stairways used for exiting must be protected
by an exit enclosure designed in accordance with the California Building Code,
Section 1020.1 and this Section.
511.8.2.1 Construction. Construction of stairway enclosures must be in
accordance with the California Building Code, Section 1023.
511.8.2.2 Extent of Enclosure. Stairway enclosures must be continuous and must
fully enclose all portions of the stairway. Exit enclosure must exit directly
to the exterior of the building or include an exit passageway on the ground
floor, leading to the exterior of the building. Each exit enclosure must extend
completely through the roof and be provided with a door that leads onto the
roof.
511.8.2.3 Openings and Penetrations. Openings and penetrations must be as
specified in the California Building Code, Section 1023.4 and 1023.5.
511.8.2.4 Pressurized Enclosures. A pressurized stairway enclosure must be
provided for all mid-rise buildings whenever a complete floor is in excess of
55 feet (16.764 mm) from the lowest point of Fire Department access. The
pressurized stairway must be designed and pressurized as specified in the
California Building Code, Section 909.20.
511.8.2.4.1 Vestibules. Pressurized stairway enclosures, serving Mid-Rise
buildings must be provided with a pressurized entrance vestibule on each floor
that complies with the California Building Code, Section 909.20.
511.8.2.4.1.1 Vestibule Size. Vestibule size must be not less than 44 inches in
width and not less than 72 inches in the direction of travel.
511.8.2.4.1.2 Vestibule Construction. Vestibules must have walls, ceilings and
floors of not less than two-hour fire resistive construction.
511.8.2.4.1.3 Vestibule Doors. Vestibule doors must comply with California
Building Code, Section 909.20.
511.8.2.4.1.4 Pressure Differences. The minimum pressure difference within a
vestibule must comply with California Building Code, Section 909.20.
511.8.2.4.1.5 Standpipes. Fire Department standpipe connections and valves
serving the floor must be within the vestibule and located in a manner so as
not to obstruct egress when hose lines are connected and charged.
511.8.2.5 Locking of Stairway doors. All stairway doors that are locked to
prohibit access from the stairway side must have the capability of being
unlocked simultaneously, without unlatching, upon a signal from the fire
control room. Upon failure of normal electrical service, or activation of any
fire alarm, the locking mechanism must automatically retract to the unlocked
position. Hardware for locking of stairway doors must be State Fire Marshal
listed and approved by the fire code official by permit before installation.
Stairway doors located between the vestibules and stairway shaft must not be
locked.
511.8.2.6 Communications. A telephone or other two-way communications system
connected to an approved emergency service which operates continuously must be
provided at not less than every third floor in each required exit stairway
vestibule.
Section 901.4.8 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
901.8 Partial fire sprinkler systems. Where in this Code or the Building Code a
partial fire sprinkler system is required, the fire sprinkler system must be
installed, modified or extended to protect the entire building or structure.
Section 901.11 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
901.11 Problematic systems. In the event of a failure of a fire protection
system or 2 or more alarms in a week where the fire code official finds no
evidence of a situation requiring a response, the fire code official is
authorized to require the building owner or occupant to provide a fire watch
until the system is repaired. Fire watch personnel must be provided with at
least one approved means for notification of the Fire Department and their only
duty is to perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch
for fires.
Section 901.12 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
901.12 Firewatch. Per Section 901.11 the Fire Chief is authorized to require
the building owner or occupant to provide a fire watch with personnel
acceptable to the Fire Chief until documentation is provided that the system is
repaired and is operational. Such individuals shall be provided with at least
one approved means for notification of the fire department and their only duty
shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected premises, keep and
maintain a log and keep watch for fires.
Section 903.2 of the 2025 CFC is amended as follows:
903.2 Where required.
1.   New Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, an approved automatic
sprinkler system in new buildings and structures shall be required for all
occupancies.
Exception: New detached buildings under one thousand (1,000) square feet
subject to approval of the Fire Official.
2.   Existing Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any work to an
existing building which removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the exterior
perimeter wall height as defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and alterations
will require the existing building to be fully sprinklered throughout.
 
Section 903.2.1 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.2 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.3 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.4 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.5 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.6 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.7 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.8 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.9 of the 2025 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.10 of the 2025 CFC is deleted.
Section 903.2.10.2 of the 2025 CFC is deleted.
Section 903.2.11.1 of the 2025 CFC is deleted.
Section 903.2.11.3 of the 2025 CFC is deleted.
 
Section 903.2.22 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
903.2.22 Structures in the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area. An automatic
sprinkler system must be provided throughout every facility or building
hereafter constructed within the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area.
 
903.2.22.1 Existing Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any work to
an existing building which removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the
exterior perimeter wall height as defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and
alterations will require the existing building to be fully sprinklered
throughout.
Section 903.3.5.3 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically
calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply
capacity.
Section 903.3.8 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
903.3.8 Limited Area Sprinkler Systems. When a fire sprinkler system is
required it shall be provided throughout the building.
Exception: Protection for specific appliances and/or hazards.
Section 903.3.10 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
903.3.10 Floor Control valves. Floor control valves and waterflow detection
assemblies shall be installed at each floor where any of the following occur:
1.   Buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than
30 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
2.   Buildings that are three or more stories in height.
3.   Buildings that are two or more stories below the highest level of fire
department access.
Exception: Group R-3 and R-3.1 occupancies floor control valves and waterflow
detection assemblies shall not be required.
Section 909.11 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
909.11 General. The smoke-control system shall be supplied with two sources of
power. Primary power shall be from the normal building power systems. Secondary
power shall be from an approved standby source complying with Section 1203 of
this code. The standby power source and its transfer switches shall be in a
room separate from the normal power transformers and switchgear and ventilated
directly to and from the exterior. The room shall be enclosed with not less
than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
Transfer to full standby power shall be automatic and within 60 seconds of
failure of the primary power. The systems shall comply with the Electrical
Code.
Exception: The secondary power is not required for pressurized enclosures in
buildings of less than 5 floors used for human occupancy
Section 1207.11.3 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
1207.11.3 Location. ESS shall be installed only in the following locations:
1.   Detached garages and detached accessory structures.
2.   Deleted.
3.   Outdoors or on the exterior side of the exterior walls located not less
than 3 feet (914mm) from doors and windows directly entering the dwelling unit.
4.   Deleted.
ESS shall not be installed in any attached structure to a dwelling unit.
Section 1207.11.4 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
1207.11.4 Energy Ratings. 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5362.gif]
ESS installations exceeding the permitted individual or aggregate ratings shall
be installed in accordance with Sections 1207.1 through 1207.9. (Material based
on NFPA 855 2023 Ed.)
 
Section 1207.11.6 “Fire Detection” of the 2025 CFC is deleted.
Section 5601.1.3 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and
use of fireworks is prohibited. The possession, sale, use, and/or discharge of
“Safe and Sane” fireworks is prohibited.
Exceptions:
1.   Storage and handling of fireworks as allowed by Section 5604.
2.   Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as allowed in Section 5605
and Health and Safety Code Division 11.
3.   The use of fireworks for fireworks displays, pyrotechnic before a
proximate audience and pyrotechnic special effects in motion pictures,
television, theatrical or group entertainment productions are allowed in Title
19, Division 1, Chapter 6 Fireworks reprinted in Section 5608 and Health and
Safety Code Division 11.
 
Section 5601.7 of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
5601.7 Seizure. All fireworks including “State approved” shall be illegal in
the City of El Segundo. The fire code official and police officers shall have
the authority to seize, take and remove fireworks and/or safe and sane
fireworks stored, sold, offered for sale, used or handled in violation of the
provisions of Title 19 CCR, Division 1, Chapter 6 and Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 9.
Exception: When permits are issued for such use.
Section 5601.7.1 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
5601.7.1 Financial Responsibility. See section 104.11.4 Financial
Responsibility for cost recovery of enforcement of section 5609.1. Fireworks
may be identified as hazardous waste by the State of California; violators
shall be responsible for any disposal fees.
Section 5801.1.1 is added to the 2025 CFC to read as follows:
5801.1.1 Methane Soil Gas. All sources of methane soil gas, including
petrogenic and biogenic, are subject to methane soil gas testing, passive or
active mitigation, and methane detection and alarm system per El Segundo Fire
Departments Guidelines.
Section B105.2 of Appendix B of the 2025 CFC is amended to read as follows:
B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-
4 buildings and townhouses. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for
buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings
and townhouses shall be as specified in Tables B105.1.
Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow up to 50 percent, as approved, is
allowed when the building is protected with an approved automatic sprinkler
system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.1, 903.1.2, or 903.3.1.3. The
resulting fire-flow must not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (5678 U/min)
for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1.
 
SECTION 3. Effect of Ordinance on Past Actions and Obligations. The adoption of
this Ordinance will not affect any civil action initiated or criminal
prosecution for ESMC violations committed prior to this Ordinance’s effective
date; will not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid prior to this
Ordinance’s effective date; and will not affect the validity of any bond or
cash deposit posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to the ESMC, prior to this
Ordinance’s effective date.
 
SECTION 4. Consistency; Repeal of Prior Codes. Prior City ordinances in
conflict with this Ordinance, in whole or in part, are superseded and expressly
repealed.
 
 
SECTION 5. Environmental Assessment. The City Council determines that this
ordinance is exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act
(California Public Resources Code §§ 21000, et seq., “CEQA”) and the
regulations promulgated thereunder (14 California Code of Regulations §§ 15000,
et seq., the “CEQA Guidelines”) because it consists only of minor revisions and
clarifications to an existing code of construction-related regulations and
specification of procedures related thereto and will not have the effect of
deleting or substantially changing any regulatory standards or findings
required therefor, and therefore does not have the potential to cause
significant effects on the environment. In addition, this ordinance is an
action being taken for enhanced protection of the environment and is exempt
from further review under CEQA Guidelines § 15308. Also, there is no
possibility that the ordinance may have a significant effect on the environment
(14 Cal. Code Regs. § 15061(b)(3)), and it will not result in a direct or
reasonably foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment (14 Cal.
Code Regs. § 15060(c)(2)).
 
SECTION 6. Construction. This Ordinance must be broadly construed to achieve
the purposes stated in this Ordinance. It is the City Council’s intent that the
provisions of this Ordinance be interpreted or implemented by the City and
others in a manner that facilitates the purposes set forth in this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 7. Savings Clause. Repeal of any provision of the ESMC or any other
city ordinance herein will not affect any penalty, forfeiture, or liability
incurred before, or preclude prosecution and imposition of penalties for any
violation occurring before, this Ordinance’s effective date. Any such repealed
part will remain in full force and effect for sustaining action or prosecuting
violations occurring before the effective date of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 8. Severability. If any part of this Ordinance or its application is
deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city council intends
that such invalidity will not affect the effectiveness of the remaining
provisions or applications and, to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance
are severable.
 
SECTION 9. Publication. The City Clerk is directed to certify the passage and
adoption of this Ordinance; cause it to be entered into the City of El
Segundo’s book of original ordinances; make a note of the passage and adoption
in the records of this meeting; and, within fifteen 15 days after the passage
and adoption of this Ordinance, cause it to be published or posted in
accordance with California law.
 
SECTION 10. Effective Date. This Ordinance will become effective on the 31st
day following its passage and adoption.
 
SECTION 11. Filing with Building Standards Commission. The City Clerk is
directed to transmit a certified copy of this Ordinance with the California
Building Standards Commission.
 
   PASSED AND ADOPTED this 3rd day of December, 2025.
____________________________
Chris Pimentel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
________________________________
Susan Truax, City Clerk
 
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
 
 
________________________________
Mark D. Hensley, City Attorney
 
CERTIFICATION
 
 
 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA      )
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES   )   SS
CITY OF EL SEGUNDO      )
 
I, Susan Truax, City Clerk of the City of El Segundo, California, do hereby
certify that the whole number of members of the City Council of said City is
five; that the foregoing Ordinance No. 1681 was duly introduced by said City
Council at a regular meeting held on the 18th day of November, 2025, and was
duly passed, and adopted by said City Council, approved and signed by the
Mayor, and attested to by the City Clerk, all at a regular meeting of said
Council held on the 3rd day of December, 2025, and the same was so passed and
adopted by the following vote:
 
AYES:   Mayor Pimentel, Mayor Pro Tem Baldino, Council Member Giroux, and
Council Member Keldorf
NOES:   None
ABSENT:   Council Member Boyles
ABSTAIN:   None
 
WITNESS MY HAND THE OFFICIAL SEAL OF SAID CITY this 3rd day of December, 2025.
 
 
                                     
                      Susan Truax, City Clerk
of the City of El Segundo,
California
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1682
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EL SEGUNDO, CALIFORNIA,
AMENDING SECTIONS 7-8-3 AND 7-8-4 OF CHAPTER 8 (PROHIBITED CAMPING) TO TITLE 7
(NUISANCES AND OFFENSES) OF THE EL SEGUNDO MUNICIPAL CODE EXPANDING ITS ANTI-
CAMPING PROHIBITIONS TO INCLUDE CERTAIN PORTIONS OF PRIVATE PROPERTY AND TO
ENSURE ACCESS TO NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
 
 
THE CITY COUNCIL DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
 
   SECTION 1. Findings. The City Council finds and declares as follows:
 
A.   The California Constitution provides that a city may make and enforce
within its limits all local, police, sanitary and other ordinances and
regulations not in conflict with general law;
 
B.   The City of El Segundo (“City”) and its City Council are committed to
protecting the life, health, and safety of its residents and all people within
the geographical boundaries of the City;
 
C.   The City and its City Council are committed to protecting the rights of
individuals who cannot obtain shelter and to treating their personal property
with respect and consideration;
 
D.   On June 28, 2024, the U.S. Supreme Court decided the City of Grants Pass,
Oregon v. Johnson et al. case, upholding Grants Pass’s ordinance prohibiting
camping on public property to tackle the issue of homelessness;
 
E.   In July 2024, California Governor Gavin Newsom issued Executive Order N-1-
24, ordering state agencies to adopt policies to address encampments on state
property and encouraging local governments to adopt similar polices “and to use
all available resources and infrastructure” to combat homelessness;
 
F.   In September 2024, in response to the Grants Pass decision, the City
adopted Ordinance No. 1664 expanding its camping prohibitions within public
parks and beaches, and prohibiting using vehicles for human habitation in
specified public areas;
 
 
G.   In July 2025, U.S. President Donald J. Trump issued an executive order
titled “Ending Crime and Disorder on America’s Streets” in which he identified
the homelessness crisis and ordered his administration to seek civil
commitments of individuals with mental illness or are living on the streets and
cannot care for themselves;
 
H.   Unauthorized camping can create health and safety risks related to the
accumulation of trash, food waste, human waste, and contaminated medical waste;
 
I.   To mitigate risks to health and safety of its citizens, the City Council
desires to adopt regulations further expanding its anti-camping prohibition to
strengthen the protection of individual and public safety as well as ensure
pedestrian accessibility rights throughout the City.
 
SECTION 2. Section 7-8-3 of the El Segundo Municipal Code is hereby amended to
read as follows (deletions in strikethrough and additions in double underline):
 
7-8-3 CAMPING PROHIBITED
 
A.   No person may occupy a campsite in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley,
lane, public right of way, park, bench, or any other publicly-owned property or
under any bridge or viaduct, unless (i) otherwise specifically authorized by
this Code or (ii) upon City Council resolution, the City Council may exempt a
special event from the prohibitions of this section, if the City Council finds
such exemption to be in the public interest and consistent with their goals and
notices and in accordance with conditions imposed by the City Council. Any
conditions imposed will include a condition requiring that the applicant
provide evidence of adequate insurance coverage and agree to indemnify the City
for any liability, damage or expense incurred by the City as a result of
activities of the applicant. Any findings by the City Council shall specify the
exact dates and location covered by the exemption.
 
B.   No person may occupy a campsite that: 
 
1.   Obstructs or impedes passage, as required by the Americans with
Disabilities Act; or
 
2.   Is within 20 feet of an entrance or exit to any nonresidential building
which abuts a public sidewalk and (i) into which the public is invited or (ii)
which is open to view from the public street; or
 
3.   Is on a privately owned parking lot to which the public is invited and
permitted.
SECTION 3.  Section 7-8-4 of the El Segundo Municipal Code is hereby amended to
read as follows (deletions in strikethrough and additions in double underline):
 
7-8-4 REMOVAL OF CAMPSITE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
 
Upon discovery of a campsite in violation of this chapter, on public
property, removal of the campsite by the Police Department, or designee, may
occur under the following circumstances:
 
A.   Prior to removing the campsite, the City shall post a notice, 24-hours in
advance.
 
B.   At the time a 24-hour notice is posted, the City shall inform a local
agency delivering social services to homeless people of the location of the
campsite.
 
C.  After the 24-hour notice period has passed, the Police Department, or
designee, is authorized to remove the campsite and all personal property
related thereto.
 
D.  The foregoing notwithstanding, campsite removal may proceed without the
above-referenced notice only if an imminent threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare exists (e.g., fire on site) that requires immediate removal
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
 
SECTION 4. Environmental Assessment. The City Council finds that this Ordinance
is not subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”), pursuant
to Sections 15060(c)(2) (the activity will not result in a direct or reasonably
foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment) and 15060(c)(3) (the
activity is not a project as defined in Section 15378) of the CEQA Guidelines,
California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Chapter 3, because it has no
potential for resulting in physical change to the environment, directly or
indirectly. In the alternative, the City Council finds that the Ordinance falls
within the “common sense” exemption set forth in State CEQA Guidelines section
15061, subdivision (b)(3), which exempts activity from CEQA where “it can be
seen with certainty that there is no possibility that the activity in question
may have a significant effect on the environment.”
 
SECTION 5. Severability. If any part of this Ordinance or its application is
deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city council intends
that such invalidity will not affect the effectiveness of the remaining
provisions or applications and, to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance
are severable.
 
SECTION 6. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30)
days after adoption.
 
SECTION 7. Publication. The City Clerk is directed to certify the passage and
adoption of this Ordinance causing it to be posted as required by law.
 
 
PASSED AND ADOPTED this 20 th day of January, 2026.
 
 
 
                     __________________________
                     Chris Pimentel, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
 
_________________________
Susan Truax, City Clerk
 
 
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM
 
 
_________________________
Mark D. Hensley, City Attorney
CERTIFICATION
 
 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA      )
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES   )   SS
CITY OF EL SEGUNDO      )
I, Susan Truax, City Clerk of the City of El Segundo, California, do hereby
certify that the whole number of members of the City Council of said City is
five; that the foregoing Ordinance No. 1682 was duly introduced by said City
Council at a regular meeting held on the 16 th day of December, 2025, and was
duly passed, and adopted by said City Council, approved and signed by the
Mayor, and attested to by the City Clerk, all at a regular meeting of said
Council held on the 20 th day of January, 2026, and the same was so passed and
adopted by the following vote:
AYES:    Mayor Pimentel, Mayor Pro Tem Baldino, Council Member Giroux, and
Council Member Keldorf
NOES:   None
ABSENT:   Council Member Boyles
ABSTAIN:   None
 
WITNESS MY HAND THE OFFICIAL SEAL OF SAID CITY this 20 th day of January, 2026.
 
 
                                     
                      Susan Truax, City Clerk
of the City of El Segundo,
California
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1335
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EL SEGUNDO, CALIFORNIA ADOPTING
THE CITY OF EL SEGUNDO, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of El Segundo, California, as
follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the City
Code of the City of El Segundo, California prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official City Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances, excluding Title 6, in
conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: Operative Date. This ordinance shall become effective at midnight
on the thirtieth (30th) day from and after the date of the final passage and
adoption of this ordinance; shall cause the same to be entered in the book of
original ordinance of said city; shall make a minute of the passage and
adoption thereof in the records of the meeting at which the same is passed and
adopted; and shall within fifteen (15) days after the passage and adoption
thereof, cause the same to be published or posted in accordance with the law.
PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED this 15th day of May, 2001.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3665.png]
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Code Adoption; Definitions      1
General Penalties   2
Administrative Citations   2A
City Seal, City Logo      3
City Council   4
Elections   4A
City Officers And Employees   5
City Manager   5A
Chief Financial Officer   5B
City Treasurer   5C
Personnel Merit System   6
Purchasing   7
Execution Of Contracts   7A
Disposition Of Surplus Property   7B
Public Works Contracts   7C
Political Activity   8
Campaign Contributions And Disclosures   9
Unclaimed Property   10
Records Destruction   11
Electronic Filing Of Campaign Disclosure Statements And Statements Of Economic
Interest   12
CHAPTER 1
CODE ADOPTION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-1-1: Adoption Of City Code
1-1-2: Title; Citation; Reference
1-1-3: Reference Applies To Amendments
1-1-4: Codification Authority
1-1-5: Definitions And Rules Of Construction
1-1-6: Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1-1-7: Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
1-1-8: Severability
1-1-1: ADOPTION OF CITY CODE:
That certain document entitled, "El Segundo City Code", three (3) copies of
which have been filed and are on file in the office of the City Clerk for
public inspection, together with the secondary codes therein adopted by
reference, is hereby adopted as a comprehensive ordinance code for the City,
pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code sections 50022.1
through 50022.10. Each and all of the provisions, terms and penalties of this
Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted,
incorporated herein, and hereby made a part hereof as though fully set forth in
this Chapter. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-2: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This Code shall be known as the EL SEGUNDO CITY CODE and it shall be sufficient
to refer to this Code as the "El Segundo City Code" in any prosecution for the
violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It
shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending,
correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to,
amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the "El Segundo City Code". Further
reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the
"El Segundo City Code" and such reference shall apply to that numbered title,
chapter, section or subsection as it appears in this Code. (Ord. 715, 4-28-
1969)
1-1-3: REFERENCE APPLIES TO AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "El Segundo City Code" or to
any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City, the reference shall apply
to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter
made. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-4: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
This Code consists of all of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of the City, codified pursuant to California
Government Code sections 50022.1 through 50022.10. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-5: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context
clearly requires otherwise:
   CITY: The words "the City" or "this City" shall be construed as if followed
by the words "of El Segundo".
   COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time in which any act provided by law is to be done
is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last
day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.
   COUNCIL: Whenever the word "Council" is used in this Code, it means the City
Council of El Segundo.
   COUNTY: The words "the County" or "this County" mean the County of Los
Angeles.
   DAY: The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
   DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME: "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and
sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
   GENDER: The masculine "gender" includes the feminine and neuter.
IN THE CITY: Means and includes all territory over which the City now has, or
shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or
other regulatory powers.
   JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving a "joint authority" to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
   MONTH: A calendar month.
   NUMBER: The singular "number" includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   OATH: "Oath" includes an affirmation.
   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, EMPLOYEES: Officers,
departments, boards, commissions, and employees referred to in this Code shall
mean officers, departments, boards, commissions, and employees of the City,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   OFFICIAL TIME: Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they mean
Pacific Standard Time or daylight-saving time, as may be in current use in the
City.
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
   OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety
of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON: Includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business trust, corporation or company.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except "real
property", as defined in this Section.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before
and next after, respectively.
   PROCESS: Includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial
proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.
   PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
   SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK: "Signature" or "subscription" includes a
mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's
name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the
signer's or subscriber's name; but, a signature or subscription by mark can be
acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement
only when two (2) witnesses so sign their own names thereto.
   STATE: The words "the State" or "this State" mean the State of California.
   TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
   TENSES: The present "tense" includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
   WEEK: A "week" consists of seven (7) consecutive days.
   WRITING: Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
   YEAR: A calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (Ord. 715, 4-28-
1969)
1-1-6: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of
the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-7: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
The repeal provided for in this Chapter shall not affect any offense or act
committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or
right established or accruing before the effective date of this City Code; nor
shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money for the City or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the
City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation
assumed by the City; nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances
or resolutions of the City Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Code; nor shall it affect the annual tax levy; nor shall it
affect any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the City
on any person or corporation; nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to the
salaries of City officers or employees; nor shall it affect any ordinance
annexing territory to the City; nor shall it affect any ordinance naming,
opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the City; nor shall it
affect any ordinance relating to zoning; nor shall it affect any ordinance
relating to State employees' retirement contracts; nor shall it affect any
ordinance establishing special and general City funds; nor shall it affect any
prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered on or prior to
the effective date of this City Code. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969; amd. 2000 Code)
1-1-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or part of this
Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would
have adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase,
part, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid
or unconstitutional. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PENALTIES
SECTION:
1-2-1: General Penalty
1-2-2: General Prohibition
1-2-3: Penalties For Infractions
1-2-4: Provisions Punishable As Infractions
1-2-5: Code Enforcement
1-2-6: Citation Procedure For Violations
1-2-7: Failure To Appear
1-2-8: Prosecutorial Duties Of The City Attorney
1-2-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Persons convicted of a misdemeanor, the penalty for which is not
otherwise prescribed, will be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00); by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months; or by
both a fine and imprisonment for each violation of this Code.
   B.   The City Council may establish lesser fines for specific misdemeanor
violations by resolution. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-2: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to violate, or fail to comply with, any
provision of this Code. Each and every violation of any part of this Code
including, without limitation, any franchise or permit issued pursuant to this
Code, is a misdemeanor unless otherwise specified.
   B.   Every person violating this Code is guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision
of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person.
   C.   In addition to these criminal penalties, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code is a
public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with this Code. (Ord. 1479, 6-
4-2013)
1-2-3: PENALTIES FOR INFRACTIONS:
   A.   Each infraction is punishable as follows:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
violation;
      2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation of the same provision within one year;
      3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
additional violation of the same provision within one year of the first
violation.
   B.   Any offense which would otherwise be an infraction may be prosecuted as
a misdemeanor if a defendant was convicted for the same violation two (2) or
more times within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the
commission of the offense.
   C.   A fourth violation of the same Code provision regardless of the time of
occurrence must be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
   D.   The City Council may establish lesser fines for specific infractions by
resolution. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-4: PROVISIONS PUNISHABLE AS INFRACTIONS:
The following sections of this Code are punishable as infractions and not as
misdemeanors:
Section Subject
Section Subject
4-1-1   Business license required
4-1-25  Business license vehicle tags
4-3-2   Alarm permits required
4-4-9   Vehicles for hire/operation permit required
4-4-22  Vehicles for hire/misrepresentation prohibited
4-6-8   Secondhand store and junk shops - compliance
4-8-3   Entertainment permit required; exceptions
4-8-21  Hours of entertainment
4-8-22  Entertainment - conduct upon premises
4-11-3  Business regulations/motion picture, radio and television/permit
        required
5-2-13  Recycling of organic waste
5-3-2   Littering streets
5-3-3   Littering - containers required for hauling
5-6-3   Smoking prohibited
5-6A-3  Tobacco products - prohibited sale to minors. Prohibited sale without
        proper identification
7-6-1   Use of vehicle for human habitation
7-6-2   Gambling
7-6-4   Weapons
7-6-5   Merchandise on street or sidewalks
7-6-8   Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages
7-7-2   Handbills - distribution
7-7-3   Handbills - posting property
7-7-4   Handbills - place in vehicles
7-7-6   Handbills - locations where prohibited
7-9-2   Private parking lot - unlawful acts
8-4-19  Vehicles and traffic/miscellaneous traffic/driving on park ground
8-4-24  Vehicles and traffic/miscellaneous traffic/coasters and skateboards
8-5-5   Vehicles and traffic/stopping, standing and parking/stopping or
        standing in parkway
8-5-12  Vehicles and traffic/stopping, standing and parking/front and side yard
        parking
9-2-5   Public ways and property/planting vegetation
9-2-6   Public ways and property/obstructions in streets
9-3-7   Public ways and property/street trees/prohibitions
9-4-4   Public ways and property/newsracks/prohibitions
10-4-3  Parks and recreation/skateboard/protective gear required
 
(Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013; amd. Ord. 1541, 12-6-2016; Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
1-2-5: CODE ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Authorization: The Police Department, Fire Department, and building
official, and other persons designated by the City Manager are authorized to
enforce the various provisions of this Code under their respective authority or
as is specifically assigned to them by the City Manager or City Council.
   B.   Powers Of Arrest: Officials and employees designated to enforce
provisions of this Code have authority to arrest persons pursuant to Penal Code
section 836.5 for purposes of issuing citations for violations of provisions of
this Code. Police officers have full authority to arrest persons for violations
of the provisions of this Code pursuant to any applicable provision of the
Penal Code. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-6: CITATION PROCEDURE FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any City officer or employee arresting any person for a violation of
any provision of this Code, who does not immediately take such arrested person
before a Magistrate, as prescribed in the Penal Code of the State, must prepare
in duplicate a written notice to appear in court.
   B.   The notice must contain:
      1.   The name and address of the person arrested;
      2.   The offense charged, the time and place of the alleged violation;
      3.   Where and when such person must appear in court. The time specified
in the notice for appearance must be at least ten (10) days after such arrest.
The place specified in the notice to appear and the notice must conform with
all applicable provisions of the Penal Code.
      4.   The arresting City officer or employee must deliver one copy of the
notice to appear to the alleged violator. In order to secure immediate release,
the violator must give a written promise to appear in court at the time and
place indicated on the notice by signing the duplicate notice. That signed copy
must be retained by the City officer or employee. Thereafter, the arresting
City officer and employee must release the alleged violator from custody. The
duplicate copy of the notice to appear must be filed in the manner prescribed
in the Penal Code. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-7: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
Any person who wilfully violates a written promise to appear in court by
failing to appear at the time and place stated is guilty of a misdemeanor
regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which the person was
originally arrested. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-8: PROSECUTORIAL DUTIES OF THE CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to
the City Attorney by this Code or California law, the City Attorney will:
      1.   Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for
violations of this Code; any franchises or permits issued pursuant to this
Code; City ordinances; and any State misdemeanors that the City Council elects
to enforce.
      2.   Draft complaints for such cases and prosecute all recognizances and
bail bonds forfeited arising from or resulting from the commission of such
offenses.
      3.   Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties,
forfeitures, and other money accruing to the City under this Code or otherwise.
      4.   Represent the City in all appeals arising as a consequence of the
City Attorney's prosecutions.
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the City Attorney is
the only officer that may file misdemeanor charges in accordance with this
Code. The City Attorney may, in his or her discretion, prosecute misdemeanor
violations of this Code as infractions.
   C.   Nothing contained in this section will interfere with the authority of
public safety officials to arrest persons pursuant to any applicable provision
of this Code and/or the California Penal Code. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
CHAPTER 2A
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
SECTION:
General Provisions
1-2A-1: Purpose
1-2A-2: Applicability
1-2A-3: Definitions
1-2A-4: Notices
Citations
1-2A-5: Citation Procedures
1-2A-6: Amount Of Administrative Fines
1-2A-7: Payment Of Administrative Fines
1-2A-8: Delinquent Administrative Fines; Penalties And Interest
1-2A-9: Issuance Of Permits Or Licenses
1-2A-10: Compliance Orders
1-2A-11: Correction Of Violation
Review And Hearings
1-2A-12: Initial Administrative Review; Request
1-2A-13: Initial Administrative Review; Procedure
1-2A-14: Initial Administrative Review; Decision
Hearing Procedures
1-2A-15: Request For Administrative Hearing
1-2A-16: Advance Deposit; Hardship Waiver
1-2A-17: Hearing Officer
1-2A-18: Hearing Date
1-2A-19: Conduct Of Hearings
1-2A-20: Hearing Officer's Decision
1-2A-21: Disposition Of Administrative Fines
1-2A-22: Right To Judicial Review
Collection And Lien Procedures
1-2A-23: Recovery Of Administrative Citation Fines And Costs
1-2A-24: Lien Procedure
1-2A-25: Recording A Lien
1-2A-26: Administrative Fee
1-2A-27: Satisfaction Of Lien
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-2A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers and Government
Code section 53069.4 for the purpose of making any violations of this Code
subject to an administrative fine and to set forth the procedures for the
imposition and collection of such fines. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013)
1-2A-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter provides for administrative citations that are in addition to all
other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which the City may pursue to address
any violation of this Code. The use of this chapter is at the sole discretion
of the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013)
1-2A-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter:
CITEE: The person(s) to whom a Code Enforcement Officer issued an
administrative citation pursuant to this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: City employees from the Public Works Department,
Community Development Department, Police or Fire Department with the authority
to enforce this Code. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013; amd. Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018; Ord.
1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
1-2A-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, all notices and citations required by this chapter
must be served on citee via personal service or first class mail, postage
prepaid, to citee's last known address. Service is effective when personally
served or when deposited into the United States mail. The individual serving a
citee with notice must complete a declaration of service. Failure to receive
any notice does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted under this
chapter. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
CITATIONS
1-2A-5: CITATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Issuance: Issuing an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter
is in lieu of any criminal citation that could have been issued for the same
violation. The issuance of the administrative citation does not, however,
prevent the issuance of a criminal citation for a subsequent violation of the
same nature.
   B.   Contents: Each administrative citation must contain the following
information:
      1.   The date of the violation;
      2.   The address or a definite description of the geographic location
where the violation occurred or is occurring;
      3.   The section of this Code that was violated;
      4.   A description of the conditions causing the code violation;
      5.   The amount of the administrative fine for the code violation;
      6.   A description of the fine payment process, including a description
of the time within which, and the place where, the fine must be paid;
      7.   An order prohibiting the continued or repeated occurrence of the
code violation described in the administrative citation;
      8.   Notification that payment of a fine under this chapter does not
excuse or discharge any continued or repeated occurrence of the code violation
that is the subject of the administrative citation;
      9.   A description of the administrative citation review process,
including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested
and the manner in which a request for review of the citation may be requested;
and
      10.   The name of the citing Code Enforcement Officer.
   C.   Service And Filing: The Code Enforcement Officer must serve the
original citation on the person cited in the manner set forth in this chapter
and forward a copy of the administrative citation to the City Clerk. (Ord.
1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-6: AMOUNT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
The amounts of the administrative fines imposed for code violations under this
chapter will be established by City Council resolution. That resolution must
also set forth any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code
provision by the same person within twelve (12) months from the date of a
previous administrative citation. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-7: PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
An administrative fine must be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from
the date of the administrative citation or, if a request for an initial
administrative review is submitted, within fifteen (15) days after the date of
the notice of the conclusions of that initial administrative review, whichever
is later. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-8: DELINQUENT ADMINISTRATIVE FINES; PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   A penalty of ten percent (10%) is added on any delinquent fines on the
last day of each month after the due date. The penalty will not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the fine.
   B.   In addition to penalties provided by this section, delinquent fines
accrue interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, exclusive of
penalties, from the due date. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-9: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS OR LICENSES:
Should a Code Enforcement Officer issue a citation because the citee lacks a
required permit or license and the fine is delinquent, the City will not issue
such permit or license until the delinquent fine, and any applicable penalties
and interest, is paid. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013)
1-2A-10: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
Before issuing an administrative citation for any violation of building,
plumbing, electrical, or similar regulation set forth in this Code or
incorporated by reference, or any violation of title 15 of this Code, the Code
Enforcement Officer must first issue a written compliance order to the person
(s) responsible for the violation unless the violation constitutes an immediate
threat to public health or safety. The Code Enforcement Officer may, but is not
required to, issue a compliance order for any other violation of this Code. Any
compliance order issued by a Code Enforcement Officer must contain all of the
following:
   A.   The date on which, and geographic location where, the violation was
observed;
   B.   The section of this Code violated;
   C.   A description of the conditions causing the code violation;
   D.   Actions required to correct the violation;
   E.   A reasonable time period for the correction of the violation;
   F.   Notice that if the violation is not corrected by the date specified in
the compliance order, that an administrative citation may be issued and
administrative fines imposed for failure to correct violations by the date
specified. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013)
1-2A-11: CORRECTION OF VIOLATION:
No further action is required if the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
all violations in the compliance order were cured. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that all violations were not corrected within the time
specified, an administrative citation may be issued to each person named in the
compliance order as a responsible person. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
REVIEW AND HEARINGS
1-2A-12: INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; REQUEST:
Citees may request an initial administrative review of the citation within
twenty (20) days of its issuance. This request must be made in writing to the
City Clerk and set forth with particularity the reasons the citee believes a
violation did not occur or that the citee was not responsible for the violation
(s); must include a copy of the citation; and contain the address to which the
conclusions of the City's review should be mailed. A request for an initial
administrative review is a mandatory prerequisite to a request for an
administrative hearing. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-13: INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; PROCEDURE:
The City Clerk will forward initial administrative review requests to the
following persons (collectively identified as “reviewing officer”):
   A.   To the Director of Community Development if the Code Enforcement
Officer issuing the administrative citation is an employee within the Community
Development Department;
   B.   To the Fire Chief if the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
administrative citation is an employee within the Fire Department; or
   C.   To the Public Works Director if the Code Enforcement Officer issuing
the administrative citation is an employee within the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
1-2A-14: INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; DECISION:
   A.   Upon receiving these requests from the Clerk, the reviewing officer
will review the requests and provide the Clerk with a written notification
that:
      1.   The citation should be vacated because there was no violation, or
the citee was not responsible for the violation, and setting forth the basis
for that conclusion;
      2.   The citation should not be vacated because no justification could be
found.
   B.   The city clerk's office should mail a copy of the notification to the
citee at the address on the request for initial administrative review along
with notice establishing the fine due date and the procedure for requesting an
administrative hearing.
   C.   The reviewing officer should complete his/her review within ten (10)
days of receiving the citee's request. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
HEARING PROCEDURES
1-2A-15: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
Any citee dissatisfied with the conclusions of an initial administrative review
may contest that citation by requesting an administrative hearing. A citee must
request an administrative hearing within fifteen (15) days after the date the
city served the citee with notice of the administrative review decision.
Requests must be submitted to the city clerk's office and be accompanied by an
advance deposit of the fine or a request for a hardship waiver. (Ord. 1364, 7-
1-2003)
1-2A-16: ADVANCE DEPOSIT; HARDSHIP WAIVER:
   A.   Citees financially unable to make an advance deposit of the
administrative fine, may file for a hardship waiver. The request for a hardship
waiver must be filed with the city clerk's office on a form containing
information that may be required by the city clerk. The city clerk will review
the request and determine whether a waiver is justified. A waiver may only be
approved if the request for waiver is accompanied by a sworn affidavit,
together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating that the
citee's actual financial inability to deposit the full amount of the fine.
   B.   The city clerk will inform the citee in writing regarding whether the
city clerk approved the waiver. This determination must be served upon the
citee by mail at the address provided in the waiver application. The city
clerk's determination is final.
   C.   Should the clerk determine that a waiver is unjustified, the citee must
deposit the fine amount with the city not later than ten (10) days after the
date of that decision. Failure to make a deposit within ten (10) days after
waiver denial is deemed a waiver of the citee's right to an administrative
hearing and the administrative fine will be deemed delinquent. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-
2003)
1-2A-17: HEARING OFFICER:
The city manager designates the hearing officer for the administrative citation
hearing. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-18: HEARING DATE:
After receiving a timely hearing request and deposit, or waiver, of the fine
amount, the city clerk sets an administrative hearing on a date not less than
fifteen (15) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the hearing is
requested. Written notice of the date, time and location of the administrative
hearing must be provided to the citee at least fifteen (15) days before the
hearing date. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-19: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
   A.   Evidentiary Rules: The administrative citation is prima facie evidence
of the respective facts contained in the citation. Both the citee and code
enforcement officer have the opportunity to testify and present additional
evidence concerning the administrative citation. Evidence may include, without
limitation, witness testimony, documents, or other similar evidence. Evidence
sought to be introduced is not limited to any legal rules of evidence except
for the rule that it must be relevant and material to the issues of whether the
violation alleged in the citation occurred and whether the citee was
responsible for the violation.
   B.   Waiver Of Personal Appearance At Hearing: In lieu of personally
appearing at an administrative hearing, the citee may request that the hearing
officer decide the matter based on the citation itself and any other
documentary evidence submitted by the citee or code enforcement officer before
the hearing date.
   C.   Failure To Appear At Hearing: Failure of a citee to appear at the
hearing is deemed a waiver of the right to be personally present at the
hearing. The hearing officer must then decide the matter based upon the
citation itself, any documentary evidence previously submitted, and any
additional evidence that may be presented at the hearing by the code
enforcement officer.
   D.   Attendance Of Code Enforcement Officer: The code enforcement officer
who issued the administrative citation may, but is not required to, attend the
administrative hearing. If the code enforcement officer does not attend, the
code enforcement officer may, before the hearing date, submit reports, photos
or other documentation regarding the violation to the hearing officer for
consideration at the hearing.
   E.   Continuation Of Hearings: The hearing officer may continue any hearing
and request additional information from the code enforcement officer or citee
before issuing a written decision. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-20: HEARING OFFICER'S DECISION:
   A.   The hearing officer must issue a written decision to uphold or set
aside the administrative citation and present the reasons for that decision.
   B.   The city clerk must send a copy of the hearing officer's decision to
the citee with notice of the citee's right to appeal the decision in superior
court.
   C.   The hearing officer's decision is the city's final action on the
matter. There is no right to an appeal other than as provided in this chapter.
The hearing officer's decision is final as of the date of the decision. (Ord.
1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-21: DISPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   Should the hearing officer uphold the administrative citation, then the
city can retain the deposited fine amount.
   B.   Should the hearing officer vacate the administrative citation, then the
city must promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine, if any.
   C.   Should the hearing officer uphold the administrative citation and a
hardship waiver was previously granted, the due date for paying the
administrative fine will be thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of the
hearing officer's decision.
   D.   The city may use all legal means to collect any past due fines,
including penalties and interest, should a citee fail to pay in a timely
manner. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-22: RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW:
   A.   A citee may appeal the hearing officer's decision by filing an appeal
with the superior court pursuant to Government Code section 53069.4, or any
successor statute, within twenty (20) days from service of the hearing
officer's decision.
   B.   Should the citee file a timely appeal with the superior court, the
requirement to pay the fine is suspended and the payment of the fine, if any,
will be in accordance with the superior court decision. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
COLLECTION AND LIEN PROCEDURES
1-2A-23: RECOVERY OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION FINES AND COSTS:
In addition to any other legal remedy, the city may place a lien on property
owned by the citee in an amount equal to the sum of the fines delinquent for
more than ninety (90) days, plus penalties and interest. Imposition of a lien
must stem from a citation for the condition or use of real property, or its
improvements, that is owned by the citee. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-24: LIEN PROCEDURE:
   A.   The city manager, or designee, may initiate proceedings to record a
lien conforming with this article if the decision is not appealed.
   B.   Before recording the lien, the city manager, or designee, must submit a
report to the city clerk stating the amounts due and owing.
   C.   The city clerk will fix a time, date, and place for the city council to
consider the report and any protests or objections to it.
   D.   The city clerk must serve the citee with a hearing notice not less than
ten (10) days before the hearing date. The notice must set forth the amount of
the delinquent administrative fine, and any penalties and interest that is due.
Notice must be delivered first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to each
citee's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or
supplemental roll of the county of Los Angeles, whichever is more current.
Service by mail is effective on the date of mailing and failure of citee to
actually receive notice does not affect its validity.
   E.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council will adopt a
resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the lien amount. (Ord. 1364,
7-1-2003)
1-2A-25: RECORDING A LIEN:
Within thirty (30) days following the city council's adoption of a resolution
imposing a lien, the city clerk will file same as a judgment lien in the Los
Angeles County recorder's office. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-26: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
Each citee against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to this
chapter will also be assessed an administrative fee in an amount established by
city council resolution based on the costs incurred in levying the assessment.
The administrative fee will be included in the lien amount approved by the city
council and recorded against the citee's property. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-27: SATISFACTION OF LIEN:
Once the city receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and
costs, the city clerk will either record a notice of satisfaction or provide
the citee with a notice of satisfaction for recordation at the Los Angeles
County recorder's office. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the city's
lien. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
CHAPTER 3
CITY SEAL, CITY LOGO
SECTION:
1-3-1: Adoption Of City Seal; Description
1-3-2: Use Required
1-3-3: Custody Of Seal
1-3-4: Adoption Of City Logo
1-3-5: Use Of City Seal And Logo
1-3-6: Additional City Logos
1-3-7: Penalties
1-3-1: ADOPTION OF CITY SEAL; DESCRIPTION:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 34501 of the State Government Code, as
the same presently provides, the City Council does hereby approve and adopt as
and for the Corporate Seal of the City the following seal, with lettering,
form, arrangement and designs all as set forth and shown in the embossed or
stamped impression thereof which follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3667.png]
 
(Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-2: USE REQUIRED:
The only form of Corporate Seal for use by or for the City shall be the form of
a seal set forth in section
1-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-3: CUSTODY OF SEAL:
The City Clerk shall have the official custody of the Official Seal of the
City. (Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-4: ADOPTION OF CITY LOGO:
The City Council approves and adopts as and for the official logo of the City,
the following logo, with lettering, form, arrangement, and design all as set
forth and shown in the embossed or stamped impression thereof which follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3669.png]
 
The City Manager is the official custodian of the City logo.
(Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018; amd. Ord. 1666, 2-4-2025)
1-3-5: USE OF CITY SEAL AND LOGO:
The City seal and logo may only be used for the official business of the City
and its City Council, except upon written approval of the City Manager, or
designee. No person may reproduce, make use, display, give away, sell,
distribute the City seal or logo, or imitation or facsimile thereof, without
the prior written authorization of the City Manager, or designee. In the event
such written authorization is granted, it is unlawful for any person to
reproduce, use, or display the City seal or logo in a matter or at any time
contrary to such written authorization. Any third-party seeking to use the City
seal or logo pursuant to this section must submit a plan to the City Manager,
or designee, describing the nature of the proposed use and the items that would
bear the City seal or City logo, if any. The plan must include the criteria
used in determining the proposed use and analyze the marketability of any item
proposed for commercial sale or use. Only those items bearing the City seal or
logo that have been authorized by the City Manager, or designee, pursuant to
this section may be offered for sale or otherwise used.
(Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018; amd. Ord. 1666, 2-4-2025)
1-3-6: ADDITIONAL CITY LOGOS:
The City Manager, or designee, may create and utilize variations of the City
logo for use consistent with this chapter. Such variations may include, without
limitation, logos for City departments or logos commemorating City events.
(Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018; amd. Ord. 1666, 2-4-2025)
1-3-7: PENALTIES:
Every person who, without the prior approval of the City Manager, or designee,
uses or allows to be used the City seal or logo or any copy or reproduction of
either, whether for commercial, personal, or any manner whatsoever not
consistent with this chapter or state law, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018; amd. Ord. 1666, 2-4-2025)
CHAPTER 4
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-4-1: Election And Terms Of Office
1-4-2: Selection Of Mayor And Mayor Pro Tem
1-4-3: Compensation Of Council Members
1-4-4: Meetings
1-4-5: Disturbance At Meetings
1-4-6: Rules Of Order
1-4-1: ELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE:
The City Council members, five (5) in number, shall be elected and serve four
(4) year terms, as provided by statute. (2000 Code)
1-4-2: SELECTION OF MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM:
After the election results are certified by the City Clerk, the newly seated
City Council shall meet and choose one of its members as Mayor, and one of its
members as Mayor Pro Tem. (Ord. 1517, 2-2-2016)
1-4-3: COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 36516, each City Council member
will receive a salary of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per month as
compensation for serving on the City Council. In addition, Council members may
also be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties as determined by City Council resolution.
(Ord. 1392, 3-7-2006)
1-4-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular City Council meetings are scheduled for the
first and third Tuesdays of every calendar month. Regular City Council meetings
begin at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. in the West Conference Room for closed
session matters and interviews or appointments for committees, commissions and
boards, and at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. in the Council Chambers for all other
matters to be addressed in open session. (Ord. 1582, 4-16-2019)
   B.   Holidays: Should the date of a regular meeting fall upon a holiday when
City Hall offices are closed then the regular meeting will be scheduled for the
next succeeding business day. (Ord. 1434, 11-3-2009)
   C.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called at any time by the
Mayor, or by a majority of the Council, upon providing twenty four (24) hours'
notice, pursuant to Government Code section 54956.
   D.   Open Meetings: Unless otherwise provided by the Government Code, all
City Council meetings are open and public. All persons are permitted to attend
any City Council meeting, except as otherwise provided in the Government Code.
(Ord. 1346, 8-20-2002)
1-4-5: DISTURBANCE AT MEETINGS:
It is unlawful for any person present at any Council meeting, and while the
Council is in session, to fail or refuse to be seated or remain quiet when
ordered or commanded so to do by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore. On order of
the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or
of any police officer of the City to eject from any meeting of the City Council
any person who disturbs any meeting of the Council or who fails or refuses to
be seated or remain quiet when ordered or commanded so to do by the Mayor or
Mayor Pro Tempore. No such ejection, however, shall release or relieve the
person so ejected from prosecution for any violation of this section. (Ord.
269, 5-12-1943)
1-4-6: RULES OF ORDER:
Except as may be otherwise provided by law, the proceedings of the Council
shall ordinarily be conducted according to "Robert's Rules of Order"; provided,
however, that a failure to observe or enforce such rules shall in no manner
affect the regularity, validity or legality of any action or proceeding taken
by the Council, and the Council, in its discretion and in accordance with its
right to govern its own proceedings, does hereby reserve the right to proceed
at any time otherwise than as prescribed or indicated in "Robert's Rules of
Order". (Ord. 269, 5-12-1943)
CHAPTER 4A
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-4A-1: General Municipal Elections
1-4A-1: GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
Beginning in November 2022, general Municipal elections for the election of
Council members and the City Clerk, and for such purposes as the City Council
may prescribe, will be held in the City on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in each even-numbered year. (Ord. 1578, 11-20-2018; amd.
Ord. 1617, 3-3-2020; Ord. 1625, 6-15-2021)
CHAPTER 5
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 1
SECTION:
1-5-1: Holidays
1-5-2: Aid To Distressed People And Animals
1-5-3: Compensation For Injury
1-5-4: Grand Jury Testimony
 
Notes
1 1. See also Chapter 6 of this Title.
1-5-1: HOLIDAYS:
Public offices of the City shall be closed on any day designated a holiday by
the City Council by resolution or by the Mayor by proclamation. (Ord. 818, 9-
18-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
1-5-2: AID TO DISTRESSED PEOPLE AND ANIMALS:
In addition to the performance of their regular and ordinary duties, it shall
be the duty of all of the officials of the City and of all police officers,
firefighters and other employees of the City, at all times and under all
circumstances, to go to the aid of all persons and animals in distress or
danger, and render them such help and assistance as lies within the power of
the officials, police officers, firefighters or employees. (Ord. 172, 9-7-1930)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION FOR INJURY:
In case any official, police officer, firefighter or other employee of the City
should be injured while rendering additional services as required by Section
1-5-2 of this Chapter, he or she, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be
injured in the course of his or her employment and shall be entitled to
workers' compensation therefor, as provided by law. (Ord. 172, 9-7-1930)
1-5-4: GRAND JURY TESTIMONY:
   A.   Refusal To Testify Under Oath: The refusal of any officer or employee
of the City to testify under oath before any grand jury having jurisdiction
over any then pending cause or inquiry in which the investigation of
governmental bribery or misconduct in public office is involved shall
constitute good and sufficient grounds for the immediate discharge of the
public officer or employee.
   B.   Furnish Copies To Officers And Employees: The City Clerk is hereby
instructed to furnish a copy of subsection A of this Section to each and all of
the present officers and employees of the City and to deliver a like copy
thereof to each future officer or employee thereof at the time of his induction
into Municipal service. (Ord. 438, 6-30-1954)
ARTICLE A. CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-5A-1: Office Created
1-5A-2: [Reserved]
1-5A-3: Eligibility
1-5A-4: Bond
1-5A-5: Interim City Manager
1-5A-6: Compensation
1-5A-7: Powers And Duties
1-5A-8: Council Restrictions
1-5A-9: Assistance To Manager
1-5A-10: Attendance At Meetings
1-5A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of the City Manager is hereby created and established. The City
Manager may be appointed by the City Council by resolution wholly on the basis
of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold
office at the will of and for and during the pleasure of the City Council. The
City Council may, in its sole discretion, contract with a person meeting the
qualifications of this Chapter to perform the duties of City Manager in the
manner described in, and subject to, all of the provisions of this Chapter and
any additional terms and conditions the City Council determines are necessary
and advisable and in the public interest. (Ord. 1143, 8-15-1989)
1-5A-2: [RESERVED]:
1-5A-3: ELIGIBILITY:
No person elected as a Council member of the City shall, subsequent to the
election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has
elapsed after the Council member has ceased to be a member of the City Council.
(Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
1-5A-4: BOND:
The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the
City Council in such sum as may be determined by the City Council. The bond
shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon
the City Manager as prescribed in this Article. Any premium for the bond shall
be a proper charge against the City. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
1-5A-5: INTERIM CITY MANAGER:
In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council may
designate some qualified City employee to perform the duties of the City
Manager during the period of absence or disability of the City Manager,
subject, however, to the person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set
forth in Section
1-5A-4 of this Article. In case of a vacancy in the office of the City Manager,
the City Council may appoint, by resolution or contract, an interim City
Manager to serve at the will and pleasure of the Council upon such terms and
conditions the City Council determines are necessary and advisable and in the
public interest. (Ord. 1143, 8-15-1989)
1-5A-6: COMPENSATION:
The City Manager shall receive such compensation, benefits and expense
allowance as the City Council shall from time to time determine and fix by
resolution or contract, as the case may be. (Ord. 1143, 8-15-1989)
1-5A-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   General: The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the
government of the City, under the direction and control of the City Council,
except as otherwise provided in this Article. He/she shall be responsible for
the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his
control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a
limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth
in this Article.
   B.   Enforcement Duty: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce
all laws and ordinances of the City and to see that all franchises, contracts,
permits and privileges granted by the City Council are faithfully observed.
   C.   Employee Authorization Duty: It shall be the duty of the City Manager
and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all
heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the City
under his jurisdiction through their department heads.
   D.   Preemployment Criminal Records Checks:
      1.   Authority To Access History Information: It shall be the duty of the
City Manager, and he, the City Attorney, or any other City official designated
by the City Manager, is hereby authorized to access State and local summary
criminal history information for preemployment screening purposes pursuant to
State Penal Code sections 11105(b)(10), 11105.3 and 13300(b)(10).
      2.   Prior Convictions: Except as otherwise provided in section 432.7 of
the State Labor Code, no person who has been convicted of a felony, or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, shall be eligible for employment by the
City; except that such conviction may be disregarded if it is determined that
mitigating circumstances exist, or that the conviction is not related to the
employment in question.
   E.   Appointment And Demotion Duty: It shall be the duty of the City Manager
to and he shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and
employees of the City except the City Clerk and the City Attorney.
   F.   Office Reorganization Duty: It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the City Manager to recommend to the City Council such reorganization of
offices, positions, departments or units under his direction as may be
indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the
City's business.
   G.   Ordinance Recommendation: It shall be the duty of the City Manager and
he shall recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and
ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient.
   H.   Council Meeting Attendance: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to
attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused therefrom, except when
his removal is under consideration.
   I.   Execute Contracts: The City Manager is authorized to sign contracts on
behalf of the City as directed by the City Council or as necessary to fulfill
the City Manager's responsibilities set forth in chapters 7 and 7A of this
title. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the City
Manager may delegate such authorization to an Assistant City Manager, Deputy
City Manager, or an acting City Manager to sing on the City Manager’s behalf.
   J.   Financial Reports: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to keep the
City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and
needs of the City.
   K.   Budget And Salary Plan Preparation: It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed
annual salary plan to the City Council for its approval.
   L.   Investigations: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to make
investigations into the affairs of the City and any department or division
thereof, and into any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of
the City.
   M.   Complaint Investigation; Public Utilities And Franchises: It shall be
the duty of the City Manager to investigate all complaints in relation to
matters concerning the administration of the City government and in regard to
the service maintained by public utilities in the City, and to see that all
franchises and permits granted by the City are faithfully performed and
observed.
   N.   Public Property Supervision: It shall be the duty of the City Manager
and he shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public
parks and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction
of the City Council.
   O.   Entire Time Devoted To Office: It shall be the duty of the City Manager
to devote his entire time to the duties of his office in the interest of the
City.
   P.   Additional Duties: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to perform
such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him
from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the City
Council.
(Ord. 486, 5-28-1956; amd. Ord. 1071, 4-16-1985; Ord. 1104, 1-12-1988; Ord.
1338, 8-21-2001; Ord. 1591, 9-17-2019; Ord. 1617, 3-3-2020)
1-5A-8: COUNCIL RESTRICTIONS:
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of
the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and
neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinates of the City Manager. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
1-5A-9: ASSISTANCE TO MANAGER:
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the City Clerk, City
Treasurer and City Attorney to assist the City Manager in administering the
affairs of the City efficiently, economically and harmoniously, so far as may
be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and the ordinances of the
City. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
1-5A-10: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission,
Recreation and Parks Commission and any other commissions, boards or committees
hereafter created by the City Council, upon his own volition or upon direction
of the City Council. At the meetings which the City Manager attends, he shall
be heard by the commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which
he wishes to address the members thereof and he shall inform the members as to
the status of any matter being considered by the City Council, and he shall
cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or
committees appointed by the City Council. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
ARTICLE B. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
SECTION:
1-5B-1: Office Created
1-5B-2: Duties
1-5B-3: Jurisdiction Of City Manager
1-5B-4: Bond
1-5B-1: OFFICE CREATED:
Pursuant to the provision of section 40805.5 of the State Government Code,
there is hereby created and established the office of Chief Financial Officer
of the City. (Ord. 483, 6-11-1956; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
1-5B-2: DUTIES:
The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by section
40802 of the State Government Code are hereby transferred to the Chief
Financial Officer. He shall perform the following duties:
   A.   Maintenance Of Financial Records: Maintain all records readily
reflecting the financial condition of the City and all of its departments;
   B.   Report For Fiscal Year: At the end of each fiscal year, prepare and
present to the City Council a summary statement of receipts and disbursements
by departments and funds, including opening and closing fund balances in the
City Treasury;
   C.   Furnishing Financial Statement: Cause the financial statement of the
City to be furnished in accordance with the provisions of section 53891 of the
State Government Code;
   D.   Compilation Of Financial Information For Budget: Compile all financial
information necessary for the preparation of the City's budget and make the
information available to the officer whose responsibility it is to prepare the
budget;
   E.   Monthly Financial Report: Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts
and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the
City and each of its departments;
   F.   Payroll Records: Supervise and be in charge of all payroll records;
   G.   Insurance Policies: Maintain a record of all insurance policies and
keep the City Manager informed of their expiration dates;
   H.   Collection Of Taxes, Assessments, Fees: See that all taxes,
assessments, license fees and other revenues of the City, or for whose
collection the City is responsible, and all other monies receivable by the City
from the County, State or Federal government, or from any court, office,
department or agency of the City are collected; and
   I.   Duties Assigned By City Manager: Perform such other duties that are
from time to time assigned to him by the City Manager. (Ord. 483, 6-11-1956;
amd. Ord. 697, 7-22-1968; Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
1-5B-3: JURISDICTION OF CITY MANAGER:
The Chief Financial Officer shall be under the jurisdiction of the City
Manager. (Ord. 483, 6-11-1956)
1-5B-4: BOND:
Pursuant to the requirements of the laws of the State with reference thereto
(section 37209 of the State Government Code), the Chief Financial Officer,
before entering upon the duties of his office, shall execute a bond in the
penal sum to be fixed by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 724, 6-12-1969;
amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
ARTICLE C. CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-5C-1: Appointment Of City Treasurer
1-5C-2: Appointee Qualifications
1-5C-3: Duties Of City Treasurer
1-5C-1: APPOINTMENT OF CITY TREASURER:
   A.   As authorized under Government Code Section 36510, the power to appoint
the City Treasurer shall be vested in the City Manager and such appointee shall
serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The foregoing notwithstanding, the
City Council, by subsequent ordinance, reserves the right to vest all authority
to appoint the City Treasurer in itself to the fullest extent authorized under
Government Code Section 36510.
   B.   Pursuant to Government Code Sections 36508 through 36510, El Segundo
voters at the City of El Segundo General Municipal Election of March 3, 2020
approved a City-initiated ballot measure which converted the elected office of
City Treasurer to an appointive office. In so far as the voters of the City of
El Segundo also elected a City Treasurer at the City's General Municipal
Election of March 3, 2020, the first appointment to the office of City
Treasurer as authorized under subsection (A), above, shall be made upon the
earlier of the following:
      1.   Upon the expiration of the term of office of the person elected to
serve as City Treasurer at the March 3, 2020 General Municipal Election; or
      2.   A vacancy of such office. (Ord. 1617, 3-3-2020)
1-5C-2: APPOINTEE QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   Any person appointed to serve in the capacity of City Treasurer must be
an employee of the City who meets such professional qualifications as may be
established and, from time-to-time, modified by the City Manager acting in
consultation with the City Council.
   B.   As provided under Government Code Section 36510, the person appointed
to serve as City Treasurer need not be a resident of the City of El Segundo.
(Ord. 1617, 3-3-2020)
1-5C-3: DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER:
   A.   The City Treasurer shall perform all such duties as may be imposed by
State law or by this Code.
   B.   Pursuant to Government Code Section 36518, the City Treasurer shall
execute a bond in an amount to be fixed by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 1617, 3-3-2020)
CHAPTER 6
PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM
SECTION:
1-6-1: Establishment; Word Construction
1-6-2: Benefit Designation
1-6-3: City Departments
1-6-4: Exclusions
1-6-5: Department Heads
1-6-6: Purpose
1-6-7: Personnel Officer
1-6-8: Hearing Of Appeals
1-6-9: Examinations
1-6-10: Notice Of Examinations
1-6-11: Inspection Of Examination Papers
1-6-12: Employment Lists
1-6-13: Appointment In Classified Service
1-6-14: Probationary Period
1-6-15: Conditions Of Employment
1-6-16: Employee Appeals
1-6-17: Grounds For Demotion, Suspension And Discharge
1-6-18: Reimbursement For Loss Of Pay
1-6-19: Layoff Procedure
1-6-20: Leave Of Absence
1-6-21: Status Of Present Employees
1-6-22: Hiring Of Extra Employees
1-6-23: Amendments
1-6-24: Political Activity
1-6-25: Solicitation Of Contributions
1-6-26: Discrimination
1-6-27: Appropriation Of Funds
1-6-28: Right To Contract For Special Service
1-6-29: Penalty For Violation
1-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT; WORD CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Word Construction: Words used in this chapter in the present tense
include the future as well as the present; words used in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter; the singular include the plural, and the
plural the singular; writing includes printing and typewriting; and the word
"employee" includes appointive officers.
   B.   System Established; Rank:
      1.   There is hereby created and established a merit system for certain
officers and members of the Fire Department, Police Department, and for other
departments as may be designated from time to time by the City Council. All
full time, regular and permanent positions in the Police Department and Fire
Department, except the department heads and clerical employees, are included in
the personnel merit system and shall for the purpose of this chapter be known
as the classified service.
      2.   Department heads will, while serving in that capacity, retain their
last previous rank in the classified service. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962; amd. 2000
Code)
1-6-2: BENEFIT DESIGNATION:
The personnel merit system, created and established in section
1-6-1 of this chapter, and all of its benefits are extended to and, by this
section, do include all regular and permanent officers and members of all
departments of the City who are members of the State employees retirement
system, subject to the provisions of the State Employees Retirement Act 1 ,
except department heads, elective officers, and those expressly excluded in
section
1-6-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 639, 9-13-1965)
 
Notes
1 1. GOV §§ 20000, 45300.
1-6-3: CITY DEPARTMENTS:
Effective October 19, 2022, the organization of City government consists of the
following departments:
   City Administration
   Community Development Department
   Finance Department
   Fire Department
   Human Resources Department
   Information Technology Systems Department
   Police Department
   Public Works Department
   Recreation, Parks, and Library Department. (Ord. 1546, 1-17-2017; amd. Ord.
1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
1-6-4: EXCLUSIONS:
Effective October 16, 2025, those officers and members of departments, in
addition to department heads and elected officers who are expressly excluded
from the merit system, are:
   Assistant City Clerk
   Assistant City Manager
   Building Official
   City Attorney
   City Engineer
   City Manager
   Communications Manager
   Deputy City Manager
   Environmental Programs Manager
   Finance Manager
   General Services Superintendent
   Human Resources Manager
   Information Systems Manager
   Library Services Manager*
   Park Maintenance Superintendent*
   Planning Manager
   Principal Civil Engineer*
   Recreation Manager
   Risk Manager
   Senior Civil Engineer
   Treasury and Customer Service Manager
   Utilities Superintendent.
   *NOTE: Any position designated above with an asterisk will only be excluded
from the personnel merit system under this section upon both the vacancy of
such position after the date first set forth in this section and City Council
approval of a revised classification specification for the position. (Ord.
1576, 11-6-2018; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1650, 9-5-2023; Ord. 1656, 2-
8-2024; Ord. 1662, 6-18-2024; Ord. 1663, 9-3-2024; Ord. 1677, 9-16-2025)
1-6-5: DEPARTMENT HEADS:
For purposes of this chapter and expanding the coverage of initiative ordinance
no. 586, pursuant to its § 19, effective October 16, 2025 the term “department
head” includes:
   Assistant City Manager
   Chief Financial Officer
   Chief of Police
   City Manager
   Deputy City Manager
   Director of Community Development
   Director of Human Resources & Risk Management
   Director of Information Technology Services
   Director of Public Works
   Director of Recreation, Parks, and Library
   Fire Chief (Ord. 1576, 11-6-2018; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022; Ord. 1677, 9-16-2025)
1-6-6: PURPOSE:
It is hereby the declared personnel policy of the City that:
   A.   Employment in the City government shall be based on merit and fitness,
free of personal or political considerations.
   B.   Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be
established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation
of the City government.
   C.   High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of this chapter,
and by every consideration of the rights and interests of employees consistent
with the best interests of the public and the City.
   D.   Tenure of employees covered by this chapter shall be subject to
satisfactory performance of work, necessity of the performance of work,
behavior consistent with the interests of the City, and the availability of
funds. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-7: PERSONNEL OFFICER:
The City Manager shall be ex officio personnel officer. With the approval of
the Council, the City Manager may delegate any of the powers and duties
conferred upon him as personnel officer in this Chapter to any other officer or
employee of the City; provided, that the other officer or employee is qualified
by education and/or experience to perform the duties, or the City Manager may
recommend that the powers and duties, or any portion thereof, be performed
under contract as provided in Section
1-6-28 of this Chapter. The personnel officer shall:
   A.   Prepare and recommend to the City Manager personnel rules. The City
Attorney shall approve the legality of these rules prior to their submission to
the City Council for its approval. Personnel rules shall be adopted by
resolution. Amendments to the rules shall be made in accordance with the above
procedures.
   B.   Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan for
those positions included under the classified service including class
specifications. The allocation or reallocation of any position to any existing
class shall not be considered a revision of the plan.
   C.   The initial classification plan shall be revised from time to time as
changing conditions require. The revisions may consist of the addition,
abolishment, consolidation, division or amendment of existing classes.
   D.   Be responsible for administration of the following procedures within
the framework of this Chapter, the classification and salary ordinance and the
personnel rules:
      1.   The formulation of standards and qualifications for each class of
position in the classified service;
      2.   The public announcement of vacancies and examinations and the
acceptance of applications for employment;
      3.   The preparation and conduct of examinations and the establishment
and use of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for
appointment;
      4.   The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists
to fill vacancies and the making of temporary and emergency appointments;
      5.   The evaluation of employees during probationary period and
periodically thereafter;
      6.   The transfer from one department to another, promotion, demotion and
reinstatement of employees;
      7.   The allocation of positions to classes on the basis of duties,
responsibilities and requirements;
      8.   The standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave
regulations, working conditions, and the development of employee morale,
welfare, training and safety;
      9.   The separation of service of employees through layoff, suspension
and dismissal;
      10.   The maintenance and use of necessary records and forms;
      11.   The establishment and maintenance of suitable methods for effective
communication between employees and their supervisors; between employees and
the City Manager relating to conditions of employment in the City service.
   E.   Administer all other provisions of this Chapter, the classification and
salary ordinance, and the personnel rules established which are not
specifically reserved to the Council. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-8: HEARING OF APPEALS:
   A.   Suspension Of Employees: Employees who are suspended for six (6)
working days or longer, where discharge is not provided at the end of the
suspension period, shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.
   B.   County To Hear Certain Appeals: The City shall contract with the Los
Angeles County Civil Service Commission to hear appeals from the following:
      1.   Dismissal;
      2.   Demotion;
      3.   Suspension for a period of six (6) days or longer where discharge is
provided; and
      4.   Suspension for a period in excess of thirty one (31) days.
   C.   County Action: Following the giving of notice as specified in these
rules, the cases shall be certified to the Los Angeles County Civil Service
Commission for hearing and report of their findings. The decision of the County
Civil Service Commission will be final in each case. The decisions and findings
of the County Civil Service Commission will be subject to review of courts
only. Hearings shall be conducted according to the rules of the Los Angeles
County Civil Service Commission, as the same may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-9: EXAMINATIONS:
   A.   Appraisal Of Qualifications: All applicants for positions in the
classified service shall be subject to an appraisal of their qualifications as
provided herein.
   B.   Open Or Promotional: Examinations may be specified by the Personnel
Officer, as promotional only, as open only, or as both open and promotional. It
shall be the policy of the Personnel Officer to encourage the general practice
of promotion within the City service wherever in his view a sufficient number
of fully qualified candidates are available and such policy will continue to
contribute to a sound and efficiently operating City organization.
   C.   Veterans: Honorably discharged veterans of the Armed Forces of the
United States, as defined in the applicable statutes and regulations of the
State pertaining to veterans' preferences may be given five (5) points, which
shall be added to the earned total passing examination score in examinations
for entry level positions in the classified service. The Personnel Officer
shall determine in advance of the publication of the announcement of an
examination, whether veterans' preference will be granted, and it shall be
stated in the official announcement. No additional points shall be credited to
any veteran's scores on any promotional examination.
   D.   Recommend Examination Plan: The Personnel Officer shall review and
recommend to the City Manager, who in turn shall recommend to the City Council,
an appropriate examination plan and weights for each portion of the
examination. For departments other than the Police and Fire Departments, the
plan may consist of any one or combination of the following techniques:
      1.   Written;
      2.   Oral;
      3.   Demonstration;
      4.   Any evaluation of education, experience, or skills or physical
fitness which fairly evaluates the relative capacities of the applicants. (Ord.
586, 4-10-1962)
   E.   Police And Fire Departments: The examination plan, for entrance or
promotional, for the Police and Fire Departments shall consist of a written
examination and one or more of the following:
      1.   Oral;
      2.   Demonstration;
      3.   Any evaluation of education certification, experience, or skills or
any test of manual skills or physical fitness which fairly evaluates the
relative capacities of the applicant. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-10: NOTICE OF EXAMINATIONS:
   A.   Notice of time, place and general scope of every examination shall be
posted by the Personnel Officer in a conspicuous place. The posting shall be
not less than two (2) weeks prior to the examination, at the City Hall, at the
office of the appropriate department, and at such other places as the Personnel
Officer deems appropriate.
   B.   An announcement of time, place and general scope of promotional
examinations shall be posted by the Personnel Officer in such places as
specified in subsection A of this Section, not less than thirty (30) days prior
to posting of "Notice of Examinations" at the end of which thirty (30) day
period, the plan for examination will be submitted to the City Council for
approval. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-11: INSPECTION OF EXAMINATION PAPERS:
   A.   Examination papers of the candidates are not subject to inspection by
the public. Upon request any candidate may inspect his own papers, including
his application and the questions and answers thereto except for copyrighted or
standardized tests for entrance classes.
   B.   Inspection of a keyed copy of the examination question booklet, which
is for the purpose of requesting a review of such items as the candidate may
believe are incorrectly or improperly keyed, will be allowed for the five (5)
working days immediately following an examination. The inspection time allowed
a candidate will not exceed one-half (1/2) the amount of the time originally
allowed to answer the questions during the administration of the examination.
During key inspection a representative of the personnel office will be present
to assure that the candidate takes no notes of any kind regarding any test
materials. The candidate may protest any item or group of items or the whole
test on the basis of either inappropriateness or inaccuracy. All protests shall
be resolved and answered before the completion of the final scoring.
   C.   Inspection of a candidate's answer booklet, which is for the purpose of
detecting whether any clerical or other error has been made in the scoring of
the booklet, shall be allowed for a thirty (30) day calendar period immediately
following the notification to the candidate of examination results. Candidates
are not allowed to review the question booklet during this inspection period.
Not more than one hour will normally be allowed for answer booklet review
during which time a representative of the Personnel Officer shall be present to
assure that no changes or marks of any kind are made by the candidate on his
answer booklet or the keyed answer booklet. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-12: EMPLOYMENT LISTS:
   A.   Priority For Consideration: Priority for consideration for employment
shall be given to the various employment lists in the following order: re-
employment lists, promotional lists and open competitive lists.
   B.   Names On Re-Employment List: The re-employment list for any position
shall consist of the names of permanent employees who have been laid off, for
lack of work or lack of funds, from a position in the same class or an
equivalent class to that in which the vacancy exists. The names shall be placed
on the re- employment list in reverse order of layoff. Employees whose
positions have been reallocated to a lower class, but who have not been demoted
for cause, shall also have their names placed on the re-employment list for the
class from which their position was reallocated.
   C.   Promotional Lists: Promotional lists shall consist of the names of
permanent employees who have been successful in a promotional examination for a
higher class.
   D.   Open Competitive Lists: Open competitive lists shall consist of the
names of persons not employed by the City who have been successful in an
examination, or of employees of the City who have passed the examination but
have not yet attained permanent status in their present class, or in the case
where an examination has been designated as open competitive only, the names of
all passing candidates, whether permanent employees, nonpermanent employees, or
persons not employed by the City, shall be placed on the list in order of their
scores.
   E.   Creation Of Lists: Promotional lists and open competitive lists shall
be created as a result of examination as provided herein. The names of
probationary employees who are laid off for lack of work or lack of funds may
be restored to the same employment list from which the original appointment was
made and in the same rank as when the original appointment was made.
   F.   Request For Certification: When request for certification from an
employment list has been received, certification shall be made in conformance
with the following provisions:
      1.   If a re-employment list exists for the class, the highest name on
the list shall be certified for each vacancy to be filled. Promotional and/or
open employment lists shall not be certified if there are any names on the re-
employment list for the class.
      2.   If there are less than three (3) qualified names on the promotional
list, the appointing power may request additional highest one or two (2) names
to be certified from the open competitive list if the list exists.
      3.   If no re-employment or promotional lists exist, the Personnel
Officer shall certify to the department head from the open competitive
employment list as prescribed in subsection
1-6-9B of this Chapter.
      4.   Except for re-employment lists, when all appropriate employment
lists for a class contain a total of fewer than three (3) names, the department
head may, with approval of the City Manager, make provisional appointments
until additional names are secured through another examination.
      5.   No person shall be appointed to any classified service position
unless that person has the qualifications for the position as set forth in the
specifications for the class.
   G.   Expiration Of Lists: Employment lists shall expire at such time as the
Personnel Officer determines; provided, that:
      1.   Names shall remain on the re-employment list for a period of not
less than three (3) years;
      2.   Promotional and open competitive lists shall have an expiration date
of one year unless otherwise announced in the notice of examination. (Ord. 586,
4-10-1962)
1-6-13: APPOINTMENT IN CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
   A.   Basis For Appointments: Appointments and promotions to vacant positions
in the classified service shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained
insofar as practicable by competitive examination. Appointments and promotions
shall be made by the City Manager upon recommendation of the various department
heads.
   B.   Names Transmitted By Personnel Officer: When appointments and
promotions are to be made to vacancies in the classified service, the names of
the highest eligible persons willing to accept appointment shall be transmitted
by the Personnel Officer to the department head in the order in which they
appear on the list as follows: for one vacancy the names of three (3), for two
(2) or secondary vacancies the names of five (5), for each additional or each
subsequent vacancy, three (3) additional names shall be submitted and
appointment shall be limited to any of these eligible persons.
   C.   Provisional Appointment: In the absence of appropriate employment
lists, a provisional appointment may be made of a person meeting the
qualifications established for the classification. Any employment list shall be
established within six (6) months, for any permanent position filled by
provisional appointment. No person shall be employed by the City under
provisional appointment for a total of more than six (6) months in any fiscal
year except that the City Manager may, with approval of the City Council,
extend the period of any provisional appointment for not more than thirty (30)
days by any one action.
   D.   Special Credit Not Allowed: No special credit shall be allowed in any
examination or the establishment of any employment or promotional lists, for
service rendered under a provisional appointment.
   E.   Temporary Appointments: Appointments to temporary, emergency and
seasonal positions may but need not be made from eligible lists and those
appointed shall not be in the classified service. Appointments of this type
shall include temporary employment for the replacement of employees on leave of
absence other than military leave, or vacation, emergency appointments to meet
emergencies which threaten life, property or the general welfare of the City,
or for work seasonal in nature.
   F.   Filling Vacancy During Suspension: During the period of suspension of
any employee, or pending final action on proceedings to review the suspension,
demotion or dismissal of an employee, the vacancy created may be filled only by
temporary appointment.
   G.   Transfer: With the approval of the City Manager, an employee may be
transferred by the department head from one position to another position in the
same class or a comparable class at the same salary level. If the transfer
involves a change from one department in the classified service to another
department in the classified service, the department heads and the employee
involved must consent thereto before the action shall be considered effective.
Transfers shall not serve to affect in any way the status, rights and
privileges of an employee under this Chapter.
   H.   Reinstatement: The department head may, with the approval of the City
Manager, reinstate to a vacant position any person who has resigned in good
standing to a position in a class or equivalent class in which he had acquired
status in the classified service; provided, that the reinstatement is
accomplished within one year of the date of resignation. A reinstatement may,
at the discretion of the department head, take precedence over any employment
list except a re-employment list. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-14: PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
   A.   Length Of Probation: All original and promotional appointments shall be
for a probationary period of one year. During the probation period the employee
may be rejected by the appointing authority at any time without right of appeal
or hearing.
   B.   Release From Promoted Position: An employee released during the
probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be
reinstated to the position from which he was promoted, unless he is discharged
for a reason, as provided in this Chapter and the rules, which would have been
sufficient to cause his discharge from his former position as well. In this
case the employee shall be entitled to appeal his dismissal as provided in this
Chapter.
   C.   Report Following Completion Of Probation: An employee's status shall be
considered permanent upon completion of the probationary period only if the
department head reports to the Personnel Officer that the services of the
employee have been satisfactory and that the employee is recommended for a
permanent appointment. A favorable or unfavorable report must be rendered on
each employee upon completion of his probationary period. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-15: CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT:
   A.   Submission Of Information: The Personnel Officer shall have the right
to require all employees to complete and submit any applications, agreements or
statements pertinent to their employment.
   B.   Medical Examination: The Personnel Officer shall have the right to
require, at the expense of the City, a medical examination of any applicant for
employment or new employees and, in addition, shall have the right to require
periodic medical examinations for any or all employees in the classified
service.
   C.   Employee Request For Reassignment Or Separation: Reassignments,
demotions or separations, at the request of the employee, shall be reviewed by
and be subject to the approval of the Personnel Officer. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-16: EMPLOYEE APPEALS:
   A.   Suspension; Time Limit For Appeal: Any permanent employee in the
classified service who has been suspended, for a period of six (6) days or
more, demoted, dismissed, or reduced in pay shall have a period of ten (10)
days following written notification in which to file an appeal or answer the
charges.
   B.   Notification Statement: The employee shall forthwith be given in the
written notification a statement of the extent and nature of any disciplinary
action and a full explanation of the reasons for the action including specific
information as to time and place of incidents.
   C.   Disciplinary Action: Each disciplinary action shall automatically be
given administrative review by the City Manager, immediately after the written
notification, and the City Manager may countermand the disciplinary action or
modify the discipline imposed prior to any hearing as hereinafter provided.
   D.   Filing With County: Appeals and requests for hearings shall be filed
with the City Manager, and then immediately referred to the Los Angeles County
Civil Service Commission or City Council, as the case may be.
   E.   Right To Refuse To Hold Hearing: The Commission shall have the right to
refuse to hold a hearing in any case in which the appellant fails to present
sufficient grounds to warrant a hearing.
   F.   Procedures For Hearing: Procedures for all hearings to be conducted by
the County shall be in accordance with the rules of the Los Angeles County
Civil Service Commission. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-17: GROUNDS FOR DEMOTION, SUSPENSION AND DISCHARGE:
No person in the classified service shall be demoted, suspended or discharged
from his position except for:
   A.   Inefficiency, misconduct, insubordination, disregard of orders;
   B.   Incompetency, incompatibility, dereliction of duty, malfeasance;
   C.   Drunkenness on duty;
   D.   Conviction of a felony;
   E.   Having a financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract,
sale or transaction to which the City is a party;
   F.   Being privately engaged in other business, employment or other
activities which occupy a substantial part of his time or attention which
interferes with the performance of his duties;
   G.   Wilful violation of any provisions of this Chapter or the personnel
rules established thereunder;
   H.   Incapacity to perform duties satisfactorily due to insanity, or other
mental or physical disability;
   I.   Obtaining appointment or promotion through falsification, subterfuge or
other illegal means;
   J.   Any other acts, or failures to act properly, which bring discredit upon
the City service or otherwise cause the employee to be unfit for the
responsibilities of his position. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-18: REIMBURSEMENT FOR LOSS OF PAY:
Reimbursement for loss of pay due to disciplinary action which is subsequently
revoked or modified shall be made to an employee, but only to the extent of
such modification, if any. Any additional salary or wages received from other
employment performed during the normal work schedule period of the employee
shall be deductible from any City compensation payable under this Section.
(Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-19: LAYOFF PROCEDURE:
No member shall be dismissed because of the discontinuance of the particular
office or position held by him, but employees dismissed because of curtailment
of expenditures, reduction in force, and for like causes, shall be the last
employee or employees, including temporary appointees, that have been appointed
to the respective department, until the reductions necessary have been
accomplished. Vacancies to be filled in the lowest class or rank, resulting
from the removal, shall be filled from the last employee or employees that have
been appointed to the next higher class or rank, and their places likewise
filled under proper distribution has been accomplished; provided, further, that
in the event the department shall again be increased in numbers, the persons
dismissed, or reduced in class or rank, under the terms of subsection
1-6-12B of this Chapter shall have the privilege of being re-employed before
any new appointments to the department shall be made. Any layoffs in accordance
with this Section shall not be subject to appeal and hearing. Any wilful
violation hereof, or violation through culpable negligence, shall be sufficient
ground to authorize the discharge of any officer or employee. (Ord. 586, 4-10-
1962; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-20: LEAVE OF ABSENCE:
   A.   Military Service: Any member who is called to serve in any branch of
the military service of the United States shall, upon his return, and with an
honorable discharge, maintain his priority rights within this Chapter, and in
accordance with the State Military and Veterans Code section 395.
   B.   Council Consent: On recommendation of the department head and approval
of the City Manager, leave of absence without compensation not to exceed one
year for any purpose may be taken by written consent of the City Council, and
temporary appointments may be made to fill the vacancies in the manner herein
provided for permanent appointments. The leaves may be extended for not to
exceed one additional year. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-21: STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Any person holding a position or employment included in the classified
service who, on the effective date hereof, has served continuously in the
position, or in some other position included in the classified service, for one
year prior to inclusion in the classified service, shall assume regular status
in the classified service in the position held on the effective date without
qualifying examination or working tests, and shall thereafter be subject in all
respects to the provisions of this Chapter, except those with the rating of
detective and patrolman assigned to motorcycle duty, the assignments shall be
made administratively and are not a part of the classified service.
   B.   Any other persons holding positions or employments in the classified
service shall be regarded as holding their positions or employments as
probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods
before obtaining regular status. The probationary periods shall be computed
from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-22: HIRING OF EXTRA EMPLOYEES:
Department heads, with the approval and sanction of the City Manager, may,
during an emergency or during vacation periods, hire extra employees as may be
needed to properly conduct the departments at a compensation to be fixed by the
City Council. These extra employees may be selected from the employment list at
the option of the heads of the departments. However, no extra employee shall be
hired for a period in excess of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days or six
(6) months in any fiscal year, and the hiring of extra employees as herein
provided for, shall not in any way mean, or be construed to mean, that said
extra employee shall be under probation as defined by Section
1-6-14 of this Chapter. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-23: AMENDMENTS:
The City Council may, from time to time by ordinance, add additional
departments, appointive officers or employees of the City to the list
originally designated in this Chapter creating a merit system. (Ord. 586, 4-10-
1962)
1-6-24: POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
No person holding an office or position in any department placed under the
personnel merit system, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, with
respect to any Municipal political campaign, shall seek or accept election,
nomination or appointment as an officer of a political club or organization, or
serve as a member of a committee of the club or organization or circle, or seek
signatures except where it pertains to this Chapter, or act as a worker at the
polls, or distribute badges or pamphlets, dodgers, or handbills of any kind
favoring or opposing any candidate for election, or for nomination to Municipal
office; provided, however, that nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to
prevent any such officer or employee from becoming or continuing to be a member
of a political club or organization, or from attendance at a political meeting,
or from enjoying entire freedom from all interference in casting his vote.
(Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-25: SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS:
No officer or employee of the City, or any other person, directly or indirectly
shall solicit or receive, from anyone on an eligible list or employed in the
service of the City any assessment, subscription, contribution, or political
service, for aiding or assisting in the campaign for election, or appointment
to any political or official position in the service of the City, or for any
political purpose whatever. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-26: DISCRIMINATION:
No person in the competitive service or seeking admission thereto shall in any
way be favored or discriminated against in his employment because of sex, age,
sexual preference, physical or mental disability, medical condition, marital
status, familial status, political affiliations, race, or religious belief.
(Ord. 586, 4-10-1962; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-27: APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS:
The City Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-28: RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL SERVICE:
The City Manager shall consider and make recommendations to the Council
regarding the extent to which the City should contract for the performance of
technical services in connection with the development and administration of any
phase of the personnel program and the Council may contract for the performance
of the services with any qualified person or agency. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-29: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, charged with the administration of this Chapter who is guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon a conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
Section
1-2-1 of this Code. Ord. 586, 4-10-1962; amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PURCHASING
SECTION:
1-7-1: Purpose And Applicability
1-7-2: Definitions
1-7-3: Purchasing Officer's Powers And Duties
1-7-4: Encumbering Funds
1-7-5: Requisitions
1-7-6: Purchasing Summary
1-7-7: Informal Bidding Requirements
1-7-8: Formal Bidding (Sealed Bids) Requirements
1-7-9: Exceptions To The Bidding Requirements
1-7-10: Segmentation Prohibited
1-7-11: Inspection
1-7-12: Business License Required
1-7-13: Recycled Products
1-7-14: Competitive Proposals
1-7-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter is adopted to authorize City officers to procure supplies,
services and professional services with City funds and to establish the manner
by which such actions may occur. Supplies, services and professional services
for City departments must be purchased in accordance with this chapter, those
administrative regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and any
additional regulations that the City Council may adopt.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor does it, apply to:
      1.   Public works projects as defined by State law, which are subject to
chapter 7C of this title.
      2.   The procurement of services, supplies and equipment with non- City
funds.
      3.   The employment of any person by the City at a regular salary.
      4.   The acquisition, disposal or lease of real property. (Ord. 1564, 12-
19-2017)
1-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
   CONTRACT: Means a purchase order, contract, or professional services
contract, or any amendment thereto, as the context may dictate.
   FORMAL BIDDING: Means the process and requirements outlined in section
1-7-8 of this chapter.
   INFORMAL BIDDING: Means the process and requirements outlined in section
1-7-7 of this chapter.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Means services typically performed by professionals,
such as financial, economic, accounting, architectural, engineering, legal,
personnel training or administrative services, including but not limited to
those described in Government Code sections 4526 and 53060.
   PURCHASING OFFICER: Means the City Manager or designee.
   SERVICES: Means general services to be provided to the City, such as the
rental, repair and maintenance of equipment, machinery and other personal
property, but not including professional services or any services related to a
public works project.
   SUPPLIES: Means supplies and equipment. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-3: PURCHASING OFFICER'S POWERS AND DUTIES:
In addition to those powers granted by applicable law, the Purchasing Officer
has the authority and duty to:
   A.   Purchase or contract for supplies, services and professional services;
   B.   Promulgate administrative rules and regulations to implement the
purposes of this chapter and as approved by the City Manager;
   C.   Prescribe and maintain such forms as necessary for the proper operation
of this purchasing system;
   D.   Supervise the inspection of all supplies purchased under this chapter
in order to ensure conformance with City specifications;
   E.   Perform such other tasks as may be necessary for the proper conduct of
purchasing or procurement of supplies, services and professional services.
(Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-4: ENCUMBERING FUNDS:
Except in cases of emergency or as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
Purchasing Officer or Department Directors may not purchase supplies or procure
any services or professional services unless there is an unencumbered
appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase or procurement
would be charged. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-5: REQUISITIONS:
All City departments must submit to the Purchasing Officer requisitions for
supplies, services or professional services in excess of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) per fiscal year for a single item or bulk purchase of an item.
(Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-6: PURCHASING SUMMARY:
The purchase of supplies or services are subject to the following requirements,
unless such purchase is otherwise exempt pursuant to section 1-7-9 of this
code:
Amount of    Bidding process Purchase order Contract  Approval Authority
purchase1, 2 required?       required?      required?
Amount of        Bidding process  Purchase order Contract       Approval
purchase1, 2     required?        required?      required?      Authority
                 None required.                                 City Manager,
                 May be purchased                Yes, if        Department
$5,000 or Less   on open market / No             procurement of Director or
                 direct                          services;      Department
                 negotiated                      otherwise, no  Manager
                 contract
                 None required.
                 May be purchased                               City Manager or
Above $5,000 to  on open market / Yes            Yes            Department
$10,000          direct                                         Director
                 negotiated
                 contract
Above $10,000 to                                                City Manager or
$25,000          Informal bidding Yes            Yes            Department
                                                                Director
Above $25,000 to Informal bidding Yes            Yes            City Manager
$50,000
Above $50,000    Formal bidding   Yes            Yes            City Council
1   For purchases of supplies, the dollar amounts listed above apply to the
purchase of a single item or bulk purchase of an item. For the procurement of
services, the dollar amounts listed above apply to the amount paid per
contract, per fiscal year.
2   If procuring property or services under a federal award, only micro-
purchases as defined by 2 CFR § 200.1 may be awarded without soliciting
competitive quotations if the City considers the price to be reasonable. To the
extent practicable, the City must distribute micro-purchases equitably among
qualified suppliers (2 CFR § 200.320).
 
(Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017; amd. Ord. 1667, 2-4-2025)
1-7-7: INFORMAL BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
As used in this chapter, the term "informal bidding" refers to the following
process and requirements:
   A.   Purchases must, whenever possible, be based upon at least three (3)
informal bids or quotes and be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.
   B.   Bids must be written.
   C.   The Purchasing Officer or Department Directors may solicit such bids.
   D.   Bids may be evaluated based upon bid amount, compliance with bid
specifications, responsibility of the bidder, and any other reasonable matter
identified in the notice soliciting bids, this Code, or any other rule or
regulation promulgated to implement this chapter.
   E.   If the City does not receive any bids or quotes, the Purchasing Officer
may act as follows, provided the requesting department concurs:
      1.   Abandon the purchase;
      2.   Rebid the purchase on an informal basis; or
      3.   Purchase the supplies or procure the services on a direct negotiated
contract.
   F.   If the Purchasing Officer determines bids are unacceptably high, or
specifications were misleading, the Purchasing Officer may reject any bids
presented and the item may be rebid.
   G.   The Purchasing Officer may reject all bids or award the purchase
contract to the best qualified bidder whose bid or proposal fulfills the
purpose intended according to criteria designated in the solicitation, provided
that the contract award amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for
that item. The Purchasing Officer may waive any minor bid irregularities.
   H.   If a successful bidder refuses to comply with, or fails to execute, a
contract issued by the City within ten (10) calendar days after being awarded
the contract, the Purchasing Officer may cancel the award and retain any bid
security. Compliance with contract requirements includes, without limitation,
submission of adequate and complete insurance documentation. Should this occur,
the Purchasing Officer may award the contract to the next lowest responsible
bidder. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-8: FORMAL BIDDING (SEALED BIDS) REQUIREMENTS:
As used in this chapter, the term "formal bidding" refers to the following
process and requirements:
   A.   A notice inviting formal bids must be posted at City Hall and
electronically mailed or faxed at least ten (10) calendar days before the
deadline for submitting bids to all vendors on the City's list for the category
of supplies or services being sought and to such other vendors as the
Purchasing Officer deems appropriate.
   B.   The notice inviting bids must describe the supplies or services needed
in general and generic terms, identify security required for the bid, how bid
specifications can be obtained, and designate the deadline and place for
submitting formal bids.
   C.   The Purchasing Officer may require bidders to secure bids and
performance in a manner approved by the Purchasing Officer and in a form
approved by the City Attorney. Unsuccessful bidders are entitled to the return
of bid security within sixty (60) calendar days after the date of the award.
   D.   Bids must be submitted to the City Clerk's Office in a sealed envelope
and be clearly marked as a bid along with the bidder's name and project or bid
number written on the outside of the envelope. The City Clerk's Office will
open properly submitted bids at the time and place stated in the notice
inviting bids. A written record must be made at the time all bids are received
and then opened.
   E.   Bids may be evaluated based upon bid amount, compliance with bid
specifications, responsibility of the bidder, and any other reasonable matter
identified in the notice soliciting bids, this Code, or any other rule or
regulation promulgated to implement this chapter.
   F.   The department seeking the supplies or services will make a
recommendation to the City Council regarding the award of a contract based upon
the department's and Purchasing Officer's evaluation.
   G.   If the City does not receive any bids, the City Council may:
      1.   Abandon the purchase;
      2.   Authorize rebidding the purchase on either a formal or an informal
basis; or
      3.   Authorize purchasing the supplies or procurement of services on a
direct negotiated contract.
   H.   The successful bidder is selected by the City Council acting within its
sole discretion. The City Council is under no obligation to contract with any
bidder. If the City Council determines bids are unacceptably high, or
specifications were misleading, it may direct the Purchasing Officer to reject
all bids presented and the item may be rebid.
   I.   The City Council may waive any minor bid irregularities.
   J.   If a successful bidder refuses to comply with, or fails to execute, a
contract issued by the City within ten (10) calendar days after being awarded
the contract, the Purchasing Officer may cancel the award and retain any bid
security. Compliance with contract requirements includes, without limitation,
submission of adequate and complete insurance documentation. Should this occur,
the City Council may award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder
and the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the City to
the difference between the lowest and second lowest bid, and the surplus, if
any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-9: EXCEPTIONS TO THE BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
When purchasing supplies and services, the procedures outlined in sections
1-7-7 and
1-7-8 of this chapter need not be followed in the following situations:
   A.   When the City Council waives the purchasing procedures otherwise
required by this chapter when the City's best interests are served by a direct
award of a contract without a competitive selection process.
   B.   When the supplies or services are available from only one vendor as
supported by appropriate documentation.
   C.   When the Purchasing Officer identifies a cooperative competitive
bidding procedure, being prepared by and processed through another local,
State, or Federal governmental agency. Under such circumstances, the Purchasing
Officer may join into an existing written purchase contract obtained within the
last five (5) years through a competitive bidding process prepared by and
awarded by another local, State or Federal governmental agency. City Council
consent is required for such purchases where the estimated value of the
supplies is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more for a single item or
bulk purchase of a single item.
   D.   When the City Manager or acting City Manager finds that there is an
immediate or imminent emergency or other exigent circumstance that threatens
the City or the City's interests, and such purchases are required for the
immediate protection of public health, safety, or welfare, or the City's
interests. A declaration of emergency as set forth in this Code is conclusive
evidence of such an event. In such an event, the City Manager or acting City
Manager may bind the City, with or without a written contract, for the
acquisition of equipment, materials, supplies, labor, services or other items.
The City Manager or acting City Manager must provide a report to the City
Council as soon as practicable regarding such emergency purchases which sets
forth the circumstances requiring such action. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-10: SEGMENTATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to knowingly take action to separate purchases into smaller
units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the competitive formal or
informal bidding requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-
2017)
1-7-11: INSPECTION:
The Purchasing Officer or department requesting the item shall inspect all
deliveries of supplies and equipment to assure conformance with the contract or
order specifications. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-12: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
All vendors who provide on-site services or professional services to the City
must hold a valid City of El Segundo business license and must be otherwise in
compliance with all requirements of this Code. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-13: RECYCLED PRODUCTS:
Whenever practicable, the City will purchase and use recycled products and
recyclable goods. The City will place special emphasis on the purchase of
products manufactured with at least twenty percent (20%) post-consumer recycled
materials. When faced with a choice of two (2) or more recycled content
products, and the price between the products is within ten percent (10%) and
the products are of comparable quality and availability, the City will purchase
the product with the greatest recycled content. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-14: COMPETITIVE PROPOSALS:
Professional services should, whenever possible, be procured through
competitive proposal procedures, whereby competitors' qualifications are
evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected. If this method is
used, the following requirements apply:
   A.   Requests for proposals (RFP) must be publicized;
   B.   All evaluation factors, along with their relative importance, must be
identified and included in the RFP;
   C.   The evaluation process may include the review of written proposals,
panel interviews, and reference checking;
   D.   Awards must be made to the responsible firm whose proposal is most
advantageous to the City, with price and all factors identified in the RFP
considered. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
CHAPTER 7A
EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Purpose And Applicability
1-7A-2: Definitions
1-7A-3: Generally
1-7A-4: City Council Authority
1-7A-5: Signature Authority
1-7A-6: Segmentation Prohibited
1-7A-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's general and specific
contracting powers and, without limitation, Government Code section 40602 for
the purpose of setting forth the requirements to bind the City by contract.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the employment of any
person by the City at a regular salary. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
definitions set forth in chapter 7 of this title govern the construction of the
words and phrases used in this chapter. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-3: GENERALLY:
   A.   The City is not bound by any contract unless the contract is in
writing, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and signed on behalf of the
City by an officer or officers as set forth in this chapter. Any such officer
must sign a contract on the City's behalf when directed to do so by the City
Council.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a written contract is required
to purchase supplies or procure services on the City's behalf, regardless of
the source of the funds. The use of non- City funds, private funds, donated
funds, or grant monies does not alleviate the requirement of a written contract
for the purchase of supplies or procurement of services on the City's behalf.
(Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-4: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a resolution, or ordinance, the City
Council must approve all contracts and direct the Mayor, or other officer, to
sign a contract on the City's behalf. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-5: SIGNATURE AUTHORITY:
In accordance with Government Code section 40602, the following officers are
authorized to sign contracts on the City's behalf:
   A.   The Mayor;
   B.   The City Manager when directed to do so by the City Council,
resolution, ordinance, or any provision of this Code;
   C.   The City Manager, for contracts where the City is receiving or
expending an amount not in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per
fiscal year;
   D.   Department Directors, for contracts where the City is receiving or
expending an amount not in excess of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
per fiscal year;
   E.   Department Managers, for contracts or amendments to contracts where the
City is receiving or expending an amount not in excess of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) per fiscal year. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-6: SEGMENTATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to knowingly separate purchases or procurements into smaller
units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the signature authority
thresholds set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
CHAPTER 7B
DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Authority
1-7B-2: Property Without Salvage Value
1-7B-3: Property Valued At Ten Thousand Dollars Or More
1-7B-4: Records
1-7B-5: Donations
1-7B-6: Proceeds Of Sale
1-7B-1: AUTHORITY:
The purchasing officer is authorized to sell or dispose of surplus personal
property having a salvage value in the open market. Property disposition may
occur by public auction, competitive sealed bids, or exchange or trade in for
new goods. The sale or lease of surplus personal property to a governmental,
public, or quasi-public agency may be without advertisement for or receipt of
bids. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-2: PROPERTY WITHOUT SALVAGE VALUE:
Surplus personal property without salvage value, as determined by the
purchasing officer, should be disposed of in a manner that salvages recyclable
components. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-3: PROPERTY VALUED AT TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS OR MORE:
The city council must direct disposition of surplus personal property with a
value estimated at ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or greater based upon a
recommendation from the purchasing officer. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-4: RECORDS:
The purchasing officer must keep regular logs showing surplus personal property
disposed of, the method of disposal, and the amounts recovered from its
disposal and maintain records for public inspection relative to the disposal of
surplus personal property for a period of time in compliance with state law and
the city's records retention schedule. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-5: DONATIONS:
Upon the advance written approval of the city manager, surplus personal
property may be donated to governmental, public or quasi-public agencies,
charities, or nonprofit organizations. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-6: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
Proceeds from the sale of surplus personal property must be deposited into the
appropriate city fund. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
CHAPTER 7C
PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Purpose
1-7C-2: Applicability
1-7C-3: Definitions
1-7C-4: Soliciting Bids And Awarding Contracts
1-7C-5: Qualified Contractors
1-7C-6: Notice Inviting Bids
1-7C-7: Bid Security
1-7C-8: Bid Opening
1-7C-9: Award
1-7C-10: Bonds And Insurance
1-7C-11: Design Approval
1-7C-12: Emergency
1-7C-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers and California
Public Contract Code section 22034, and any succeeding or related statutes, for
the purpose of implementing the alternative bid procedures set forth in the
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act.
(Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006; amd. Ord. 1667, 2-4-2025)
1-7C-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter may be used for public projects with a value equal to or less than
the amount set forth in Public Contract Code section 22032(b), and any
successor statute or regulation, or, when applicable, as established pursuant
to Public Contract Code section 22020.
(Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
definitions in Public Contract Code section 22002 and set forth below will
govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:
CITY MANAGER: The City Manager or designee.
FACILITY: Any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system
(subject to the limitations found in subsection (2) of the definition of
"public project" below), real property, streets and highways, or other public
work improvement.
MAINTENANCE WORK: Includes all of the following:
   (1)   Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection
of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes.
   (2)   Minor repainting.
   (3)   Resurfacing streets and highways at less than one inch.
   (4)   Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning,
planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler
systems.
   (5)   Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water,
power, or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams,
reservoirs, powerplants, and electrical transmission lines of 230,000 volts and
higher.
PUBLIC PROJECT: Means any of the following:
   (1)   Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation,
improvement, demolition, installation, and repair work involving any publicly
owned, leased, or operated facility.
   (2)   In the case of a publicly owned electric utility system, a "public
project" shall include only the construction, erection, improvement, or repair
of dams, reservoirs, powerplants, and electrical transmission lines of 230,000
volts and higher.
   Note: "Public project" does not include maintenance work.
(Ord. 1506, 4-21-2015; amd. Ord. 1667, 2-4-2025)
1-7C-4: SOLICITING BIDS AND AWARDING CONTRACTS:
   A.   Public projects of seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less
may be performed by the employees of a public agency by force account, by
negotiated contract, or by purchase order.
   B.   Public projects of two hundred and twenty-thousand dollars
($220,000.00) or less may be let to contract by informal procedures.
      1.   If all bids received are in excess of two hundred and twenty
thousand dollars ($220,000), the city council may, by adoption of a resolution
by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, at two hundred and thirty-five
thousand dollars ($235,000.00) or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it
determines the cost estimate of the city was reasonable.
   C.   Public projects of more than two hundred and twenty thousand dollars
($220,000.00) shall be let to contract by formal bidding procedures.
      1.   The City Manager may solicit bids, award contracts, and execute
contracts for public projects up to seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00).
Contracts for public projects costing more than seventy-five thousand dollars
($75,000.00) must be awarded by the City Council.
(Ord. 1583, 5-21-2019; amd. Ord. 1667, 2-4-2025)
1-7C-5: QUALIFIED CONTRACTORS:
The Public Works Department will maintain a list of qualified contractors,
identified according to categories of work. Any licensed contractor requesting
to have its name placed on this list must be included. The list may be
periodically revised to remove inactive names. A name may be deemed inactive
if:
   A.   Letters addressed to the contractor at its last known address are
returned without a forwarding address;
   B.   The contractor does not obtain plans for, or bid on, a public project
for two (2) years;
   C.   The contractor's license is revoked or suspended by the California
State Licensing Board;
   D.   The contractor removes its name; or
   E.   For other good cause as determined by the City Manager. (Ord. 1391, 1-
17-2006)
1-7C-6: NOTICE INVITING BIDS:
   A.   The notice inviting bids must describe the project in general terms,
indicate how to obtain more detailed information regarding the project, and
state the time and place for submitting bids.
   B.   Unless the product or service is proprietary, not less than ten (10)
calendar days before the date set for opening bids, the City Manager must
notify contractors using one or both of the following methods:
      1.   Mail notices to each contractor on the list for the category of work
to be performed;
      2.   Mail notices to each of the construction trade journals specified in
Public Contract Code section 22036. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-7: BID SECURITY:
   A.   Bid security is required for all bids on public projects when the City
Manager estimates that the price will exceed twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00). Bid security may be a bond issued by a licensed and duly
qualified corporate surety, or the equivalent in cash, money order, cashier's
check, certified check, unconditional letter of credit, or other form approved
by the City Attorney. Nothing in this section prevents the City from requiring
bid security on public projects of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or
less when the City Manager believes such security is needed to protect the
City's interests.
   B.   Bid security must equal at least ten percent (10%) of the bid amount.
   C.   If the notice inviting bids requires a bid security, noncompliance or
defective, inadequate, or incomplete security will render the bid
nonresponsive.
   D.   Bid security will be forfeited or paid to the City should the bidder
fail to execute a contract within the time specified in the notice inviting
bids.
(Ord. 1583, 5-21-2019; amd. Ord. 1667, 2-4-2025)
1-7C-8: BID OPENING:
The City Clerk, or designee, will publicly open all bids in the presence of one
or more witnesses at the time and place specified in the invitation for bids.
Late, misplaced, or unsealed bids cannot be considered. If no bids are
received, the City may proceed as set forth in Public Contract Code section
22038. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-9: AWARD:
   A.   The contract may be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder if the
City Manager or City Council considers the bid to be reasonable, sufficient
funds are appropriated for the public project, and the bid is within the limits
specified by Public Contract Code section 22032(b) or, if applicable, Public
Contract Code section 22020.
   B.   Nothing in this section restricts the city from taking any action set
forth in Public Contract Code section 22038.
(Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006; amd. Ord. 1667, 2-4-2025)
1-7C-10: BONDS AND INSURANCE:
Contractors awarded a contract under this chapter are required to provide
sureties and insurance in forms approved by the city attorney and conforming
with the contract documents. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-11: DESIGN APPROVAL:
The public works director is authorized to approve designs for purposes of
design immunity pursuant to Government Code section 830.6. Nothing in this
section is intended to, nor will it, preclude the city council from separately
or additionally approving designs for purposes of design immunity pursuant to
Government Code section 830.6.
(Ord. 1506, 4-21-2015)
1-7C-12: EMERGENCY:
In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the city
council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without
adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving
notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the
direction of the city council, by contractor, or by a combination of the two.
If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given in case of an emergency,
the city shall comply with the emergency contracting procedures set forth in
Public Contract Code Section 22050.
(Ord. 1667, 2-4-2025)
CHAPTER 8
POLITICAL ACTIVITY
SECTION:
1-8-1: Personnel Merit System
1-8-2: Nonmerit System Employees
1-8-3: Solicitation Of Political Contributions
1-8-4: City Lobbyists
1-8-1: PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM:
   A.   During Working Hours: No officer or employee of the City whose position
is covered by the personnel merit system shall engage in political activity
during working hours.
   B.   City Premises: No officer or employee of the City whose position is
covered by the personnel merit system shall engage in any political activity on
premises of the City. (Ord. 928, 4-19-1977)
   C.   Uniformed Officers And Employees: No officer or employee of the City
whose position is covered by the personnel merit system shall participate in
political activities of any kind while in uniform. (Ord. 1248, 3-5-1996)
1-8-2: NONMERIT SYSTEM EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Applicability: The provisions of subsections B and C of this Section
shall apply to every officer and employee of the City who is compensated for a
full-time or part-time basis whose position is permanent or temporary except
elected officials, members of the Planning Commission, members of the
Recreation and Parks Commission and employees whose positions are covered by
the personnel merit system and are regulated by subsections
1-8-1A and B of this Section.
   B.   During Working Hours: No officer or employee of the City enumerated in
subsection A of this Section shall engage in political activity during working
hours.
   C.   City Premises: No officer or employee of the City designated in
subsection A of this Section shall engage in political activity on premises of
the City. (Ord. 933, 6-7-1977)
   D.   Uniformed Officers And Employees: No officer or employee of the City
enumerated in subsection A of this Section shall participate in political
activities of any kind while in uniform. (Ord. 1248, 3-5-1996)
1-8-3: SOLICITATION OF POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS:
   A.   Restrictions:
      1.   For purposes of this Section, the term "contribution" shall have the
same meaning as defined in section 82015 of the California Government Code, as
may be amended from time to time.
      2.   An officer or employee of the City shall not, directly or
indirectly, solicit a political contribution from an officer or employee of the
City, or from a person on an employment list of the City, with knowledge that
the person from whom the contribution is solicited is an officer or employee of
the City.
      3.   A candidate for elective office of the City shall not, directly or
indirectly, solicit a political contribution from an officer or employee of the
City, or from a person on an employment list of the City, with knowledge that
the person from whom the contribution is solicited is an officer or employee of
the City, or is a person on an employment list of the City.
      4.   This Section shall not prohibit an officer or employee of the City,
or a candidate for elective office in the City, from requesting political
contributions from officers or employees of the City if the solicitation is
part of a solicitation made to a significant segment of the public which may
include officers or employees of the City.
      5.   Violation of this Section is punishable as a misdemeanor. The
District Attorney shall have all authority to prosecute under this Section.
   B.   Applicable: The provisions of subsection A of this Section shall apply
to every officer and employee of the City who is compensated for a full-time or
part-time basis whose position is permanent or temporary, including elected
officials, members of the Planning Commission, members of the Recreation and
Parks Commission and employees whose positions are covered by the personnel
merit system and are regulated by subsections
1-8-1A and B of this Chapter. (Ord. 1248, 3-5-1996)
1-8-4: CITY LOBBYISTS:
   A.   Defined: The following shall be considered a "City lobbyist" and be
subject to the provisions of this Chapter:
Any person, business entity or other organization which is employed, contracts
or otherwise receives value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, in any form
whatsoever in a twelve (12) month period, to communicate directly or through
agents, employees or subcontractors with any elected or appointed City
official, employee or agent for the purpose of influencing any City legislative
or administrative action on behalf of any other person, business entity, or
organization. Provided, however, a City lobbyist shall not include:
      1.   An elected or appointed public official or public employee when
acting in his or her official capacity as an elected or appointed public
official or public employee.
      2.   A newspaper or other regularly published periodical, radio or
television station (including any individual who owns, publishes or is employed
by any such newspaper or periodical, radio or television station) which in the
ordinary course of business publishes news items, editorials or other comments,
or paid advertisements, which directly or indirectly urge action upon City
legislative or administrative action.
      3.   An attorney providing legal representation to a person, business
entity or other organization which is a party to an administrative proceeding
with the City.
      4.   An employee who has been employed on a full-time basis, forty (40)
hours per week or more ("full time employee"), at the time the employee
attempts to influence a City legislative or administrative action on behalf of
his/her employer with respect to a proposed City legislative or administrative
action.
   B.   Registration: Prior to communicating with an elected or appointed City
official, City employee or City agent about any potential City legislative or
administrative action, each City lobbyist shall file with the City Clerk a
statement under oath which contains the following information:
      1.   The full name, business and home addresses and telephone numbers of
the City lobbyist;
      2.   The names of all persons, business entities or other organizations
that the City lobbyist is performing lobbying services on behalf; and
      3.   A statement that the City lobbyist has read and understands the
provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   Disclosure Requirement; City Lobbyists And Full-Time Employees: City
lobbyists shall not communicate with an elected or appointed official, City
employee, or City agent about any potential City legislative or administrative
action on behalf of any other person or business entity, other organization
without first disclosing their status as a City lobbyist and the name of the
person, business entity or other organization which has engaged the services of
the City lobbyist. A full-time employee shall disclose his/her status as
employee and the name of his/her employer when communicating with an elected or
appointed City official, City employee or City agent on behalf of his/her
employer about a legislative or administrative action.
   D.   Violations; Penalty: Any violation of subsection
1-8-4B or C of this Section shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided
in Section
1-2-1  of this Code. (Ord. 1256, 7-16-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 9
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS AND DISCLOSURES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Purpose
1-9-2: Definitions
1-9-3: Anonymous Contributions Prohibited
1-9-4: Campaign Statement Information
1-9-5: Anonymous Mailings Prohibited
1-9-6: Liberal Interpretation
1-9-7: Filing Deadlines
1-9-8: Enforcement And Penalties
1-9-1: PURPOSE:
The California political reform act 1  imposes a number of requirements upon
persons supporting or opposing candidates and ballot measures. Among other
things, the political reform act generally restricts anonymous contributions
and requires disclosure for mass mailings. Under Government Code sections 81013
and 85703 the city may impose more restrictive regulations for local elections.
Accordingly, this chapter is added to this code to further the public's
compelling interest for full disclosure in local elections in order to better
inform the electorate and prevent political corruption. Nothing contained in
this chapter is intended, nor should it be construed, to supplant the political
reform act's requirements, or its regulations; this chapter is intended only to
supplement the political reform act as to local elections. (Ord. 1341, 11-7-
2001)
 
Notes
1 1. Gov.C. § 81000 et seq.
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise stated below, the words and phrases used in this chapter
generally have the same meanings as in the California Elections Code, the
political reform act, and those regulations promulgated by the fair political
practices commission. In addition, unless the contrary is stated or clearly
appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the
construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:
   CAMPAIGN LITERATURE: Unsolicited circulars, pamphlets, letters, posters,
political signs, or other reproduced matter referring to an election,
candidate, or any ballot measure. Campaign literature does not include other
campaign paraphernalia such as, without limitation, pencils, buttons, or
similar items.
   CONTRIBUTION: A payment, loans and extensions of credit (other than those
made by financial institutions), a payment of a loan from a financial
institution by a third party, or an enforceable promise to make a payment,
except to the extent that full and adequate consideration is received, unless
it is clear from the surrounding circumstances that it is not made for
political purposes. An expenditure made at a candidate's, committee's, or
elected officer's direction is a contribution to the candidate, committee, or
elected officer, unless full and adequate consideration is received for making
the expenditure.
   A.   "Contribution" includes purchasing tickets for events such as dinners,
luncheons, rallies, and similar fundraising events; granting discounts or
rebates not extended to the public generally or granting discounts or rebates
by television and radio stations and newspapers not extended on an equal basis
to all candidates for the same office; and paying compensation by any person
for the personal services or expenses of any other person if such services are
rendered or expenses incurred on behalf of a candidate or committee without
payment of full and adequate consideration.
   B.   "Contribution" also includes any transfer of anything of value received
by a committee from another committee. The term does not include amounts
received under an enforceable promise to the extent such amounts were
previously reported as a contribution. However, these amounts will be reported
in the appropriate campaign statement.
   C.   "Contribution" does not include volunteer personal services or payments
made by any individual for his or her own travel expenses if such payments are
made voluntarily without any understanding or agreement that they will be
directly or indirectly repaid to him.
   D.   In accordance with Buckley v. Valeo (1976) 424 U.S. 1, a candidate's
direct contribution to his or her campaign is not regulated by this chapter.
   PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture,
syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, controlled
committee, or committee. (Ord. 1420, 9-2-2008)
1-9-3: ANONYMOUS CONTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to make, and any candidate, controlled committee,
or committee to solicit or accept, any anonymous contribution in a local
election. (Ord. 1420, 9-2-2008; amd. Ord. 1628, 8-17-2021)
1-9-4: CAMPAIGN STATEMENT INFORMATION:
Candidates, elected officers, controlled committees, and committees must comply
with Government Code section 84211 regarding all persons contributing one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or more to a campaign for a local election. In
addition, candidates, elected officers, controlled committees, and committees
must list the zone improvement plan ("ZIP") code assigned by the United States
postal service for the business or residential postal address of persons making
contributions of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) during a campaign for
a local election. (Ord. 1384, 4-5-2005)
1-9-5: ANONYMOUS MAILINGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, candidate, or committee to send any
unsolicited piece of mail supporting or opposing any candidate or ballot
measure in a local election that does not comply with the requirements of
Government Code section 84305 or, if a slate mailer, Government Code section
84305.5.
   B.   In addition to the requirements of Government Code section 84305 or, if
applicable, Government Code section 84305.5, campaign literature including,
without limitation, mailers, must include the name and telephone number of any
person contributing twenty five percent (25%) or more of the cost for producing
the campaign literature. The text identifying such persons must conform with
the requirements of Government Code section 84305 or, if applicable, Government
Code section 84305.5. (Ord. 1420, 9-2-2008)
1-9-6: LIBERAL INTERPRETATION:
This chapter will be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose. (Ord. 1341,
11-7-2001)
1-9-7: FILING DEADLINES:
A final preelection filing of updated versions of all documents required by the
political reform act and this chapter will be filed by candidates and
committees and received by the city clerk by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
final Friday before the election and will reflect all actual and anticipated
expenditures and contributions through the date of the election. (Ord. 1384, 4-
5-2005)
1-9-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
The means of enforcing this chapter, and the penalties for violating it, are
set forth in the political reform act which will apply to this chapter and are
mandatory. In addition to any other penalty, the court may award a prevailing
party costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 1341, 11-
7-2001)
CHAPTER 10
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Receipt By Police Chief
1-10-2: Holding Period
1-10-3: Proof Of Ownership
1-10-4: Reclaim By Finder
1-10-5: Deposit Of Unclaimed Money
1-10-6: Sale Or Use Of Unclaimed Property
1-10-7: Sale Proceeds
1-10-8: Unsalable And Unusable Property
1-10-9: Dangerous Or Perishable Property
1-10-10: Applicability
1-10-1: RECEIPT BY POLICE CHIEF:
The Police Chief shall make provision for receiving and safekeeping found
property and money delivered to him or coming into his possession. A receipt
shall be issued to the person delivering the property or money. (Ord. 617, 2-3-
1964)
1-10-2: HOLDING PERIOD:
The property, except unclaimed bicycles, shall be held in a safe place and the
money deposited with the Chief Financial Officer for a period of at least six
(6) months, and unclaimed bicycles shall be held for a period of at least three
(3) months, unless sooner claimed by the true owner, and shall then be deemed
to be unclaimed property or unclaimed money, subject to disposal as provided in
this Chapter. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
1-10-3: PROOF OF OWNERSHIP:
During such time as any such property or money is so held, it may be delivered
or paid to the true owner. The property shall be delivered upon proof of
ownership satisfactory to the Police Chief after ten (10) days’ notice by mail
to any others who have asserted a claim of ownership, at any address given by
the persons. The money shall be paid to the true owner upon written order to
the Chief Financial Officer from the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall make
the order upon the same proof of ownership and with the same notice as
prescribed in the case of property. If ownership cannot be determined to the
satisfaction of the Police Chief, he may refuse to deliver the property or
order the payment of the money to anyone until ordered to do so by a court.
(Ord. 671, 2-3-1964; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
1-10-4: RECLAIM BY FINDER:
If the true owner does not appear during the time the property or money is so
held, and claim the property or money, it may be delivered back to the finder,
other than a City employee who found the same while performing his regular
duty, if the finder has served written notice upon the City that he wishes to
assert a claim to the property or money as a finder, and if he has complied
with the requirement of the State Civil Code governing the duties and
obligations of a finder. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-5: DEPOSIT OF UNCLAIMED MONEY:
All monies so received by the Police Chief and not delivered to the true owner
during a six (6) month period or the finder, shall thereafter be deposited in
the General Fund. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-6: SALE OR USE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
Upon expiration of the initial three (3) or six (6) month period, as such may
be applicable, any property so received and not delivered to the true owner or
finder may be appropriated to the use of the City upon order of the City
Manager, and property not appropriated to City use may be sold at public
auction to the highest bidder. Notice of the sale shall be given by the Police
Chief at least five (5) days before the time fixed therefor by at least one
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. (Ord. 617,
2-3-1964)
1-10-7: SALE PROCEEDS:
After the auction is completed, the Chief Financial Officer shall deposit the
proceeds of the auction in the General Fund. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964; amd. Ord.
1620, 11-17-2020)
1-10-8: UNSALABLE AND UNUSABLE PROPERTY:
Any property advertised and offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for
appropriation to the use of the City shall be deemed to be of no value and
shall be disposed of in such manner as the City Manager directs. (Ord. 617, 2-
3-1964)
1-10-9: DANGEROUS OR PERISHABLE PROPERTY:
Any property coming into the possession of the Police Chief which he determines
to be dangerous or perishable may be disposed of immediately, without notice,
in such manner as he determines to be in the public interest. (Ord. 617, 2-3-
1964)
1-10-10: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to apply to property subject
to confiscation under the laws of the State or of the United States of America,
and shall apply to property held as evidence only when the same is unclaimed by
any person and no other provisions of law are applicable concerning its
disposition. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
CHAPTER 11
RECORDS DESTRUCTION
SECTION:
1-11-1: Duplicate Records
1-11-1: DUPLICATE RECORDS:
Whenever an original of an instrument or document is on file in the City and
duplicates thereof are on file in that office or any other office, the
duplicates may be destroyed by the department head or officer who is in charge
of the records on file. (Ord. 923, 3-15-1977)
CHAPTER 12
ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS AND STATEMENTS OF ECONOMIC
INTEREST
SECTION:
1-12-1: Purpose And Authority
1-12-2: Basic Requirement
1-12-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to require the filing of Campaign
Disclosure Statements and Statements of Economic Interest by elected officials,
candidates, staff, consultants or committees to be completed electronically.
The City Council implements this chapter in accordance with the authority
granted to cities by state law, and this chapter is intended to supplement, and
not conflict with, the Political Reform Act.
   B.   While electronic filing of statements will be mandated under this
chapter, the City Clerk, as the City's filing officer, will have the right to
accept a paper filing in lieu of an electronic filing at the City Clerk's
discretion, under certain circumstances, including without limitation,
accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act. (Ord. 1632, 2-15-
2022)
1-12-2: BASIC REQUIREMENT:
   A.   An elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to
file statements, reports, or other documents required by Chapter 4 of the
Political Reform Act or designated in the City's local conflict of interest
code adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 87300 must file any required
Statement of Economic Interests (Form 700) online or electronically with the
City Clerk. Electronic filing is mandatory unless the officer, candidate, or
committee is exempt as described Government Code 8415(a).
   B.   The City Clerk shall issue an electronic confirmation that notifies the
filer that the Statement was received, and the notification shall include the
date and the time that the Statement was received and the method by which the
filer may view and print the data received by the City Clerk. The date of
filing for a Statement filed online shall be the day that it is received by the
City Clerk.
   C.   If the City Clerk's system is not capable of accepting a Statement due
to technical difficulties, a Statement in paper format shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
   D.   The City Clerk will operate the electronic filing system in compliance
with the requirements of California Government Code Section 84615. (Ord. 1632,
2-15-2022)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Planning Commission   1
Emergency Services Organization   2
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created
2-1-2: Composition
2-1-3: Powers And Duties
2-1-4: Terms Of Office
2-1-5: Expenses
2-1-6: Records; Report
2-1-7: Expenditures In Excess Of Appropriation
2-1-8: Organization; Meetings
2-1-9: Notification Of City Council Proceedings
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
A Planning Commission which may be known and referred to as the "City Planning
Commission" or "Planning Commission" of the City is hereby created and
established, pursuant to the provisions of The Planning Law of the State
(commencing with section 65000 of the State Government Code). (Ord. 677, 12-26-
1967)
2-1-2: COMPOSITION:
The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the City with the approval of the City Council. (Ord.
300, 8-20-1946)
2-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Planning Commission and the members thereof shall respectively have and
exercise each and all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and
authorities of city planning commissions and of members of the commissions, all
as set forth and contemplated in and under The planning law of the State
(commencing with section 65000 of the State Government Code) as same now exists
and as same may hereafter be amended, and shall perform the functions of the
city planning commissions and members thereof, respectively, all as indicated,
set forth and referred to in the Act and in the manner therein stated. (Ord.
677, 12-26-1967)
2-1-4: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The terms of members of the Planning Commission shall be for four (4) years. If
a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the term, it shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. Terms shall begin
on July 1 of the year of appointment and expire June 30 of the fourth year
thereafter. Terms shall be staggered amongst the members such that not more
than two (2) Commission terms expire in any given year. (Ord. 689, 5-23-1968;
amd. 2000 Code)
2-1-5: EXPENSES:
The City Council may in making its annual tax levy and as a part thereof levy
and collect a tax each year hereafter in the manner and for the purpose of
defraying the lawful expenses incurred by the Planning Commission in carrying
out the purposes of this Chapter; provided, that the tax shall not exceed in
any fiscal year the sum of two (2) mills on the dollar of assessed valuation of
the City. The City Council, however, reserves the right to make additional
appropriations from the general revenues of the City for the purposes of the
Planning Commission whenever the City Council deems the action necessary or
advisable. (Ord. 300, 8-20-1946)
2-1-6: RECORDS; REPORT:
The Planning Commission shall cause proper records to be kept of all of its
official acts and proceedings and shall make reports to the City Council, all
as contemplated in the planning law of the State (commencing with section 65000
of the State Government Code). (Ord. 677, 12-26-1967)
2-1-7: EXPENDITURES IN EXCESS OF APPROPRIATION:
The Planning Commission shall have no power or authority to bind or obligate
the City or any officer or department thereof for any money, debt, undertaking
or obligation of any kind in excess of the appropriation which the City Council
may have made for the purposes of the Planning Commission for any fiscal year.
(Ord. 300, 8-20-1946)
2-1-8: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS:
The Planning Commission shall provide for its own organization, shall adopt
rules and regulations for the transaction of business and shall designate the
time and place for the regular meetings of the Planning Commission. Permission
is granted to the Planning Commission to use the Council Chamber in the City
Hall as the place for its meetings; provided, that the meetings shall not
conflict or interfere with meetings of the City Council. (Ord. 300, 8-20-1946;
amd. 2000 Code)
2-1-9: NOTIFICATION OF CITY COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS:
The City Clerk is hereby authorized and instructed to notify the Planning
Commission of any matters which may hereafter be pending before the City
Council and to forward to the Planning Commission from time to time any and all
documents, proceedings and instruments which may hereafter be so pending, which
documents, proceedings and instruments, according to law, are required to be
submitted to the Planning Commission prior to final action thereon by the City
Council. (Ord. 300, 8-20-1946)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Definitions
2-2-2: Purposes
2-2-3: Expenditures
2-2-4: Disaster Council
2-2-5: Director Of Emergency Services
2-2-6: Emergency Organization; Composition
2-2-7: Emergency Plan
2-2-8: Violations; Penalty
2-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   EMERGENCY SERVICES: The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this
chapter apply to any condition relating to a labor controversy.
   LOCAL EMERGENCY: The duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or
of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial
limits of this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood,
storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions
resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be
beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of
this city and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to
combat.
   STATE OF EMERGENCY: The duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster
or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state
caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot,
or earthquake or other conditions causing a "state of war emergency", which
conditions, by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the
control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single
county, city and county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual
aid region or regions to combat.
   STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY: The condition which exists immediately, with or
without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever this state or nation
is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a
warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is
probable or imminent. (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-2: PURPOSES:
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this
city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization;
and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other
public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons.
(Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-3: EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual
aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection
and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-4: DISASTER COUNCIL:
   A.   Creation: The city disaster council is hereby created.
   B.   Composition: The city disaster council created under the provisions of
the preceding subsection shall consist of the following:
      1.   The mayor, who shall be chairman;
      2.   The city manager, who shall be director of emergency services and
vice chairman;
      3.   The assistant director, appointed by the city manager with the
advice and consent of the city council who, under the supervision of the
director, shall develop emergency plans and organize the emergency services
program of the city, and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the
director;
      4.   Such deputy directors and chiefs of emergency services as are
provided for in the current emergency plan of the city, adopted pursuant to
this chapter; (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
      5.   Such representatives of the school district, civic, business, labor,
veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency
responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent
of the city council;
      6.   A council member appointed by the mayor to serve for a period of one
year on a rotating basis. (Ord. 1388, 11-1-2005)
   C.   Meetings: The disaster council shall meet upon the call of the
chairman, or in his absence from the city or inability to call the meeting,
upon the call of the vice chairman.
   D.   Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the city disaster council
and it is hereby empowered to review and recommend for adoption by the city
council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and
resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement the plans
and agreements. (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-5: DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of director of
emergency services. The officer shall be the city manager.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The director of emergency services is hereby
empowered:
      1.   To request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a "local emergency" and the termination thereof, if the city
council is in session, or to issue the proclamation if the city council is not
in session, subject to confirmation by the city council within seven (7) days
thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.
      2.   To request the governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when in
the opinion of the director the resources of the area are inadequate to cope
with the disaster. The request must be confirmed by a resolution adopted by the
city council.
      3.   To control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of
the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.
      4.   To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services
and staff of the emergency organization of the city, and to resolve questions
of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.
      5.   To represent the disaster organization of the city in all dealings
with public or private agencies pertaining to civil defense and disaster.
      6.   To designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect
in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise
perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be
approved by the city council.
   C.   Powers In Event Of Disaster: In the event of the proclamation of a
"local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of
emergency" by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency
services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency", the director is
hereby empowered:
      1.   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest
practicable time by the city council.
      2.   To impose a curfew which prohibits all individuals from being
present on or at any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, sidewalk,
alley, park, playground or other public ground, public place or public building
between the hours of sundown and sunrise, or such other hours which the
director determines are reasonably related to the protection of life and
property as affected by such emergency. Such curfew shall not apply to
individuals whose presence on or at any public street, avenue, highway, road,
curb area, sidewalk, alley, park, playground or other public ground, public
place or public building is required pursuant to their responsibilities under
the city emergency organization and city "emergency plan", as such terms are
defined under sections
2-2-1 and
2-2-7 of this chapter. The director's imposition of a curfew shall be confirmed
at the earliest practical time by the city council.
      3.   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city
for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same
for public use.
      4.   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and,
in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in
which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency", to
command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in
the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges,
benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster
service workers.
      5.   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city
department or agency.
      6.   To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the
special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution (or
emergency plan) adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him by any
statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful
authority, and in conformity with section 38791 of the state Government Code,
to exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police power
vested in the city by the constitution and general laws. (Ord. 1195, 3-16-1993)
2-2-6: EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION; COMPOSITION:
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and
persons who may by agreement or operation of laws, including persons
commandeered under the provisions of subsection
2-2-5C4 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of
life and property in the city during the emergency shall constitute the
emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-7: EMERGENCY PLAN:
The functions and duties of the emergency organization shall be established in
the city emergency plan. The plan shall be consistent with the standardized
emergency management system and provide for the effective mobilization of all
of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition
constituting a "local emergency", "state of emergency", or "state of war
emergency"; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties,
services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect
upon adoption of resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1282, 10-21-1997)
2-2-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section
1-2-1 of this code, for any person during an emergency to: (Ord. 1195, 3-16-
1993; amd. 2000 Code)
   A.   Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by
virtue of this chapter.
   B.   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant
to this chapter.
   C.   Violate a curfew imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   D.   Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 1195, 3-16-1993)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Taxation   1
Business Attraction Program   2
Sales And Use Tax   3
Transient Occupancy Tax   4
Real Property Transfer Tax   5
Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund   6
Utility Users Tax   7
Transactions And Use Tax   8
CHAPTER 1
TAXATION
SECTION:
3-1-1: Transfer To County
3-1-1: TRANSFER TO COUNTY:
   A.   Compliance With State Law: The City does hereby elect to avail itself
of all of the provisions of an act of the legislature of the State entitled:
"An act to provide for the levy and collection of taxes by and for the use of
municipal corporations and cities incorporated under the laws of the State,
except municipal corporations of the first class, and to provide for the
consolidation and abolition of certain municipal offices, and to provide that
their duties may be performed by certain officers of the county, and fixing the
compensation to be allowed for such county officers for the services so
rendered to such municipal corporation", approved March 27, 1895, and all acts
of the legislature of the State amending the same, except the provisions of
section 2 of said Act.
   B.   Taxes Collected By County: All assessments for taxes in the City shall
be made and all the taxes collected by the assessor and tax collector,
respectively, of the County, and the duties of assessing property and
collecting taxes provided by law to be performed heretofore by the assessor and
tax collector of the City, shall hereafter be performed by the assessor and tax
collector, respectively, of the County, until the City shall, by ordinance,
elect not to avail itself of the provisions of the Act for any longer time.
(Ord. 3, 1-31-1917)
CHAPTER 2
BUSINESS ATTRACTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
3-2-1: Title
3-2-2: Purpose
3-2-3: Businesses Eligible For Incentives
3-2-3-1: Council Approval Of Incentives
3-2-4: Business License Tax Credit
3-2-5: Utility Users Tax Credit
3-2-6: Planning And Building Fees Agreements
3-2-7: Tax Reductions And Suspensions
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BUSINESS ATTRACTION PROGRAM OF THE CITY.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-2-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter sets forth a mechanism for establishing financial incentives to
businesses to facilitate business attraction in the city. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-2-3: BUSINESSES ELIGIBLE FOR INCENTIVES:
"Business" as used in this chapter is defined as a business proposing to locate
in the city which meets most of the following criteria and is eligible for
consideration for the incentives established under this chapter:
   A.   The business is engaged in a primary or secondary target industry as
identified in the city economic development strategic plan dated September 23,
1993, as amended from time to time by the city council.
   B.   The business has developed a business plan for long-term growth.
   C.   The business will provide the city with a return on investment within
three (3) years or a longer term if approved by the city council. The method
used to determine the return on investment for the city shall consider the
costs of city services provided to the business and the revenue and other
benefits that the business provides to the city. The revenue and benefits
provided to the city shall include, but not be limited to, the following
factors: increase in number of jobs, increase in square footage occupied,
increase in sales and use tax revenue, increase in utility users tax revenue,
increase in franchise fees, and increase in any other taxes or fees paid to the
city.
   D.   Commitment of the business to stay in the city for a minimum of six (6)
years.
   E.   Business has the capability of utilizing existing businesses located in
the city or attracting support industries into the city. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-2-3-1: COUNCIL APPROVAL OF INCENTIVES:
   A.   The authority granted to the city manager to approve financial
incentives to businesses under sections
3-2-5 and
3-2-6 of this chapter is limited to an aggregate amount of twelve thousand five
hundred dollars ($12,500.00) per eligible business. The city council shall have
the exclusive authority to approve incentives to businesses under sections
3-2-5 and
3-2-6 of this chapter which exceed the aggregate amount of twelve thousand five
hundred dollars ($12,500.00) per eligible business.
   B.   In the event a business seeks an incentive which requires city council
approval under subsection A of this section and such business needs a land use
approval which is subject to city council review, the council shall only
consider the request for the incentive concurrently with or subsequent to the
council's review of the land use application; or, in the event city council's
potential review of the land use application is only by way of appeal and no
appeal is filed within the time limits established by the El Segundo municipal
code, subsequent to the expiration of time to file the appeal.
   C.   An incentive requiring city council approval under this section shall
be placed on the consent calendar section of the city council meeting agenda.
(Ord. 1324, 9-19-2000)
3-2-4: BUSINESS LICENSE TAX CREDIT:
   A.   Tax Credit: A business subject to the tax imposed by this chapter is
entitled to a tax credit against the tax imposed by section
4-2-4 of this chapter whenever it generates sales and/or use tax in the year
immediately preceding the year in which the tax is due. The credit is applied
to the business registration tax due for the following year.
   B.   Percentage Of Tax: The tax credit referred to in subsection A of this
section, will equal up to forty percent (40%) of the sales or use tax generated
by the business and received by the city during the twelve-month period ending
on June 30 preceding the date the tax is due.
   C.   Amount Of Tax Credit: Under no circumstances can the amount of the tax
credit for any year be calculated to be greater than the total amount of tax
due for any year under this chapter.
   D.   A business may only be granted business license tax credits under this
section for the first three (3) consecutive years after the initial year of
issuance of the business license or such longer term as determined pursuant to
subsection
3-2-3C of this chapter.
   E.   In no event may a tax credit granted to any business pursuant to this
section exceed a cumulative total of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
Any business that has received a business license tax credit totaling more than
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) as of December 1, 2023, shall not be
entitled to any additional business license tax credit under this section.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
3-2-5: UTILITY USERS TAX CREDIT:
The city manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to negotiate and
enter into a tax credit agreement which grants to a business a credit on the
utility users tax imposed by the city for a period not to exceed three (3)
years following the date of the agreement or such longer term as determined
pursuant to subsection
3-2-3C of this chapter. The credit shall be calculated annually and shall be
applied to the utility users tax owed for the next fiscal year only; provided,
that, in no event, shall the credit exceed the amount of tax owed. (Ord. 1252,
4-9-1996)
3-2-6: PLANNING AND BUILDING FEES AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Fee Reduction: Director of community development or his or her
designee, is hereby authorized to negotiate an agreement which reduces the
planning and/or building fees applicable to a project developed by a business
in an amount not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the fees imposed. The fee
reduction shall only apply to projects specified in the agreement. Said
agreement shall be approved by the city manager.
   B.   Completion Timetable: The director of community development or his or
her designee, is hereby authorized to negotiate an agreement which establishes
a timetable for the completion of the review, approval and inspection process
conducted by the city in connection with a project developed by a business.
Under said agreement, the planning and/or building fees applicable to the
project shall be refunded and/or waived if the failure to meet the timetable is
solely caused by city inaction. The fee refund and/or waiver shall only apply
to the project specified in the agreement. Said agreement shall be approved by
the city manager.
   C.   Fees Defined: For the purpose of this section, "planning and/or
building fees" is defined as any or all of the fees imposed by the city under
the zoning, subdivision, building, electric, plumbing, and mechanical codes of
the city. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022)
3-2-7: TAX REDUCTIONS AND SUSPENSIONS:
The city council has the authority to: a) provide for the suspension of taxes
collected under this title and title 4 of this code; and b) provide for a
reduction in the tax rates assessed under this title and title 4 of this code.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
CHAPTER 3
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Title
3-3-2: Purpose
3-3-3: Operative Date; State Contract
3-3-4: Sales Tax
3-3-5: Use Tax
3-3-6: Amendments To State Code
3-3-7: Application Of Provisions Relating To Exclusions And Exemptions
3-3-8: Enjoining Collection
3-3-9: Suspension Of Existing Sales And Use Tax Ordinances
3-3-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX REGULATIONS
OF THE CITY. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
3-3-2: PURPOSE:
The City Council hereby declares that this Chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   A.   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which comply with the
requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the State
Revenue and Taxation Code 1 .
   B.   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which incorporate provisions
identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the State insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in part 1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code.
   C.   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which impose a one percent (1%)
tax and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by
the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the State sales and use taxes.
   D.   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of part
1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of
collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
 
Notes
1 1. Rev. & T.C. § 7200 et seq.
3-3-3: OPERATIVE DATE; STATE CONTRACT:
This Chapter shall become operative on April 1, 1956, and prior thereto, the
City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all the
functions incident to the administration and operation of this Chapter;
provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of
Equalization, as above set forth, prior to April 1, 1956, this Chapter shall
not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following
the execution of the contract by the City and by the State Board of
Equalization; and provided further, that this Chapter shall not become
operative prior to the operative date of the uniform local sales and use tax
ordinance of the County. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
3-3-4: SALES TAX:
   A.   Designation:
      1.   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a
tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible
personal property sold at retail in the City on and after the operative date of
this Chapter. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
      2.   For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated
at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination
or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from the sales shall include delivery charges, when the charges are
subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to where
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(Ord. 581, 11-27-1961, eff. 1-1-1962)
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 (commencing with
section 7200) of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of
part 1 of division 2 of such Code, as amended and in force and effect on April
1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this
Section as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that, in part 1 of division 2 of the
State Revenue and Taxation Code, the State is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this
subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the City
for the word "State" when that word is used as part of the title of the State
Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the constitution of the
State; nor shall the name of the City be substituted for that of the State in
any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be
taken by or against the City or any agency thereof, rather than by or against
the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this Chapter; and neither shall the substitution
be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily
limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State, where
the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax
with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage,
use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the State under the
provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the said State Revenue and Taxation Code,
or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption
of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State
under the said provisions of that Code; and in addition, the name of the City
shall not be substituted for that of the State in sections 6701, 6702 (except
in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the said
Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the City shall not be
substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in
this State" in section 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in section
6203. (Ord. 581, 11-27-1961, eff. 1-1-1962)
      3.   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section
6067 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall
not be required by reason of this Section. (Ord. 823, 10-16-1973, eff. 1-1-
1974)
      4.   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer;
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
this State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 1057, 12-20-
1983, eff. 1-1-1984)
      5.   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer;
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the
City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes;
         c.   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
this State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 1057, 12-20-
1083)
3-3-5: USE TAX:
   A.   Imposition: An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or
other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after the operative date of this Chapter, for storage, use or
other consumption in the City at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales
price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges, when the
charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made.
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue
and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of such Code,
as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes
are hereby adopted and made a part of this Section as though fully set forth
herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that, in part 1 of division 2 of the
State Revenue and Taxation Code, the State is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this
City for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the
State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State
Board of Equalization or the name of the State Treasury, or of the constitution
of the State; nor shall the name of the City be substituted for that of the
State in any section when the result of that substitution would require action
to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof, rather than by or
against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident
to the administration or operation of this Chapter; and neither shall the
substitution be deemed to have been made in those Sections, including, but not
necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the
State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption
from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the
State under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the State Revenue and
Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the State under the provisions of that Code; and in addition, the name
of the City shall not be substituted for that of the State in sections 6701,
6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code, as adopted, and the name of the City shall not
be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business
in this state" in section 6203, nor in the definition of that phrase in section
6203. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
      3.   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this Section:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer on consumer;
         b.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales
tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of
division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or
city in this State;
         c.   In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and
6366.1 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other
consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft
and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government.
         d.   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property
in such vessels for commercial purposes. (Ord. 1057, 12-20-1983)
3-3-6: AMENDMENTS TO STATE CODE:
All amendments of the State Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the
effective date of this Chapter which relate to the sales and use tax and which
are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue and
Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this Chapter. (Ord. 479, 2-
27-1956)
3-3-7: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Subsection
3-3-4B5 of this Chapter shall become operative on January 1 of the year
following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an
assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio
which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the State Revenue and
Taxation Code, at which time subsections
3-3-4B4 and
3-3-5B3 of this Chapter shall become inoperative.
   B.   In the event that subsection
3-3-4B5 of this Chapter become operative and the State Board of Equalization
subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is
higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by section 401 of
the State Revenue and Taxation Code, subsections
3-3-4B4 and
3-3-5 B3 of this Chapter shall become operative on the first day of the month
following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time
subsection
3-3-4 B5 of this Chapter shall become inoperative until the first day of the
month following the month in which the Board again adopts an assessment ratio
for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local
assessments by section 401 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, at which
time subsection
3-3-4 B5 of this Chapter shall again become operative and subsections
3-3-4B4 and
3-3-5 B3 shall become inoperative. (Ord. 823, 10-16-1973, eff. 1-1-1974; amd.
2000 Code)
3-3-8: ENJOINING COLLECTION:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this
City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this Chapter, or part 1.5 of division 2 of the State
Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be
collected. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
3-3-9: SUSPENSION OF EXISTING SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCES:
At the time this Chapter goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinances 480
and 481 (existing City sales and use tax ordinances) shall be suspended and
shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the
State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the
administration and operation of the sales and use tax imposed by this Chapter;
provided, however, that if for any reason it is determined that the City is
without power to adopt this Chapter, or that the State Board of Equalization is
without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and
operation of the taxes imposed by this Chapter, the provisions of Ordinances
480 and 481 (existing City sales and use tax ordinances) shall not be deemed to
have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect
at the rate of one percent (1%) continuously from and after April 2, 1956. Upon
the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the functions
incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this
Chapter, the provisions of Ordinances 480 and 481 (existing City sales and use
tax ordinances) shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of one
percent (1%). (1969 Code § 3.08.100)
CHAPTER 4
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
SECTION:
3-4-1: Title
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Imposition; Rate
3-4-4: Exemptions
3-4-5: Collection
3-4-6: Registration Certificate
3-4-7: Rent Report; Tax Remittance
3-4-8: Failure To Remit; Penalty
3-4-9: Operator Violation
3-4-10: Operator Appeal
3-4-11: Record Retention
3-4-12: Refunds
3-4-13: Tax Deemed Debt To City
3-4-14: Operative Date
3-4-15: Violation; Penalty
3-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX REGULATIONS
OF THE CITY. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this chapter.
   HOTEL: Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or
intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel,
studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house,
dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed
location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
   OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of
any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
   OPERATOR: The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity
of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other
capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of
any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be
deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same
duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this
chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be
considered to be compliance by both.
   PERSON: Any firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club,
fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination
acting as a unit.
   RENT: The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy
of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods,
labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and
services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The Chief Financial Officer.
   TRANSIENT:
   A.   Any "person" as defined in this section, who exercises occupancy or is
entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license
or other agreement, for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or
less.
   B.   Any individual who personally exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement, for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less.
Any such person or individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to
be a transient.
In determining whether an individual is a transient, uninterrupted periods of
time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date hereof may be
considered. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
3-4-3: IMPOSITION; RATE:
   A.   Tax Imposed: For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each
transient is subject to and must pay a tax of twelve percent (12%) of the rent
charged by the operator. (Ord. 1519, 5-3-2016)
   B.   Payment To Operator: The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient
to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel
at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a
proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid
tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If
for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax
administrator may require that the tax shall be paid directly to the tax
administrator. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-4-4: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   No tax shall be imposed upon:
      1.   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
      2.   Any federal or state of California officer or employee while on
official business only and when payment for such occupancy is made by duly
authorized voucher payment from the governing agency;
      3.   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.
   B.   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the
time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by
the tax administrator. (Ord. 1121, 9-20-1988)
3-4-5: COLLECTION:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent
and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount
of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each
transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of
a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly,
that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator,
or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be
refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-6: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE:
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, or within thirty (30)
days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel
renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the Tax
Administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration
certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
   A.   The name of the operator;
   B.   The address of the hotel;
   C.   The date upon which the certificate was issued;
   D.   This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform
transient occupancy tax regulations by registering with the Tax Administrator
for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and
remitting such tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not
authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful
business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly
complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those
requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this
City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.
(Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-7: RENT REPORT; TAX REMITTANCE:
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close
of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which
may be established by the Tax Administrator, make a return to the Tax
Administrator, on forms provided by him of the total rents charged and received
and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the
return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the
Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator may establish shorter reporting
periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure
collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return.
Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any
reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this Chapter shall be held
in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Tax
Administrator. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-8: FAILURE TO REMIT; PENALTY:
   A.   Original Delinquency: Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent
(10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   B.   Continued Delinquency: Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent
remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount
of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.
   C.   Fraud: If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any
remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty five
percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to
the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this Section.
   D.   Interest: In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails
to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-
half of one percent (0.5%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the
tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent until paid.
   E.   Penalties Merged With Tax: Every penalty imposed and such interest as
accrues under the provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax
herein required to be paid. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-9: OPERATOR VIOLATION:
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the
time provided in this Chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any
portion thereof required by this Chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed
in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to
base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator procures
such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the
assessment of any tax imposed by this Chapter and payable by any operator who
has failed or refused to collect the same and to make the report and
remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against the operator the
tax, interest and penalties provided for by this Chapter. In case the
determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice of the amount
so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known
place of address. The operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or
mailing of the notice make application in writing to the Tax Administrator for
a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing
is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if
any, determined by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive and
immediately due and payable. If the application is made, the Tax Administrator
shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the manner prescribed
herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice
why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for the tax, interest and
penalties. At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why the
specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing
the Tax Administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall
thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of
the determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties. The amount
determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal
is taken as provided in Section
3-4-10 of this Chapter. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-10: OPERATOR APPEAL:
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to
the amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15)
days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council
shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, and the City Clerk shall
give notice in writing to the operator at his last known place of address. The
findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing.
Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the
service of notice. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-11: RECORD RETENTION:
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to
the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period
of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of
such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the
City, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at
all reasonable times. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-12: REFUNDS:
   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the City under this Chapter, it may be refunded as provided in
subsections B and C of this Section, provided: 1) the tax was paid under
protest, and 2) a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury
the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax
Administrator within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on
forms furnished by the Tax Administrator. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
   B.   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the
transient to the operator.
   C.   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than
once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a
claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this Section, but only when the
tax was paid by the transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when the
transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction
of the Tax Administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund
from the operator who collected the tax.
   D.   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the
claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-13: TAX DEEMED DEBT TO CITY:
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a
debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under
the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name
of the City for the recovery of the amount. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-14: OPERATIVE DATE:
This Chapter shall become operative on August 1, 1964. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-15: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in
Section
1-2-1 of this Code.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to
register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or
who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by
the Tax Administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is
guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to
make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or
fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of
any amount due required by this Chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor
and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964; amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 5
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
SECTION:
3-5-1: Title
3-5-2: Imposition Of Tax
3-5-3: Payment
3-5-4: Applicability Exceptions
3-5-5: Liability
3-5-6: Conveyance For Reorganization Or Adjustment
3-5-7: Conveyance For Securities And Exchange Commission Order
3-5-8: Levy
3-5-9: Administration
3-5-10: Refund Claims
3-5-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX REGULATIONS OF
THE CITY, adopted pursuant to part 6.7 (commencing with section 11901) of
division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands,
tenements, or other realty sold within the City, shall be granted, assigned,
transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty seven and
one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional
part thereof. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-3: PAYMENT:
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section
3-5-2 of this Chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues
any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the
same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-4: APPLICABILITY EXCEPTIONS:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in
writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-5: LIABILITY:
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision
thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this
Chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 734, 1-26-1970)
3-5-6: CONVEYANCE FOR REORGANIZATION OR ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making,
delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:
      1.   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
      2.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of title 11
of the United States Code, as amended;
      3.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
"corporation", as defined in subdivision (3) of section 506 of title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended; or
      4.   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
   B.   Subdivisions A1 to A4, inclusive, of this Section shall only apply if
the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs
within five (5) years from the date of the confirmation, approval or change.
(Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-7: CONVEYANCE FOR SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION ORDER:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or
delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of section 1083 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:
   A.   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which the conveyance is made recites that the conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of section 79K of title 15 of the
United States Code relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   B.   The order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
   C.   The conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 674, 11-27-
1967)
3-5-8: LEVY:
   A.   Realty Held By Partnership: In the case of any realty held by a
partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any
transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:
      1.   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing
partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954; and
      2.   The continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   B.   Termination Of Partnership: If there is a termination of any
partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, for purposes of this Chapter, the partnership shall be treated as having
executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value
(exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all
realty held by the partnership at the time of the termination.
   C.   Limitation On Taxing: Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant
to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this
Chapter, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by
the partnership at the time of the termination. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-9: ADMINISTRATION:
The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the
provisions of part 6.7 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code and
the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 674, 11-
27-1967)
3-5-10: REFUND CLAIMS:
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed
by the provisions of chapter 5 (commencing with section 5096) of part 9 of
division 1 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
SECTION:
3-6-1: Creation Of Fund
3-6-2: Monies Paid Into Fund
3-6-3: Expenditures
3-6-1: CREATION OF FUND:
In order to comply with the provisions of sections 182 to 207 of the State
Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to section 2113 thereof,
there is hereby created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the
Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. (Ord. 678, 12-26-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
3-6-2: MONIES PAID INTO FUND:
All monies received by the City from the State under the provisions of sections
182 to 207 of the State Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real
property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or
improvement of streets or highways, other than State highways, shall be paid
into the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. (Ord. 678, 12-26-1967)
3-6-3: EXPENDITURES:
All monies in the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund shall be expended
exclusively for the purpose authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions
of sections 182 to 207 of the State Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 678, 12-
26-1967)
CHAPTER 7
UTILITY USERS TAX
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Exemptions
3-7-3: Electricity Users Tax
3-7-4: Tax On Cogenerated Electricity
3-7-5: Gas Users Tax
3-7-6: Water Users Tax
3-7-7: Communication Services User Tax
3-7-8: Reporting And Remitting
3-7-9: Interest And Penalty
3-7-10: Actions To Collect
3-7-11: Duty To Collect; Procedures
3-7-12: Additional Powers And Duties Of Tax Administrator
3-7-13: Assessment; Administrative Remedy
3-7-14: Records
3-7-14-1: Violation Of Records Requirement; Penalty
3-7-15: Refunds
3-7-16: Reduction Of Tax Based On Sales Tax Receipts
3-7-17: Utility Users Account
3-7-18: Annual Review
3-7-19: Appeals
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meanings
stated elsewhere in this code, or in accordance with applicable law.
   ANCILLARY TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES: Services associated with or incidental
to providing use or enjoyment of telecommunication services, including, without
limitation, the following:
      Conference Bridging Service: An ancillary service that links two (2) or
more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include
providing a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the
telecommunication services used to reach the conference bridge.
      Detailed Telecommunication Billing Service: An ancillary service of
separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer's
billing statement.
      Directory Assistance: An ancillary service of providing telephone number
information or address information.
      Vertical Service: An ancillary service offered in connection with one or
more telecommunication services, which offers advanced calling features that
allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call
connections, including conference bridging services.
      Voice Mail Service: An ancillary service that enables customers to store,
send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any
vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize
the voice mail service.
   BILLING ADDRESS: The mailing address of the service user where the service
supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
   COGENERATOR: Any corporation, including an electrical corporation, or
commercial or industrial utility user employing cogeneration technology for
producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation
of electricity.
   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL UTILITY USER: Any commercial or industrial utility
user conducting business as described in sections
4-2-4,
4-2-9,
4-2-11,
4-2-13,
4-2-14,
4-2-15,
4-2-16,
4-2-17,
4-2-25,
4-2-28,
4-2-29,
4-2-31,
4-2-32,
4-2-36,
4-2-37,
4-2-38,
4-2-41,
4-2-43, and subsections
4-2-20C, F and
4-2-23C of this code and means "electrical corporation", "gas corporation", and
"water corporation".
   COMMUNICATION SERVICES: "Telecommunication services" and "ancillary
telecommunication services" as defined herein.
   ELECTRICAL CORPORATION, GAS CORPORATION, AND WATER CORPORATION: The same
meaning as defined in sections 218, 222, and 241, respectively, of the state
Public Utilities Code as said sections existed on January 1, 1975, except
"electrical corporation" is construed to include any municipality, franchised
agency, or cogenerator.
   MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Has the same meaning and usage as set
forth in the mobile telecommunications sourcing act (4 USC section 124) and the
regulations promulgated thereto or any successor statutes or regulations.
   MONTH: A calendar month.
   PERSON: Means, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust,
common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate,
club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company,
corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or
municipal corporation (other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee,
guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: The street address representative of where the service
user's use of a communication service primarily occurs, which must be the
business street address of the service user.
   POSTPAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE: A telecommunication service obtained by
making a payment on a communication by communication basis either through the
use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card,
credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not
associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication
service.
   PREPAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE: The right to access telecommunication
services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination
of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether
manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or
dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.
   PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE: A telecommunication service that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in
which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity,
extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided
in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications
channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are
transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the
location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).
   SERVICE ADDRESS: Either:
   A.   The location of the service user's communication equipment from which
the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the
communication is billed or paid; or
   B.   If the location in subsection A of this definition is unknown (e.g.,
mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means
the location of the service user's place of primary use.
   C.   For prepaid telecommunication service, "service address" means the
location associated with the service number.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER: Any entity which receives taxes paid and remits same as
imposed by this chapter.
   SERVICE USER: A commercial or industrial utility user required to pay a tax
imposed by this chapter.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The finance director of the city of El Segundo.
   TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES:
   A.   The transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, or any
other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever
the technology used, and includes broadband services (e.g., T-1, digital
subscriber line (eDSL), fiber optic, coaxial cable, and wireless broadband,
including Wi-Fi, WiMAX, and wireless MESH) to the extent federal or state law
permits taxation of such broadband services, now or in the future. The term
telecommunication services includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing
in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or
protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing
without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet
protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the federal communications
commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video or data services that
are functionally integrated with telecommunication services.
   B.   Telecommunication services include, without limitation, the following
services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are
calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; broadband service
(to the extent federal and/or state law permits taxation of such service);
mobile telecommunication service; prepaid telecommunication service (to the
extent that it is practicable for the service supplier to collect the correct
tax imposed under this chapter from the service supplier); postpaid
telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service;
800 service (or any other toll free numbers designated by the federal
communications commission); and 900 service (or any other similar numbers
designated by the federal communications commission for services whereby
subscribers who call in to prerecorded or live service).
   C.   Telecommunication services also include, without limitation, charges
for connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of
telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office
and custom calling features (including, without limitation, call waiting, call
forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other
messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal
service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges;
local number portability charges; and text. Telecommunication services do not
include digital downloads that are not ancillary telecommunication services,
such as video programming, music, ringtones, games, and similar digital
products. (Ord. 1438, 4-13-2010)
3-7-2: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person
when imposition of such tax upon that commercial or industrial utility user
would be in violation of the constitution of the United States or that of the
state or upon the city or any of its departments, agencies, boards or
commissions or upon the El Segundo unified school district, Centinela Valley
union high school district and the Wiseburn school district, or upon any other
person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of
the constitution of the United States or the constitution of the state. The tax
administrator shall prepare a list of the commercial or industrial utility
users exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and
furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-3: ELECTRICITY USERS TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed a tax upon every commercial or
industrial utility user in the city using electrical energy in the city. The
tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three percent (3%) of the
charges made for such energy and shall be paid by the commercial or industrial
utility user paying for such energy. "Charges", as used in this section, shall
include charges made for: 1) metered energy; and 2) minimum charges for
service, including customer charges, services charges, demand charges, standby
charges and annual and monthly charges, fuel cost adjustments, etc.
   B.   Definition: As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy"
shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a
battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery
or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided,
however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the
purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include
electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of
its business as an electric public utility; nor shall the term include the mere
receiving of such energy by an electric public utility; nor shall the term
include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or
government agency at a point within the city for resale; or the use of such
energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a
governmental agency.
   C.   Collection: The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person providing such energy. The amount of the tax
collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before
the last day of the following month. Remittance of tax may be predicated on a
formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's customer. (Ord. 1252,
4-9-1996)
3-7-4: TAX ON COGENERATED ELECTRICITY:
   A.   Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed a tax upon every commercial or
industrial utility user in the city using cogenerated electrical energy in the
city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three percent
(3%) of the value of the cogenerated energy. The value shall be equal to the
price an electrical corporation, serving the city, would pay to purchase
electrical energy from a cogenerator. The cogenerator shall install and
maintain an appropriate utility type metering system which will enable
compliance with this section.
   B.   Collection: The tax shall be collected and paid by the cogenerator if
the cogenerator consumes the energy. If the cogenerator sells the energy, the
tax shall be paid by the commercial or industrial utility user to whom the
energy is sold and collected by the cogenerator.
   C.   Time For Remitting: The amount of the tax collected in one month shall
be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following
month. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-5: GAS USERS TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed a tax upon every commercial or
industrial utility user in the city other than a gas corporation, using in the
city, gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this
section shall be at the rate of three percent (3%) of the charges made for such
gas and shall be paid by the commercial or industrial utility user paying for
such gas. "Charges", as used in this section, shall include: 1) gas which is
delivered through mains of pipes; and 2) minimum charges for services,
including customer charges, service charges, and annual and monthly charges.
   B.   Exclusions: There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax
imposed in this section is computed: 1) charges made for gas which is to be
resold and delivered through mains or pipes; 2) charges made for gas sold for
use in production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental
agency; 3) charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in
the conduct of the business of gas public utilities; 4) charges made for gas
used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the
state vehicle code, utilizing natural gas; and 5) charges related to late
payments and returned checks.
   C.   Collection; Time For Filing Return: The tax imposed by this section
shall be collected from the service user by the person selling the gas. The
person selling the gas shall, on or before the twentieth of each calendar
month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the
effective date hereof, make a return to the tax administrator stating the
amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such
returns are filed, the person selling the gas shall remit tax payments to the
tax administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the
tax administrator. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
   D.   Nonapplicability: The tax imposed by this section is not intended to
apply to gas not purchased from third party vendors and gas used for nonutility
purposes.
      1.   For the purposes of this subsection D, the phrase "gas not purchased
from third party vendors" shall mean gas which is produced and owned by the
same legal entity where ownership is not the result of a sale or purchase
transaction.
      2.   For the purposes of this subsection D, the phrase "gas used for
nonutility purposes" shall mean gas which is a component part of a manufactured
product produced by an entity which is subject to the utility users tax. (Ord.
1226, 8-2-1994)
3-7-6: WATER USERS TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed a tax upon every commercial or
industrial utility user in the city using water which is delivered though mains
or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three percent
(3%) of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the commercial or
industrial utility user paying for such water.
   B.   Exclusions: There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax
imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be
resold and delivered through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal
water department, public utility or a county or municipal water district for
water used and consumed by such department, utility or district.
   C.   Collection: The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person selling the water. The amount collected in one month
shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the
following month. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-7: COMMUNICATION SERVICES USER TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed upon every service user in the city using
communication services. The maximum tax imposed by this section is two percent
(2%) of the charges made for such services and must be collected from the
service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent. There
is a rebuttable presumption that communication services billed to a billing or
service address in the city are used, in whole or in part, within the city's
boundaries and such services are taxable under this chapter. If the billing
address of the service user is different from the service address, the service
address of the service user must be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As
used in this section, the term "charges" include the value of any other
services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration
provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services.
   B.   Mobile Service Sourced: Mobile telecommunications service is sourced in
accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act (4 USC section 124), regulations promulgated thereto, and any
successor statute or regulation. The tax administrator may issue and
disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax
collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of
other communication services including, without limitation, postpaid
communication services, prepaid communication services, and private
communication services, provided that such rules are based upon industry custom
and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize
multijurisdictional taxation.
   C.   Tax Credit: To prevent actual multijurisdictional taxation of
communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user,
upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user previously paid the
same tax in another state or city on such communication services, is allowed a
credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally
imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit
cannot exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.
   D.   Combined Charge Subject To Tax: Except as otherwise provided by
applicable federal or state law, if any nontaxable charges are combined with
and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or
invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the
service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the
portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the
service supplier's books and records kept in the regular course of business and
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created
and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving
the proper apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges.
   E.   Collection Of Tax: For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a
duty to collect and remit a tax under this section, "substantial nexus" and
"minimum contacts" are construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection
or remittance of the tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal
law and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by
statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a
person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of
terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, is
subject to a rebuttable presumption that "substantial nexus/minimum contacts"
exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and
remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier is deemed to have
sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if
its activities include, without limitation, any of the following: maintains or
has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of
business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent
contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in
the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of
advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or
distributed from a location within the city; or advertises in newspapers or
other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials
distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail. Upon
request, the city must make available an accurate description of its
jurisdictional boundaries based on street addresses or ZIP plus four, in an
electronic format. If a service supplier relies upon such information provided
by city, it is not responsible for any errors in taxation that may result.
   F.   Satisfaction Of Tax Obligation By Service Users: Any person who pays
the tax levied pursuant to this section with respect to any charge for a
communication service is deemed to have satisfied that person's obligation to
pay the tax levied pursuant to former section
3-7-7 as codified immediately before adoption of this regulation with respect
to that charge. Likewise, before October 1, 2010, any person who pays the tax
levied pursuant to former section
3-7-7 as codified immediately before adoption of this regulation is deemed to
have satisfied the person's obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to this
section with respect to that charge. The intent of this subsection is to
prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during
the transition period from the previous telephone tax to the new tax (which
transition period ends October 1, 2010) and to permit communication service
providers during that transition period to satisfy their collection obligations
by collecting either tax.
   G.   Collection Of Tax By Service Supplier: Service suppliers must begin to
collect the tax imposed by this section as soon as feasible after the effective
date of the section, but in no event later than permitted by Public Utilities
Code section 799. (Ord. 1438, 4-13-2010)
3-7-8: REPORTING AND REMITTING:
Each service supplier shall, on or before the last day of each month, make a
return to the Tax Administrator on forms provided by him, stating the amount of
taxes billed by the service supplier during the preceding month, except as
provided in subsection
3-7-5C of this Chapter. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the
tax collected shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator
is authorized to require such further information as he deems necessary to
determine if the tax imposed hereby is being levied and collected in accordance
with this Chapter. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-9: INTEREST AND PENALTY:
   A.   Delinquency: Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted
to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this Chapter
are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the
return may be postmarked the first regular working day following a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday.
   B.   Penalty Rate: Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax
collected or any deficiency determination pursuant to this Chapter shall attach
to, and be paid by, the person required to collect and remit at the rate of
fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax collected or imposed by this Chapter.
   C.   Additional Penalty For Fraud: The Tax Administrator is hereby empowered
to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes
under the provisions of this Chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or
remitting at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax
collected or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.
   D.   Penalty Part Of Tax: Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this
Section shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. (Ord. 1252, 4-
9-1996)
3-7-10: ACTIONS TO COLLECT:
Any such tax received from a service user which has wilfully been withheld from
the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person
required to collect and remit. Any person holding such money contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of
the City for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-11: DUTY TO COLLECT; PROCEDURES:
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be
performed as follows:
   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
3-7-5C of this Chapter, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at
the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular
billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service
user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the energy charge
and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any
subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge
first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall
be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the
service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on said energy charges,
subsection
3-7-13C of this Chapter will apply.
   B.   The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the
beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service
user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to
the provisions of this Chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing,
one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall
arise separately for each billing. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-12: ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby
directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and
regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this Chapter for the purpose of
carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes
herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the
Tax Administrator's office.
   C.   The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the
strict requirements of this Chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here
may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of particular service
supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in
conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Chapter. A copy of each
such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office.
   D.   The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any commercial
or industrial utility user who asserts a right to exemption from the tax
imposed by this Chapter. The Tax Administrator shall provide the service
supplier with the name of any commercial or industrial utility user who the Tax
Administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with
the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt
commercial or industrial utility user. The Tax Administrator shall notify the
service supplier of the termination of any commercial or industrial utility
user's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which
service is supplied to any exempt commercial or industrial utility user. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-13: ASSESSMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY:
   A.   The Tax Administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by
a person required to remit.
   B.   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts
remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has
refused to pay the amount of tax to such person, or whenever the Tax
Administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he may relieve such
person of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain
named service users for specified billing periods.
   C.   The service supplier shall provide the city with amounts refused and/or
unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to
pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter. Whenever the service user
has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two (2) or more billing
periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect
taxes due.
   D.   The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he has assumed
responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand
payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by
handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States
mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to
which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should
the service user have changed his address, to his last known address. If a
service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen
(15) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be
the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of
twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice
shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars ($5.00). The penalty shall
become part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-14: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city
any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3)
years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as
he may have been liable for the collection of a remittance to the tax
administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to
inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-14-1: VIOLATION OF RECORDS REQUIREMENT; PENALTY:
If any person subject to record keeping under this chapter unreasonably denies
the tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative,
access to such records, the person unreasonably denying access shall be subject
to a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. The person
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion
of which denial of access is committed, continued or permitted by such person.
This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this code.
(Ord. 1325, 9-19-2000)
3-7-15: REFUNDS:
   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once
or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax
administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections
B and C of this section, provided: 1) the tax was paid under protest; and 2) a
claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific
grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator
within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished
by the tax administrator.
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a
service supplier may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected
and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or
illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user
from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however,
that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the
tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to
charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to
collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in
excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a
service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for
such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly
returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one
year from the date of overpayment.
   C.   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the
claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto.
   D.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service
supplier, pursuant to an order of the California public utilities commission or
a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges
for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the
amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and
the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded
taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In
the event this chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be
borne by the city.
   E.   A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user
in accordance with this section or by the service supplier's customary
practice. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
   F.   Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class
or group of taxpayers. (Ord. 1325, 9-19-2000)
3-7-16: REDUCTION OF TAX BASED ON SALES TAX RECEIPTS:
Whenever in this title a utility users tax is imposed on any person subject to
the utility users tax, the amount of the utility users tax shall be reduced
proportionately whenever the preceding fiscal year exceeds the limit determined
by the formula in subsection A of this section.
   A.   The sales tax limit which will trigger a reduction in the utility users
tax shall be equal to eighty percent (80%) of the sales tax revenue received in
the 1979-1980 fiscal year multiplied by the appropriations limit established
annually since 1980-1981 under the provisions of article XIIIB of the
California constitution.
   B.   In any year in which sales tax revenue exceeds the limit established in
subsection A of this section, the utility users tax imposed the following July
1 shall be reduced by the percentage that revenue exceeds the limit. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-17: UTILITY USERS ACCOUNT:
The tax administrator shall establish a utility users tax account within the
general fund and shall place therein any and all taxes collected under this
chapter which are in excess of the amounts needed to balance the adopted
general fund budget during any one fiscal year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-18: ANNUAL REVIEW:
   A.   Each year in conjunction with the annual budget deliberations and prior
to September 30, the city council shall reconsider the provisions and rate of
the utility users tax as well as any taxes that may have been placed in the
utility users tax account as provided in section
3-7-17 of this chapter during the preceding and current fiscal years.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
3-7-16 of this chapter, the council may reduce or suspend all or a part of the
tax rate for the current fiscal year; or may provide no tax on one or more
utilities for the current fiscal year.
   B.   The city will give the service supplier at least one month's
notification prior to any requested change in the utility users tax percentage.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-19: APPEALS:
   A.   If the service user or service supplier is aggrieved by any decision or
administrative ruling of the tax administrator, or with the failure to grant a
refund or exemption as provided for under this chapter, he may appeal to the
city manager, or his or her duly authorized designee, by filing a notice of
appeal with the city clerk within fourteen (14) days of the decision or
administrative ruling which aggrieved the service user or service supplier. The
city clerk shall thereupon fix a time and place for a hearing of such appeal.
The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of
hearing as herein provided.
   B.   The decision of the city manager, or his or her duly authorized
designee, shall be final unless appealed to the city council, in the manner
provided for in this section, no later than ten (10) calendar days after the
date of the decision.
      1.   The notice of appeal shall contain the name and address of the
person appealing the action, the decision appealed from and the grounds for the
appeal. A defect in the form of the notice does not affect the validity or
right to an appeal. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the fee fixed
by resolution of the city council.
      2.   A city council member may appeal a decision of the city manager. The
appeal shall be processed in the same manner as an appeal by any other person
but need not be accompanied by the fee prescribed for an appeal. The city
council member appealing the decision is not disqualified by that action from
participating in the appeal hearing and the deliberations nor from voting as a
member of the city council.
      3.   The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city
council and shall give notice of the hearing on the appeal.
      4.   The city council shall hear the appeal as a new matter. The original
applicant has the burden of proof. The city council may reverse or affirm the
city manager's decision in whole or in part, or may modify the decision that is
being appealed, irrespective of the precise grounds or scope of the appeal. In
addition to considering the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing on
the appeal, the city council shall consider all pertinent information from the
file as a result of the previous actions from which the appeal is taken.
   C.   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process
shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city
or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under
this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or
remitted. (Ord. 1325, 9-19-2000)
CHAPTER 8
TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-8-1: Title
3-8-2: Operative Date
3-8-3: Purpose
3-8-4: Contract With State
3-8-5: Transactions Tax Rate
3-8-6: Place Of Sale
3-8-7: Use Tax Rate
3-8-8: Adoption Of Provisions Of State Law
3-8-9: Limitations On Adoption Of State Law And Collection Of Use Taxes
3-8-10: Permit Not Required
3-8-11: Exemptions And Exclusions
3-8-12: Amendments
3-8-13: Enjoining Collection Forbidden
3-8-14: Automatic Suspension, Implementation
3-8-15: Suspension Or Reduction
3-8-16: City Council Authority To Amend
3-8-1: TITLE:
This Chapter is entitled the "El Segundo Transactions and Use Tax." The term
"City," as used within this Chapter, is the city of El Segundo. This Chapter is
applicable in the incorporated territory of the City. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-2: OPERATIVE DATE:
"Operative Date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing
more than one hundred and ten (110) days after the adoption of this Chapter,
the date of such adoption being as set forth below. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-3: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that its provisions be interpreted in order to accomplish those
purposes:
   A.   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code which authorizes the City to adopt this Chapter which
becomes operative if a majority of the electors voting on the ballot measure
approving the Chapter vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election
called for that purpose.
   B.   To adopt retail transactions and use tax regulations that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code.
   C.   To adopt retail transactions and use tax regulations that imposes a tax
and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the
State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use
Taxes.
   D.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes,
and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-
2018)
3-8-4: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
Before the operative date, the City must contract with the State Board of
Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this Chapter; provided, that if the City has not contracted with
the State Board of Equalization before the operative date, it must nevertheless
so contract and in such a case the operative date is the first day of the first
calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-
2018)
3-8-5: TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE:
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a
transaction tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated
territory of the City at the rate of 0.75% of the gross receipts of any
retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said
territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-
2018)
3-8-6: PLACE OF SALE:
For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place
of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the
state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In
the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has
more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales
are consummated is determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-7: USE TAX RATE:
A use tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of
tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the
operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said
territory at the rate of 0.75% of the sales price of the property. The sales
price includes delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or
use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-
2018)
3-8-8: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW:
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001)
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of
this Chapter as though fully set forth. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-9: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES:
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code:
   A.   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City will be substituted. However, the substitution is
not made when:
      1.   The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of
Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;
      2.   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter.
      3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         a.   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other
consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or
         b.   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      4.   In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711,
6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   B.   The word "City" is substituted for the word "State" in the phrase
"retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
(Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-10: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit is not required by
this Chapter. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-11: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   There is excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use
tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California
or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns
Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered
transactions or use tax.
   B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
      2.   Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a
point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier
for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph,
delivery to a point outside the City is satisfied:
         a.   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject
to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of
Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section
21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration
to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed
by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place
of residence; and
         b.   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to
furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
before the operative date of this chapter.
      4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease before the operative date
of this chapter.
      5.   For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the
sale or lease of tangible personal property is deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   C.   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this Chapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property:
      1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in
Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of
California.
      3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into before the operative date of this
chapter.
      4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease before the
operative date of this ordinance.
      5.   For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section,
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property is deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      6.   Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in
business in the City is not required to collect use tax from the purchaser of
tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property
into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the
property, including, without limitation, soliciting or receiving the order,
either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the
City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or
person in the City under the authority of the retailer.
      7.   "A retailer engaged in business in the City" also includes any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with
Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer is required to collect use tax
from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft
at an address in the City.
   D.   Any person subject to use tax under this Chapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to
the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-12: AMENDMENTS:
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter to Part 1 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and
which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, automatically become a part of
this Chapter, provided however, that no such amendment operates so as to affect
the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-13: ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process may issue
in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the City,
or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this ordinance, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord.
1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-14: AUTOMATIC SUSPENSION, IMPLEMENTATION:
The taxes authorized by this chapter are subject to the following:
   A.   For purposes of this Section, the term "district" has the meaning set
forth in Revenue and Taxation Code § 7252 to the extent such a district may
have taxing powers within the City's jurisdiction under applicable law. For
example, and without limitation, the County of Los Angeles is a district for
purposes of this Section.
   B.   The City will suspend collection of the taxes authorized by this
chapter so long as a district does not place a measure on the ballot seeking
voter authorization for a new or increased retail transactions and use tax in
accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Sections 7285 or 7285.5 of Part
1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   C.   Should a district place a transaction and use tax measure on the ballot
as contemplated by Subsection B, then the City will promptly commence
collection of the taxes authorized by this chapter.
   D.   Should a ballot measure contemplated by Subsection C fail to become
effective then, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the City
will suspend collection of the taxes authorized by this chapter.
   E.   Nothing in this Section is intended to, nor will it, limit the number
of times the City may suspend or implement tax collection authorized by this
chapter based upon the actions contemplated in Subsections B through C.
   F.   Revenue from any taxes collected between the time periods contemplated
by Subsections B through D may be retained by the City for general purposes and
need not be refunded. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-15: SUSPENSION OR REDUCTION:
Nothing in this Chapter requires the City Council to collect a tax; the City
Council may suspend or reduce tax rates imposed by this chapter by resolution
after a public hearing. (Ord. 1566, 4-10-2018)
3-8-16: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY TO AMEND:
Except for amendments that would increase the tax rate, impose the tax on
transactions and uses not previously subject to the tax, or be inconsistent
with the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may exercise all applicable
powers set forth in the Government Code including, without limitation, amending
this chapter by ordinance upon three affirmative votes by its members. It may,
in additional, adopt by ordinance or resolution such additional regulations
that may be necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1566, 4-
10-2018)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
General Licensing Provisions   1
Business License Fee Schedule   2
Burglary And Robbery Alarm Systems   3
Vehicles For Hire   4
Auctions And Auction Houses   5
Secondhand Stores And Junk Shops    6
Poolrooms And Billiard Rooms   7
Entertainment Regulations   8
Fortune Telling   9
Massage Establishments   10
Motion Picture, Radio And Television Production Regulations   11
Firearms Sales, Licensing Authority   12
Bingo Games For Charitable Purposes   13
Marijuana   14
Sidewalk Vendor Program   15
Home Sharing Permit Program   16
Cannabis Business Tax   17
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: License Required Generally; Compliance With Code
4-1-2: Administration
4-1-3: Fee Deemed Tax; Established By Resolution
4-1-4: Business Registration Fee
4-1-5: Unlawful Businesses
4-1-6: Disabled Veterans
4-1-7: Nonprofit And Charitable Organizations
4-1-8: Constitutional And Statutory Exemptions
4-1-9: Vocational Rehabilitation Applicants
4-1-10: Minors; Conditions
4-1-11: Exemption Statements
4-1-12: Business License Application; Basis For Fees
4-1-13: Record Keeping And Audits
4-1-14: False Statements Unlawful
4-1-15: Appeal Procedure; Business Classification Method
4-1-16: License Preparation
4-1-17: Investigation, Inspection And Fee
4-1-18: Issuance Of License
4-1-19: Fee Payment
4-1-20: Fee Error
4-1-21: Transferability
4-1-22: Duplicate Licenses
4-1-23: Display
4-1-24: Renewal
4-1-25: Vehicle Tags
4-1-26: Revocation Of License
4-1-27: Penalties And Interest
4-1-28: Credit For Penalties Paid
4-1-29: Fee Debt To City
4-1-30: Complaints Against Violators
4-1-31: Failure To Pay Fee
4-1-32: Small Income Businesses
4-1-33: Enforcement
4-1-34: Confidentiality Of Tax Records
4-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED GENERALLY; COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
It is unlawful for any person to commence or conduct in the City, any business
specified, named, designated or referred to in this Code without first having
procured a license from the City so to do as provided in this Title, or without
complying with all of the requirements or provisions of this Title and any
other ordinance of the City now existing or which may hereafter be adopted by
the City Council, and which refers or relates to such business. The commencing
or conducting of any such business without having first procured the license
and paid the required license fee or without having complied with any and all
such requirements or provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each
and every day that the business is so commenced and conducted. (Ord. 1054, 8-
16-1983)
4-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Manager shall have the discretion to designate any City official or
employee as the licensing authority under this Title to exercise responsibility
for administration of the license and fee requirements set forth herein in this
Title. (Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; amd. 2000 Code)
4-1-3: FEE DEEMED TAX; ESTABLISHED BY RESOLUTION:
The fees provided for in this Title are exclusively a tax imposed for revenue
purposes and imposed only with the intent of the City to have each commercial
activity, as herein provided, sustain its just share of the burden or expense
of local government, and defray the costs of administration of this Title.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-4: BUSINESS REGISTRATION FEE:
Any license fee for a license issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter
shall be denominated a business registration fee. In addition to any other
legend the licensing authority considers appropriate, the business registration
fee document shall carry on its face the following legend:
This business registration fee document does not constitute a permit to engage
in any business. In appropriate cases when required by City ordinance a
separate permit is issued.
(Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-5: UNLAWFUL BUSINESSES:
No license shall be issued for any business which is prohibited within the City
by this Code or by any ordinance of the City. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-6: DISABLED VETERANS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, every soldier, sailor or
marine of the United States of America, who has received an honorable discharge
or release from active duty under honorable conditions from the service and who
is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter
of this State, shall have the right to peddle and vend any goods, wares or
merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating
liquor, without payment of any license fee; and, the licensing authority shall
issue to the soldier, sailor or marine without cost a license therefor, upon
presentation of proper and sufficient credentials; provided, however, that no
such business shall be commenced or continued by the soldier, sailor or marine
without first procuring the license herein referred to. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971;
amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-7: NONPROFIT AND CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS:
Nonprofit and charitable organizations not otherwise exempt from the payment of
a business license fee pursuant to section
4-1-8 shall pay a business license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
per year. The business license fee shall be subject to annual increases in
accordance with section
4-2-1. The licensing authority may require any information or evidence
necessary to establish nonprofit status. (Ord. 612, 10-28-1963; amd. Ord. 1643,
12-13-2022)
4-1-8: CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY EXEMPTIONS:
This Title shall not be construed to require the payment of a license fee by
any person engaging in business when such person or business is exempt by
virtue of the constitutions or applicable statutes of the United States or of
the State of California. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-1-9: VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION APPLICANTS:
Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this Title, the City Council
reserves the right to waive the payment of any license fee required under this
Title from any licensee who is recommended in writing to the City Council by
the Vocational Rehabilitation Bureau of the State Department of Education, as
worthy of consideration, and who, after personal interview of the applicant by
the City Council sitting as a committee of the whole, may be extended such a
privilege by the City Council. In case the privilege is so extended, the City
Council may fix such conditions as to the City Council may seem proper or
desirable in connection with the business, occupation or activity to be so
licensed and conducted by the applicant. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-10: MINORS; CONDITIONS:
Upon application therefor, and subject to any administrative requirements the
City Manager may prescribe, the licensing authority is authorized to issue a
license without payment of any license fee to any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years where the following conditions are present:
   A.   Minor person conducting business is currently enrolled in school not
above high school;
   B.   Business activity is conducted only outside of school hours or during
school vacation;
   C.   Business activity produces not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) in gross receipts during any calendar year, and any profits
therefrom, accrue only to the applicant;
   D.   Only the applicant and others under the age of eighteen (18) years
shall be employed in the business;
   E.   The applicant has filed with the licensing authority the written
consent of the parent or legal guardian, to issuance of the license. (Ord. 612,
10-28-1963; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-11: EXEMPTION STATEMENTS:
   A.   Interstate Commerce: Each person claiming exemption from payment of any
license fee provided for in this Title upon the grounds that the imposition of
such fee casts an undue burden upon his right to engage in commerce with
foreign nations, or among the several states, or conflicts with the regulation
of interstate commerce by the United States of America, shall file a verified
statement with the licensing authority of the City, disclosing the interstate
or other character of his business entitling him to such exemption. Such
statement shall include the name and location of the person for whom the orders
are to be solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or State manager,
if any, and his address; the kind of goods, wares, merchandise or services to
be delivered or performed; the place from which the same are to be shipped or
forwarded or the services performed; the method of solicitation or of taking
orders; the location of any warehouse, factory, or plant within the State; the
method of delivery; the applicant's residence, or any other facts necessary to
establish such claim of exemption. The applicant shall also be required to
furnish his fingerprints and thumbprints. A copy of the order blank, contract
form or other papers used by such person in taking orders shall be attached to
the affidavit. An application for exemption of license fee shall be filed with
the licensing authority and the applicant shall pay a fee of ten dollars
($10.00) for processing the application. If the application is approved by the
licensing authority, a certificate of exemption will be issued. The applicant
shall not conduct any business prior to the issuance of this certificate of
exemption. (Ord. 751, 12-28-1970; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
   B.   Filing Of Statement: Any person claiming a license exemption shall file
a verified statement with the licensing authority upon an application form
therefor approved by the licensing authority, stating the facts upon which the
exemption is claimed. The licensing authority shall, upon a proper showing
contained in the verified statement, issue a license or permit to the person
claiming exemption under this Section without payment to the City of the
license tax required by this Title. In addition to the above, the applicant
shall obtain from the licensing authority an identification card to be carried
on his person when conducting the business. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord.
1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-12: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION; BASIS FOR FEES:
   A.   Basis For Fee: In all cases, the amount of business license fee to be
paid under the provision of this Title, by any person, is based upon the number
of persons employed, or upon the number of square feet of floor space, or upon
square acre of space owned, leased, or rented, or upon the number of vehicles
used, or upon the number of machines or other devices used for any business,
enterprise, game or activity, or upon the number of rooms or units in any
building or structure.
   B.   Renewal Application: Before any person can obtain a business license
renewal, and prior to January 31 of each year, that person must file a business
license renewal application signed under penalty of perjury that all
information is true, with the licensing authority for guidance in ascertaining
the amount the person is required to pay or deposit, and provide the following
information: the number of employees employed by the person, or upon the number
of square feet of floor space, or upon square acre of space owned, leased, or
rented, or the number of vehicles used, or the number of machines or other
devices used for any business, enterprise, game or activity by the person, or
the number of rooms or units contained in the building or structure, for the
quarters in the calendar year during which the person was, or will actually be,
doing business in the City.
   C.   Initial Application: If a business is seeking its initial El Segundo
business license, that business shall, within the first five (5) days of
business activity (or upon a timely written request, the licensing authority
may grant an extension of time not to exceed 30 calendar days), file a business
registration application, signed under penalty of perjury that all information
is true, with the licensing authority for guidance in ascertaining the amount
the business is required to pay or deposit, showing the number of employees
employed by the business, or upon the number of square feet of floor space, or
upon square acres of space owned, leased, or rented, or the number of machines
or other devices used for any business, enterprise, game or activity by the
business, or the number of rooms or units contained in the building or
structure, for the quarters in the calendar year during which they will
actually be doing business in the City.
   D.   Maintain Records For Calculating Tax: Each person subject to any tax in
this Title shall retain records documenting the information upon which any
applicable tax is calculated and which shall support the calculation of tax
reflected on that person's return. Unless a subcontractor of a taxpayer has a
valid City business license, said records shall include records of the
taxpayer's subcontractors and the taxpayer shall be held responsible for the
failure of any of its subcontractors to maintain records necessary to calculate
any tax under this Title. Said records shall be kept for three (3) years from
the date upon which the tax to which the records related is due. Where no
records are available or those available are insufficient to calculate the tax
due hereunder, the City shall have the authority to determine the tax due. Upon
fifteen (15) days' notice (or upon a timely written request, the licensing
authority may grant an additional extension of time, not to exceed 15 calendar
days), a taxpayer or any business which the City contends should pay tax, must
make available to the City, within the City, all records requested by the City
relating to said tax.
   E.   Amount Due Per Statement: No statement shall be conclusive upon the
City, or upon any officer thereof, as to the matters therein set forth, or
otherwise, and the same shall not prejudice the right of the City to recover
any amount that may be ascertained to be due from the person, in addition to
the amount shown by the statement to be due, in case the statement should be
found to be incorrect.
   F.   Failure To Provide Information; Penalty: If any person required by this
Section to provide information fails to do so, the person shall be required to
pay a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day if the business employs ten
(10) or less employees or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day if the business
employs more than ten (10) employees until such time as the information
required by this Section is properly filed with the licensing authority. That
person shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter which shall be punishable
as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-13: RECORD KEEPING AND AUDITS:
Each person subject to any tax in this Title shall retain records documenting
the information upon which any applicable tax is calculated and which shall
support the calculation of tax reflected on that person's return. Said records
shall include records of the taxpayer's subcontractors. The taxpayer shall be
held responsible for the failure of any of the subcontractors to maintain
records necessary to calculate any tax under this Title. Said records shall be
kept for three (3) years from the date upon which the tax to which the records
relate is due. Where no records are available or those available are
insufficient to calculate the tax due hereunder, the City shall have the
authority to determine the tax due. Upon five (5) working days' notice, a
taxpayer or any business which the City contends should pay tax, must make
available to the City at City Hall in El Segundo all records requested by the
City relating to said tax. Failure to do so may result in a fine of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for every day, beyond the notice period, for which the person
fails to comply. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-14: FALSE STATEMENTS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person required to apply for a license and pay a
license fee under this Title to make any false statement on said application.
(Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983)
4-1-15: APPEAL PROCEDURE; BUSINESS CLASSIFICATION METHOD:
   A.   Hearing Request Procedure: Any applicant for a business license under
this Title, or any licensee hereunder, may appeal the amount of any tax,
interest or penalty that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been
erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Title, in
the manner provided herein. Within ten (10) days of the provision of an
interpretation of this Title, or of an opinion concerning this Title from a
license inspector, auditor, or designated City official, any party affected
thereby may pay the tax so assessed under protest and request a hearing before
the licensing authority or his/her designee. Said hearing shall be held within
thirty (30) days from the date of the first appeal and a final decision shall
be rendered at the hearing. Within ten (10) days from the date of the hearing,
an appeal of the licensing authority's decision may be filed with the City
Council. Within thirty (30) days from the date of the filing of the second
appeal, the matter shall be scheduled for hearing with the City Council.
However, appeal to the City Council may only be made when the dispute concerns
the accuracy of calculation of the amounts due, or the facts upon which a tax
assessment is based.
   B.   Claim To Appeal Final Decision: A claim appealing the final decision of
the licensing authority or of the City Council may be filed in writing, stating
under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded,
provided such claim is filed with the licensing authority within one year of
the date of payment.
   C.   Nonpayment; Penalty And Interest Continue: If the full amount of the
tax and any penalty and interest due is not paid, there shall be no rights of
appeal, and penalty and interest shall continue to run. (Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988;
amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
   D.   Loss Of Appeal Rights: Any appeal rights provided for herein are lost
if the procedures set forth herein are not fully complied with and if the
appeal is not made in writing with the licensing authority within the time
specified herein. (Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; 2000 Code)
4-1-16: LICENSE PREPARATION:
It shall be the duty of the licensing authority to prepare in duplicate a
license under this Title for every person liable to pay a license fee
hereunder; provided, that the licensing authority may prepare such additional
number of duplicate copies thereof as the business and accounting practices of
the City may require. Each license shall show the amount of the fee therefor,
the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom issued, the
business license, and if a fixed or established place of business, the location
or place where the business is to be commenced or conducted. All licenses under
this Title shall be signed by the licensing authority or his authorized deputy.
(Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-17: INVESTIGATION, INSPECTION AND FEE:
   A.   Investigation By City: Notwithstanding any provisions of this Title,
when in the discretion of the licensing authority it shall be deemed necessary,
an application for a business license or permit, or renewal thereof, shall be
forwarded to the appropriate departments of the City, including, but not
limited to, City Manager, City Attorney, Police Department, Fire Department,
and Community Development Department for investigation and/or inspection.
   B.   Time Limit: The appropriate departments shall conduct any investigation
and/or inspection to determine whether said license or permit should be issued
in accordance with the appropriate provisions of this Code. A period of not
less than thirty (30) days shall be allowed for the purpose of conducting said
services.
   C.   Fees: In addition to the applicable licensing and permit fees, all
investigation and inspection fees shall be due and payable at the time the
application is filed. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord.
1639, 9-20-2022)
4-1-18: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
When the required license fee has been paid and all other provisions of this
Title have been complied with, the licensing authority shall issue the original
license provided for in this Title to the licensee named in the license, and
shall retain the first duplicate copy of the license on file in his office.
Other duplicate copies, if any, shall be filed as the business and accounting
practices of the City may from time to time require. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971;
amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-19: FEE PAYMENT:
Annual license fees shall be due and payable in advance on January 1. A license
fee for a new business commenced on or after July 1 of any year shall be
prorated on a semiannual basis, except that no prorated fee shall be less than
twelve dollars ($12.00). (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983)
4-1-20: FEE ERROR:
No error or mistake on the part of the licensing authority or otherwise in the
determination, statement or collection of the amount of any license fee shall
prevent or prejudice the collection by or for the City what shall be actually
due from any person commencing or conducting any business subject to a license
under this Title. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-21: TRANSFERABILITY:
   A.   Transferability Generally: Licenses are nontransferable; however, an
owner of a relocated business may obtain a license for the business at the new
location for the unexpired calendar year upon surrendering the license issued
for the former place of business and the payment of a six dollar ($6.00) fee.
   B.   Acquisition Of Business: Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the
contrary, where a business that is properly licensed under this Code is the
subject of an acquisition, merger or reorganization and the nature of such
business will remain substantially the same as prior to the acquisition, merger
or reorganization, the owner or new owner, as the case may be, may obtain a
license for the business for the unexpired calendar year upon surrendering the
previously issued license and the payment of a six dollar ($6.00) fee. The
owner or new owner, as the case may be, shall provide documentation verifying
such acquisition, merger or reorganization to the satisfaction of the Chief
Financial Officer. The acquisition, merger or reorganization of an ongoing
business that is properly licensed under this Code where the nature of such
business will remain substantially the same as prior to the acquisition, merger
or reorganization shall not be deemed to be a new business for purposes of
Title 4 of this Code. (Ord. 1294, 2-2-1999; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
4-1-22: DUPLICATE LICENSES:
The licensing authority may on receipt of an affidavit filed in the office of
the licensing authority by or on behalf of any licensee stating that any
license issued under this Title has been lost or destroyed, issue a duplicate
of the license to the licensee therein named. A charge of three dollars ($3.00)
shall be made for each such duplicate license issued, which sum shall be paid
into the Treasury of the City to the credit of the General Fund. (Ord. 1054, 8-
16-1983; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-23: DISPLAY:
Every person having a license issued under the provisions of this Title and
commencing or conducting the business therein mentioned at a fixed place shall
keep the license conspicuously posted and exhibited in the place of business
while the same is in force. Every person having the license and not having a
fixed place of business shall carry or transport the license with him at all
times while conducting the business. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-24: RENEWAL:
Every person having a license issued under the provisions of this Title shall
exhibit the same to the licensing authority or his authorized deputy when
applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any police
officer of the City or by any inspector or officer thereof authorized to issue
or inspect licenses or collect license fees. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord.
1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-25: VEHICLE TAGS:
In all instances in which a license is required under the provisions of this
Title and a vehicle is used in conducting the business, the licensee shall
request and the licensing authority shall furnish the licensee with a suitable
license tag or plate therefor, which tag or plate shall be permanently
displayed in a seven inch (7") square in the lower corner of the windshield
farthest removed from the driver. The sum of fifty cents ($0.50) for the tag or
plate shall be paid by the licensee. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-
15-1988)
4-1-26: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under this Title are granted and accepted by all parties
receiving licenses with the express understanding that the City Council may
revoke the same at any time if satisfied that any of the conditions of the
license or terms of this Title have been violated, that the license was
obtained by fraudulent representation or that the holder of the license is an
unfit person to be trusted with the privileges granted by the license;
provided, however, that no license shall be revoked without first giving the
holder an opportunity to appear before the City Council in his own behalf. On
the revocation of the license, no part of the money in the hands of the City
shall be returned but the license fee shall be forfeited to the City. When the
license of any person is revoked for any cause, no new or other license shall
be granted to the same person within six (6) months from the date of the
revocation. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-27: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   Other Than Fixed Place Of Business: A license for a business from other
than a fixed place of business within the City is due and payable upon the
first day of business activity, and delinquent thereafter.
   B.   New Business, Fixed Place: A license for a new business with a fixed
place of business within the City is due and payable upon the first day of
business activity, and delinquent five (5) days thereafter.
   C.   Previously Licensed Business, Fixed Place: A license for a business
previously licensed, or doing business in the City during the prior tax year
from a fixed place of business, is due and payable January 1, and delinquent
February 1.
   D.   Interest: Any person who fails to pay any tax required to be paid by
this Title shall pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or
fraction thereof, on the amounts of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the
date on which the tax first became delinquent until paid. Interest shall run
during any period of time for which an extension of time has been granted by
the City for payment of the tax. Interest required by any of the provisions of
this Title shall not be subject to waiver or compromise except as the City
Council may direct. Said interest shall not be compounded, but shall be on
principal only.
   E.   Penalties: All taxes imposed by this Title shall be subject to the
following penalties.
      1.   Delinquency: Any person who fails to pay any tax, or any fraction
thereof required to be paid by this Title within the time required, shall pay a
penalty of twenty percent (20%) per month of the amount of the unpaid tax. Such
penalty shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the tax for any calendar
year for each year that the tax is unpaid. This penalty shall accrue on the
first day of each calendar month for which the tax remains unpaid.
      2.   Fraud: If the City official administering the tax, after notice to
taxpayer and hearing, determines that the nonpayment of any tax due under this
Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of ninety percent (90%) of the amount of the
unpaid tax shall be added thereto, in addition to any other penalties set forth
in this Section. Where, after notice and hearing to the taxpayer, the City
determines that a corporate director, officer, or shareholder is responsible
for the fraud resulting in the nonpayment of the tax of a corporation, the City
may designate the tax, interest, and penalties unpaid, including the penalty
provided for in this subsection due to said fraud as a personal debt of said
director, officer, or shareholder.
      3.   Merger Of Interest And Penalties: Such interest as is accrued, and
every penalty imposed under the provisions of this Section, shall become a part
of the tax required to be paid under this Title.
      4.   Penalties On Principle: All penalties imposed hereunder shall be
calculated on principle only, and shall not be compounded. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-
1996)
4-1-28: CREDIT FOR PENALTIES PAID:
   A.   Past Penalties Paid: A credit against the business license tax for past
penalties paid shall be granted beginning with the tax due in January 1992, to
be calculated and administered as follows:
      1.   For Tax Due January 1, 1992: Any taxpayer who has been assessed and
has, by September 10, 1991, paid a penalty for the tax year 1989 and/or 1990
and/or 1991, shall receive a credit in a sum equal to fifty percent (50%) of
the penalty paid, to be applied against the business license tax due January 1,
1992 and years thereafter. Said credit shall only be effective if the entire
tax (less the credit) is paid before February 1, 1992. As provided for in
subsection A3 below, the credit granted hereunder may be carried over from year
to year until exhausted.
      2.   For Subsequent Tax Years: Any taxpayer who has been assessed a
penalty and paid that penalty by September 30 in the year prior to the January
1 a tax is due, may claim a credit against that tax in the amount of fifty
percent (50%) of said penalty paid if the tax (less the credit) is paid before
February 1 of the year in which the tax is due.
      3.   For All Tax Years: City staff shall calculate the credit granted
hereunder and reflect the amount of said credit upon tax statements mailed to
taxpayers.
   B.   Amount Of Reduction: No tax, to which the credit granted hereunder is
applied, shall be reduced by said credit to less than fifty percent (50%) of
the amount due before application of the credit, in any tax year. However,
where the amount of the credit exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the tax due in
any given year, the unused balance of the credit may be carried over to future
tax years and applied to the tax then due so long as the full amount of the tax
(less the credit) is paid by February 1 of the year in which the tax is due.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-29: FEE DEBT TO CITY:
The amount of any license fee imposed by this Title shall be deemed a debt to
the City, and any person commencing or conducting any business without having a
license under this Title so to do shall be liable to an action by the City in
any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license fee imposed
by this Title on the business. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-30: COMPLAINTS AGAINST VIOLATORS:
It is the duty of the Chief of Police to cause a complaint to be made against
all persons violating any of the provisions of this Title, and as soon as he
has knowledge of the same, to deliver to the licensing authority the names of
all persons not paying a license whom he believes should be charged with the
payment of a license fee. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-31: FAILURE TO PAY FEE:
The conviction and punishment of any person for commencing or conducting any
business without a license as required by the provisions of this Title, or
without a special permit from the City Council when required, shall not excuse
or exempt the person from the payment of any license fee due or unpaid under
this Title at the time of the conviction, and nothing contained in this Title
shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of any of the provisions
of this Title. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-32: SMALL INCOME BUSINESSES:
Upon the filing of an application for a small income business license and an
affidavit stating, among other things, that the volume of contemplated business
would be so small that the regular business license fee therefor would impose a
hardship of unfair proportions; and upon the City Council's finding and
determining that the representations are true and correct, the City Council may
order the issuance of a small income business license which shall be for the
current fiscal year, and shall be issued upon payment of a ten dollar ($10.00)
license fee. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-33: ENFORCEMENT:
All police officers of the City and all other authorized persons shall have and
exercise their power to enter, free of charge, any place of business for which
a license is required and provided, and to demand the exhibition of the license
for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of
the business, and the person then and there shall exhibit the license. (Ord.
612, 10-28-1963)
4-1-34: CONFIDENTIALITY OF TAX RECORDS:
The City shall retain as confidential all tax statements, returns and receipts
submitted or provided under this Title, any records required to be submitted by
a taxpayer hereunder and any business data disclosed to the City as a result of
any tax audit hereunder. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
CHAPTER 2
BUSINESS LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Fees Paid To City
4-2-2: Branch Establishments
4-2-3: Tax Credit
4-2-4: Businesses Generally
4-2-5: New Businesses
4-2-6: Refund Of Tax On Property Available For Rent Or Lease
4-2-7: Advertising
4-2-8: Agents, Solicitors And Salesmen
4-2-9: Amusements
4-2-10: Apartment Houses And Apartment House Complexes
4-2-11: Automobile And Truck Wrecking Or Dismantling
4-2-12: Bankrupt Stock And Fire Sales
4-2-13: Barbershops
4-2-14: Beauty Parlors
4-2-15: Billiard And Pool Rooms
4-2-16: Bowling Alleys
4-2-17: Chemical, Petroleum, Cement Or Cryogenic Products; Smelters Or
Refineries
4-2-18: Christmas Tree Sales
4-2-19: Circuses, Wild West Shows Or Sideshows
4-2-20: Coin Operated Machines Or Devices
4-2-21: Concert Or Opera
4-2-22: Contractors
4-2-23: Dances And Dance Schools
4-2-24: Delivery Vehicles
4-2-25: Drive-In Theaters
4-2-26: Food Caterers (Vehicle)
4-2-27: Home Occupations
4-2-28: Hotels, Motels, Auto Courts And Lodging Houses
4-2-29: Junk Collectors
4-2-30: Lawn Service And Window Cleaning
4-2-31: Loans
4-2-32: Lumber And Building Material Yards, Junkyards And Nurseries
4-2-33: Motion Pictures Or Television (Commercial Use)
4-2-34: Parking Lots
4-2-35: Peddling
4-2-36: Rest, Convalescent, Guest And Family Care Homes; Childcare Nurseries
4-2-37: Rubbish Or Garbage Collection
4-2-38: Schools (Private)
4-2-39: Street Stands
4-2-40: Taxicab Or Automobile For Hire
4-2-41: Theaters And Shows
4-2-42: Transient Vendors, Merchants
4-2-43: Warehouses
4-2-44: Tax Reductions And Suspensions
4-2-1: FEES PAID TO CITY:
   A.   The amount of license fee to be paid to the city by persons commencing
or conducting any business subject to this chapter are set forth in this
chapter.
   B.   Beginning on January 1, 2025, license fees imposed in this title will
be increased annually each January 1 on a percentage basis using the percentage
increase in the consumer price index ("CPI") for all urban consumers as
calculated by the United States department of labor, bureau of labor
statistics, for the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim area, all items, calculated
as follows:
      1.   The five (5) most recent annual CPI percentages are added together
and then divided by five (5) to derive the five-year average CPI percentage
(“ACPI”); and
      2.   The ACPI is multiplied by the amount of existing license fees. The
product of that multiplication is added to the amount of the license fees
imposed by the city for the previous calendar year.
      3.   For purposes of this section, an “annual CPI percentage” is the
percentage change in CPI based upon comparing a twelve-month period ending on
March 31 with the subsequent twelve-month period ending on March 31. For
example, and without limitation, on January 1, 2025, the ACPI will be
calculated using the five (5) years of CPI percentages that include the
following time periods: March 31, 2019 to March 31, 2020; March 31, 2020 to
March 31, 2021; and calculated in the same manner for the subsequent years with
the final and fifth year CPI percentage measured from March 31, 2023 to March
31, 2024.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, license fees imposed
in this chapter will be increased by a minimum of one cent ($0.01) every two
(2) calendar years. (Ord. 1439, 4-13-2010; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-2: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
Every person owning or operating a business which is subject to the provisions
of this chapter shall pay a single license fee for all branch locations or
separate places of business within the city. In addition to the single license
fee, such persons shall pay an additional nine dollars ($9.00) per year for
each branch location or separate place of business within the city. (Ord. 1054,
8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-3: TAX CREDIT:
See Section
3-2-4. (Ord. 1439, 4-13-2010; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-4: BUSINESSES GENERALLY:
   A.   Unclassified Businesses; Fee Schedule: Every person engaged in a
business not specifically mentioned or classified in this chapter shall pay a
license fee in accordance with the following schedule:
      1.   Employees: A basic tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
year, which shall cover the first five (5) employees and one hundred thirty-
eight dollars ($138.00) per year for each employee in excess of five (5)
employees; and
      2.   Floor Area: In addition, each such person shall pay a tax per square
foot of floor area occupied for a business purpose in excess of two thousand
(2,000) square feet in accordance with the following chart.
 
Total Floor Area   Rate Per Square Foot
2,001 to 5,000     $0.26
5,001 to 50,000    $0.27
50,001 to 100,000  $0.28
100,001 to 250,000 $0.29
250,001 and above  $0.30
 
A tax of fourteen cents ($0.14) per square foot shall be imposed on vacant
space available for rent or lease for business purposes, said feet to be
payable by the person with the right to possession of the property; and
      3.   Additional Location: In addition, each such person shall pay nine
dollars ($9.00) per year for each additional business location within the city.
      4.   Tax Credit: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a credit shall be granted
against the tax imposed by this section whenever a business subject to the tax
imposed by this chapter generates sales and/or use tax in the year immediately
preceding the year in which the tax is due. The credit shall be applied to the
business registration tax due for the following year. The credit shall be equal
to fifty percent (50%) of the portion of the sales and/or use tax generated
which was awarded to the city during the twelve (12) month period ending on
June 30 preceding the date the tax is due. However, the amount of said credit
shall under no circumstances be calculated to be greater than the total amount
of tax due.
      5.   Credit For Sales And Use Tax Revenue: Notwithstanding the foregoing,
a business which increases the amount of sales and use tax revenue received by
the city from the business or its activities above its "baseline", as defined
hereunder, shall receive a credit to the business license tax imposed under
this chapter equal to the dollar amount of the increase above the baseline. The
amount of business license tax credit shall be determined annually and is
subject to approval by the city manager. Said credit shall be applied to the
business license tax owed in the next fiscal year only; provided, that, in no
event, shall the credit exceed the amount of business license tax owed.
         a.   Calculation Of Baseline: For the purposes of this subsection, the
"baseline" for a business shall be calculated as follows:
            (1)   For the first fiscal year in which a credit is granted, the
"baseline" shall equal the sum of sales and use tax received by the city from
the business and its activities and the business license tax imposed by the
city in the prior fiscal year.
            (2)   For each subsequent fiscal year, the baseline amount
established under subsection A5a(1) of this section shall be recalculated as
follows: the sales and use tax component of the baseline shall be adjusted to
reflect any increase from the prior fiscal year in the consumer price index as
established in the report of consumer prices for all urban consumers for the
Los Angeles-Anaheim- Riverside standard metropolitan statistical area. Said
adjustment shall be based on the most recent month for which such price index
figure is available on the date the adjustment is calculated. The business
license tax component of the baseline shall be recalculated to equal the amount
of business license tax imposed on the business under the fee schedule in
effect at the time the recalculation is made, including any automatic increase
established under this code; provided, that, in no event, shall the amount of
business license tax be less than the amount under subsection A5a(1) of this
section.
         b.   Eligibility: A business is not eligible to receive any business
license tax credits under this subsection A5 while the business is receiving a
business license tax credit under section
3-2-4 of this code.
         c.   Business Relation Program: The business license tax credit
established under this subsection A5 shall be known as the business relation
program of the city.
   B.   Employee Defined: For the purpose of this section, the term "employee"
shall mean any person employed by the business and shall include an independent
contractor and persons employed by the independent contractor, unless the
independent contractor and/or persons employed by the independent contractor
has a valid city business license as prescribed in chapter 1 of this title and
this chapter.
   C.   Number Of Employees Determined: The total number of employees for each
business for purposes of this section shall be determined by averaging the
total number of employees employed by each business during each of the four (4)
calendar quarters preceding the date the tax is paid.
   D.   Floor Area Defined: For the purpose of this section, "floor area" means
the total floor space in terms of square footage occupied by an owner, lessee
or renter in a building except:
      1.   Elevator shafts;
      2.   Stairwells;
      3.   Courts or atriums, uncovered and open to the sky;
      4.   Rooms exclusively housing building operating equipment; and
      5.   Parking areas. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1439, 4-13-2010; Ord.
1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-5: NEW BUSINESSES:
   A.   Initial Tax: Any business not specifically mentioned or classified in
this chapter which is locating, or doing business in the city for the first
time shall, before receiving a business license from the city, pay the tax
imposed by section
4-2-4 of this chapter. The amount of said tax shall be calculated based upon
the taxpayer's best estimate of the average quarterly number of employees,
square feet, and business locations which the business will have within the
city the remainder of that calendar year.
   B.   Adjustment: Each new business shall, upon renewal of its business
license in the first full year following the year it began doing business in
the city, be subject to an adjustment. This adjustment shall be based upon the
difference between the estimates of employees, and square feet occupied
supplied by the business to the city at its initial application, and the actual
average quarterly number of employees, and square feet, and business locations
which the taxpayer had during its initial year of doing business in the city.
The licensing authority shall recalculate this initial tax based upon these
actual figures and, if the resulting amount is greater than the actual tax paid
by the taxpayer in the preceding year, shall impose a surcharge to be collected
at the same time, and in the same way as the renewal tax. If the actual tax is
less than the initial tax, the licensing authority shall apply a credit against
the renewal tax in the amount of the difference. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd.
2000 Code)
4-2-6: REFUND OF TAX ON PROPERTY AVAILABLE FOR RENT OR LEASE:
   A.   Any taxpayer who has paid the tax for property available for rent or
lease imposed by subsection
4-2-4A2 of this chapter, who leases all or any part of the property by June 30
of the year in which the tax was due and paid, and the new occupant has paid a
square footage tax for its occupancy, shall be entitled to a refund up to one
hundred percent (100%).
   B.   If all or any part of the property is rented by December 31 of the year
in which the tax is paid, and the new occupant has paid a square footage tax
for its occupancy, the taxpayer shall receive a refund up to fifty percent
(50%).
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to apply for the refund
authorized herein, and to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the licensing
authority that the prerequisites to receipt of the refund have been satisfied.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
4-2-7: ADVERTISING:
   A.   Billboards Or Signboards: Every person engaged in the business of
contracting, maintaining, using, or leasing billboards or signboards, or
posting, sticking, tacking, or affixing or painting bills or signs, or both
upon the same, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per annum for each such billboard or signboard.
   B.   Lights: Every person advertising by means of portable searchlights, or
arc lights, or light producing apparatus or equipment, shall pay a business
license tax of thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) per quarter. The
license shall be subject to compliance with all requirements of the traffic
ordinances and regulations of the City.
   C.   Vehicle Signs: Every person advertising by means of portable signs
mounted on vehicles, when not in connection with any business licensed under
subsection D of this Section, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. The license shall be subject to compliance
with all requirements of the traffic ordinances and regulations of the City.
   D.   Sound Trucks: Every person advertising by means of sound trucks,
portable loudspeakers, or sound- producing apparatus or equipment, shall pay a
business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. The
license shall be subject to compliance with all requirements of the traffic
ordinances and regulations of the City. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643,
12-13-2022)
4-2-8: AGENTS, SOLICITORS AND SALESMEN:
Agents, solicitors, and salesmen selling or soliciting, or taking orders for
the sale or furnishing of any paintings, pictures, portraits, photographs,
orders for advertising or for any goods, wares, merchandise, or service at
retail not otherwise provided for herein, when not in connection with any fixed
place of business within the City licensed under this Title, shall pay a
business license tax of forty-five dollars ($45.00) per day, or one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for each agent, salesman, or solicitor. All
such sales, solicitations and/or order taking are prohibited between the hours
of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996;
amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-9: AMUSEMENTS:
   A.   Amusement Center 1 :
      1.   Definition: An "amusement center" is defined as any place to which
the public is admitted or invited, where eight (8) or more coin-operated
amusement machines are maintained, operated or available for operation.
      2.   Tax Amount: Every person operating an amusement center shall pay a
business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
      3.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to establish,
maintain, conduct, or keep open any "amusement center", as defined in this
Section, within the corporate limits of the City without first having obtained
a permit, in writing, from the licensing authority. In any application for an
amusement center, the licensing authority may require, in addition to other
information, that the applicant furnish the information necessary to enable the
Chief of Police to make an investigation of any prior criminal activity of the
applicant, or any operator of the amusement center.
      4.   Conditions For Approval: After an investigation by the Chief of
Police, the licensing authority shall approve the application for the amusement
center permit, or renewal of such permit if he finds:
         a.   A completed written application form has therefor been filed; and
         b.   The required license fee has therefor been paid to the City
Treasurer; and
         c.   As a result of his investigation, all applicable provisions of
this subsection with regard to such permit application have been met; and
         d.   That the operation by the applicant will be carried on in a
building, structure, and location which complies with and meets all of the
health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements, and standards of the
laws of the State and this Code applicable to such business operation; and
         e.   That the applicant, his employee, agent, or any person connected,
or associated with applicant as a partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate, or manager, has not been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction by final judgment of an offense involving the maintenance of a
nuisance, in connection with the same or similar business operation; and
         f.   That the business is not a public nuisance, or has not been a
public nuisance at any time within the last five (5) years; and
         g.   That the applicant, his employee, agent, or any person connected,
or associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate, or manager, has not knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the Chief of Police; and
         h.   That the applicant has not had a similar type permit previously
revoked for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant has shown a
material change in circumstances since the date of revocation.
   B.   Amusements Generally: Every person operating a business where an
admission, fare, or fee is charged or made, or a collection or contribution is
received (and which are not otherwise provided for in this Chapter) for
entrance to amusements, such as exhibitions, shows, games, rides, tent
performances, merry-go-rounds, carousels, shoot-the-chutes, shooting galleries,
Ferris wheels, pig slides, ball games, dart games, roller coasters, grunt
derbies, whip rides, scooter rides, sideshows, illusions and other amusements,
or concessions similar in character to those, or any of those hereinabove
named, shall pay a business license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per
day, or one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month, and shall obtain a
special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such
activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not
prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  15-2-15 of this Code, video arcade
4-2-10: APARTMENT HOUSES AND APARTMENT HOUSE COMPLEXES:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this Section, an "apartment house
complex" is defined as two (2) or more individual buildings containing dwelling
units located upon the same property, or on contiguous property under the same
ownership.
   B.   Tax Amount: Every person owningan apartment house or apartment house
complex, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per year for up to the first three (3) dwelling units; and one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for each additional dwelling unit;
provided, however, that the dwelling units used in computing the obligation to
pay the business license tax shall be the dwelling units rented or leased, and
the dwelling units held for rent or lease shall not include a dwelling unit
occupied by the owner. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-11: AUTOMOBILE AND TRUCK WRECKING OR DISMANTLING:
Every person engaging in the business of automobile, truck wrecking or
dismantling, and/or operating an automobile, truck wrecking or dismantling
yard, and/or outdoor yard of similar character, shall pay a business license
tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, and shall obtain a special
permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The
City Council may condition such permit in any manner not prohibited by law.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-12: BANKRUPT STOCK AND FIRE SALES:
Every person conducting bankrupt stock sales, fire sales, damaged goods sales,
and sales of similar character (not at auction), shall pay a business license
tax of thirteen dollars and fifty cents ($13.50) per month, forty-five dollars
($45.00) per quarter, or one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, and
shall obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging
in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner
not prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-13: BARBERSHOPS:
Every person operating a barbershop shall pay a business license tax of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643,
12-13-2022)
4-2-14: BEAUTY PARLORS:
Every person operating a beauty parlor and similar businesses shall pay a
business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-15: BILLIARD AND POOLROOMS:
Every person operating a billiard room and/or poolroom shall pay a business
license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, which shall
include the right to sell cigars, tobacco, soft drinks, chewing gum, and
confections, subject to first obtaining a special permit as provided by
Sections
4-7-1 and
4-7-2 of this Title. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-16: BOWLING ALLEYS:
Every person operating a bowling academy, bowling alley, bowling center, or
similar business shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) basic, plus four dollars ($4.00) per lane per year. A license granted
under this Section shall include the right to sell bowling equipment,
paraphernalia, and bowling apparel, but shall not include the right to conduct
a cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, or refreshment, or confectionery stand or
concession, or any other type of business, except as specifically authorized
above. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-17: CHEMICAL, PETROLEUM, CEMENT OR CRYOGENIC PRODUCTS; SMELTERS OR
REFINERIES:
Every person owning or operating a business engaged in the processing or
manufacturing of chemical, petroleum, cement or cryogenic products; and every
person owning or operating a business engaged in smelting or refining shall pay
a business license fee in accordance with the following schedule:
   A.   A basic fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year which shall
cover the first five (5) employees.
   B.   One hundred thirty-eight dollars ($138.00) per year for each employee
in excess of five (5) employees.
   C.   One thousand five hundred thirty one dollars ($1,531.00) per year per
square acre of space owned, leased or rented for the purpose of producing,
manufacturing or processing chemical, petroleum, cement or cryogenic products;
or for the purpose of smelting or refining.
   D.   Thirty six dollars ($36.00) per year for each vehicle in excess of six
thousand (6,000) pounds (gross vehicle weight) owned or operated in the conduct
of the business.
   E.   Eleven dollars ($11.00) per year for each additional business location
within the City.
   F.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a credit shall be granted against the
tax imposed by this Section whenever a business subject to the tax imposed by
this Chapter generates sales and/or use tax in the year immediately preceding
the year in which the tax is due. The credit shall be applied to the business
registration tax due for the following year. The credit shall be equal to fifty
percent (50%) of the portion of the sales and/or use tax generated which was
awarded to the City during the twelve (12) month period ending on the June 30
preceding the date the tax is due. However, the amount of said credit shall
under no circumstances be calculated to be greater than the total amount of tax
due.
   G.   Any person subject to this Section paying a delinquent utility user tax
or a tax concerning which, in the opinion of the City Manager, a good faith
dispute exists may enter into a settlement agreement to be ratified by the City
Council which entitles the taxpayer to a credit equal to seventy five percent
(75%) of the paid delinquent or disputed utility user tax (excluding penalties
and interest). Said credit must be applied for within three (3) tax years from
the date of payment. The maximum credit to be applied against the business
license tax in any year shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the total credit
available hereunder. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-18: CHRISTMAS TREE SALES:
Every person engaged in the business of Christmas tree sales shall pay a
business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-19: CIRCUSES, WILD WEST SHOWS OR SIDESHOWS:
Every person operating a circus or wild west show, not including any sideshows,
shall pay a business license tax for the first day of two hundred dollars
($200.00), and one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per day thereafter. A
sideshow shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per sideshow for the first day, and fifty dollars ($50.00) per
sideshow per day for each day thereafter. Every such person shall obtain a
special permit from the City Council to operate such circus, wild west show, or
sideshow, prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition
such permit in any manner not prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd.
Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-20: COIN-OPERATED MACHINES OR DEVICES:
   A.   Vending Machines (Persons Not Primarily Engaged In Business Of Renting,
Leasing Or Operating):
      1.   Every person not primarily engaged in the business of renting,
leasing, or operating coin-operated vending machines for which a license is
required by subsection B of this Section, who places, maintains, and operates,
or offers for operation, a vending machine or machines, or a vending device or
vending devices which vends or delivers merchandise of any character, or
provides a service for which the coin or coins are inserted, shall pay a
business license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year per vending machine or
vending device.
      2.   This Section shall not apply to subsections C, D and E of this
Section.
   B.   Coin-Operated Devices (Persons Engaged In Business Of Renting, Leasing
Or Operating):
      1.   Every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or
operating coin-operated vending machines shall pay a business license tax of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
      2.   This Section shall not apply to subsections C, D and E of this
Section.
   C.   Automatic Laundry And Dry Cleaning Establishments: Every person engaged
in the laundry and dry cleaning business where coin-operated laundry and dry
cleaning machines are used in the operation of the business, and which are not
preempted by section 16002.2 of the State Business and Professions Code, shall
pay a business license tax of two dollars ($2.00) per year per machine;
provided, however, that the business license tax shall not be less than one
hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year.
   D.   Automatic Washers And Dryers (Persons Not Primarily Engaged In Renting,
Leasing Or Operating): Every person not primarily engaged in the business of
renting, leasing, or operating coin- operated automatic washers and dryers who
places, maintains, and operates, or offers for operation automatic washers and
dryers for which coins are inserted, shall pay a business license tax of two
dollars ($2.00) per year per machine.
   E.   Automatic Washers And Dryers (Persons Engaged In Business Of Renting,
Leasing Or Operating): Every person renting, leasing, or operating coin-
operated automatic washers and dryers, whose business is limited exclusively to
the renting, leasing, or operating of such machines shall pay a business
license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year.
   F.   Devices With Amusement Features: Every person owning a coin, or token
operated machine or device having an amusement or skill feature connected
therewith, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars
($103.00) per year per machine. Licenses granted under this Section shall be
revocable at any time, at the pleasure of the City Council for any reason which
the City Council may deem appropriate.
   G.   Seal Affixed To Devices: Every person owning a machine or device, which
is required to pay a business license tax under the provisions of this Title,
shall have conspicuously affixed thereto a legible and current official seal or
sticker issued by the license collector of the City for such machine or device
licensed; the seal shall include the year of issuance, and the number of the
license under which it is issued. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-21: CONCERT OR OPERA:
Every person operating a concert, opera, entertainment, or other show,
exhibition or performance not exceeding two (2) performances during any one
calendar month shall pay a business license tax of four dollars ($4.00) per
month, and shall obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior
to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in
any manner not prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-22: CONTRACTORS:
   A.   General, Electrical, Plumbing: Every person engaged in the business of
contracting, in any of the following trades, shall pay a business license tax
of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year: general building contractor,
general building contractor (speculative), electrical contractor, and plumbing
contractor. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
   B.   Definitions; Provisions:
      1.   General Building Contractor Defined: A "general building
contractor", as used in this Chapter, is a contractor or person whose principal
contracting business is in connection with any structure built, or to be built,
for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable
property of any kind, requiring in its construction the use of two (2) or more
unrelated building trades or crafts or to do or to superintend the whole or any
part thereof.
      2.   General Building Contractor (Speculative) Defined: A "general
building contractor (speculative)", as used in this Chapter, is a contractor or
person who builds or constructs a building or structure on property owned,
possessed or controlled by him for the purpose of selling or disposing of the
same during, or subsequent to, construction or erection thereof.
      3.   Additional Fee: Nothing contained within this Chapter shall be
construed to permit any general building contractor or any general building
contractor (speculative) to operate, in addition to his regular business of
general building contracting or general building contracting (speculative) any
one specialized building trade business or subcontracting business, for which a
sub or specialty contractor's license is required, without the payment of an
additional fee as prescribed for the business by subsection E of this Section.
      4.   Architect Or Engineer: Provided, further, that any architect or
engineer who, in addition to his regular professional duties of designing and
superintending the design and erection of any building or structure, also acts
in the capacity of a "general building contractor" or "general building
contractor (speculative)" as defined in this Section, or who subcontracts or
employs labor to perform any or all of the work involved either acting for
himself or the owner of the building shall pay the same fee as a general
building contractor or a general building contractor (speculative), as the case
may be.
      5.   Exclusion: The provisions of this Section do not include anyone who
merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating them into or
consuming them in the performance of the work of a general building contractor
or general building contractor (speculative).
      6.   Furnish Proof Of Type Of Employment: Every person who represents or
claims that the work being done or performed by him is being done or performed
by the hour or by the day's work shall furnish to the license collector or his
authorized deputy, if asked, an affidavit from his employer or from the owner
of the building or structure being erected or constructed stating the nature of
the work, the wages, fee or commission being paid and the location of the work.
Any person holding a State contractor's license will be considered a contractor
if he superintends or contracts for a fee the erection or construction of any
building or structure in the City and shall be required to pay the same license
fee as a general building contractor. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983)
   C.   Lathing And Plastering: Lathing and plastering contractors shall pay a
business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
   D.   Repairs And Alterations:
      1.   Fee Imposed: Exceptions: Every person engaged in the business of
minor construction, alterations, improvements, or repair work, or every person
undertaking any project by one or more contracts, the aggregate contract price
of which, for labor, materials, and all other items is less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), shall pay a business license tax of twenty four dollars
($24.00) per year. This type of license shall not be issued, or apply in any
case wherein the work of construction is only a part of a larger or major
operation, whether undertaken by the same or a different contractor, or in
which a division of the operation is made on contracts of amounts less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the purpose of evading the obtaining of a
license, or the payment of a license tax under this Title or any of the
provisions thereof.
      2.   Accidents Or Fire Damage: Wherein repairs to damages resulting from
accident or fire do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) total
valuation, a general license covering the activities of all trades involved in
repair work may be issued to the prime contractor for the one project for a
business license tax of forty eight dollars ($48.00).
   E.   Subcontractors Or Specialty Contractors:
      1.   Definition: A "subcontractor" or "specialty contractor", for the
purposes of this Title, is defined as a person who performs construction work
requiring special skill, and whose principal contracting business involves the
use of a specialized building trade or craft, not otherwise provided for
herein.
      2.   Separate License; Fee: Every person commencing, or carrying on the
work of a subcontractor, shall secure a separate City license, and shall pay
for the same a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per
year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-23: DANCES AND DANCE SCHOOLS:
   A.   Public Dances: Every person conducting public dances, where an
admission fee or per dance fee is charged, shall pay a business license tax of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, and shall obtain a special permit
from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City
Council may condition such permit in any manner not prohibited by law.
   B.   Other Dances: Every person engaged in a business where any cafe,
restaurant, or any similar establishment affords its patrons the privilege or
opportunity to dance, without charge for the dancing, shall pay a business
license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, and shall obtain a
special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such
activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not
prohibited by law.
   C.   Dancing School Or Academy (Talent School): Every person conducting a
dancing school or dancing academy, or talent school or talent academy, shall
pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-24: DELIVERY VEHICLES:
Every person engaged in a business not having a fixed place of business within
the City which, in connection with said business, delivers any goods or
services within the City shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per year per vehicle. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643,
12-13-2022)
4-2-25: DRIVE-IN THEATERS:
Every person operating a drive-in theater shall pay a business license tax of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, but the license shall not include
the right to conduct a cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or
confectionery, or like stand or concession, or any other type of business.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-26: FOOD CATERERS (VEHICLE):
Every person conducting sales of food from a vehicle shall pay a business
license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year per vehicle. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-27: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Every person engaged in a "home occupation", as defined by the Zoning Ordinance
of the City in Section
15-1-6 of this Code, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-28: HOTELS, MOTELS, AUTO COURTS AND LODGING HOUSES:
Every person engaged in the business of operating a hotel, motel, auto court,
or lodging house shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per year for up to the first three (3) rooms and one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per year for each additional room. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd.
Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-29: JUNK COLLECTORS:
Every person engaged in the business of junk collection shall pay a business
license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for each vehicle
used. "Person engaged in the business of junk collection" as used herein, means
a person engaged in the business of going from house to house, or from place to
place, gathering, collecting, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in old
rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, or other articles commonly known as "junk";
provided, however, that any person licensed under the provisions of this
Section shall not solicit for "free will offerings" of such materials as are
above enumerated, or referred to under the guise or representation that the
same are being collected by or for any charitable, or other organization
entitled to obtain a free permit, as provided for under other provisions of
this Title. Provided, however, that the provisions of this Title relating to
junk collectors shall not apply to official collectors of the City, or
collectors specially authorized by the City Council to make the collections as
a public service. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-30: LAWN SERVICE AND WINDOW CLEANING:
Every person providing lawn service, gardening service, window cleaning
service, and similar services, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-
2022)
4-2-31: LOANS:
Every person engaged in the business of lending, financing, or money-lending
shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-32: LUMBER AND BUILDING MATERIAL YARDS, JUNK YARDS AND NURSERIES:
Every person owning or operating a business engaged in the sale of lumber,
building material, or operation of a building material wrecking yard,
secondhand building material yard, junk yard, or outdoor yard of similar
character or wholesale or retail nursery shall pay a business license tax, in
accordance with the following schedule:
   A.   A basic fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year which shall
cover the first five (5) employees;
   B.   One hundred thirty-eight dollars ($138.00) per year for each employee
in excess of five (5) employees;
   C.   One thousand five hundred thirty one dollars ($1,531.00) per year per
square acre of space owned, leased, or rented for the purposes set forth above;
   D.   Thirty six dollars ($36.00) per year for each vehicle in excess of six
thousand (6,000) pounds (gross vehicle weight) owned or operated in the conduct
of business;
   E.   Eleven dollars ($11.00) per year for each additional business location
within the City;
   F.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a credit shall be granted against the
tax imposed by this Section whenever a business subject to the tax imposed by
this Chapter generates sales and/or use tax in the year immediately preceding
the year in which the tax is due. The credit shall be applied to the business
registration tax due for the following year. Credit shall be equal to fifty
percent (50%) of the portion of the sales and/or use tax generated which was
awarded to the City during the twelve (12) month period ending on June 30
preceding the date the tax is due. However, the amount of said credit shall
under no circumstances be calculated to be greater than the total amount of tax
due. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-33: MOTION PICTURES OR TELEVISION (COMMERCIAL USE):
Every person engaged in the motion picture or television production business
not operating from a fixed place of business in the City, using either public
or private property, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per day. Every person subject to this Section shall also
obtain a permit pursuant to Chapter 11 of this Title. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996;
amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-34: PARKING LOTS:
Every person engaged in the business of operating a parking lot for vehicles
which is open to the public generally and which also provides shuttle service
from the parking lot to any other location shall pay a business license tax of
ten dollars ($10.00) per parking stall per year. The business license tax
imposed by this Section shall not apply to the number of stalls, if any,
occupied on a regular basis by employees of the business or by tenants of the
building which is serviced by the parking lot. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-35: PEDDLING:
   A.   Generally: Every person peddling services, not otherwise mentioned in
this Chapter, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per year, and shall obtain a special permit from the City to do so
prior to engaging in such activities.
   B.   Food: Every person peddling foods, foodstuffs, and food products, other
than from catering food trucks, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per year where the person is on foot or where the same
is sold from a vehicle, and shall obtain a special permit from the City to do
so pursuant to Chapter 4-15 of this Code prior to engaging in such activities.
   C.   Miscellaneous Merchandise: Every person peddling any goods, wares,
magazines, or merchandise not otherwise provided for in this Chapter, shall pay
a business license tax of ten dollars ($10.00) per day where such person is on
foot, and twenty dollars ($20.00) per day where the same is sold from a
vehicle, and shall obtain a special permit from the City to do so pursuant to
Chapter 4-15 of this Code prior to engaging in such activities.
   D.   Popcorn, Souvenirs: Every person peddling popcorn, peanuts, gum, candy,
confections, or toys, such as balloons, flags, pennants, banners, canes,
buttons, badges, horns, musical or noise making instruments, serpentines,
souvenirs, and similar articles shall pay a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
per day where the same is sold from a vehicle, and shall obtain a special
permit from the City to do so prior to engaging in such activities. (Ord. 1252,
4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-36: REST, CONVALESCENT, GUEST AND FAMILY CARE HOMES; CHILDCARE NURSERIES:
   A.   Fee Imposed; State And Local Approval: Every person operating rest,
convalescent, guest homes, and childcare service shall pay a business license
tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. Every person operating a
family care home shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per year. No such license shall be issued without the written
approval of:
      1.   The State Department of Social Services;
      2.   The County Health Officer;
      3.   The Chief of the Fire Department;
      4.   The Community, Economic and Development Services Director.
   B.   Inspection: All such establishments shall be subject to inspection by
the City at any time. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; 2000
Code; Ord. 1639, 9- 20-2022; Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-37: RUBBISH OR GARBAGE COLLECTION:
Every person engaged in the operation of rubbish or garbage collection shall
pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for
each vehicle used in the City. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-
2022)
4-2-38: SCHOOLS (PRIVATE):
Every person operating a private school shall pay a business license tax of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643,
12-13-2022)
4-2-39: STREET STANDS:
Every person operating street stands for the selling of any goods, wares, or
merchandise on any portion of the public streets within the City shall pay a
business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month;
provided, that no license shall be issued for the stand until a permit has been
obtained from the City Council, and that the application for the permit shall
be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or occupant of the premises
abutting immediately upon that portion of the street which the applicant
desires to use; and further provided, that the City Council shall have the
right to grant, conditionally grant, or deny the permit under this Section in
its discretion. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-40: TAXICAB OR AUTOMOBILE FOR HIRE:
Every person engaged in the business of providing taxicabs or automobiles for
hire shall obtain a special permit from the City Council prior to engaging in
such activities, and the City Council may condition such permit in any manner
not prohibited by law. Permittee shall pay an annual business license tax of:
a) one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for each vehicle operated
within the City limits; or b) a flat business license tax for the entire fleet
of taxicabs or automobiles for hire of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per
year; whichever is greater. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-41: THEATERS AND SHOWS:
Every person engaged in the business of operating a theater, motion picture
show, playhouse, events, and all other shows or exhibitions (except those
conducted in the open or under canvas) not otherwise provided for in this
Chapter, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per year. Any such license, however, shall not include the right to
conduct a cafe, restaurant, or lunch counter. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord.
1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-42: TRANSIENT VENDORS, MERCHANTS:
   A.   Transient Food Vendors: Every transient food vendor shall pay a
business license tax of forty eight dollars ($48.00) per day, and shall obtain
a special permit from the City to do so pursuant to Chapter 4-15 prior to
engaging in such activities.
   B.   Transient Merchants: Every transient merchant, which shall include all
such persons doing business at a fixed place of business for a period of less
than thirty (30) consecutive days, and who does not deal exclusively in food or
foodstuffs for human consumption, shall pay a business license tax of forty
dollars ($40.00) per day.
   C.   Transient Merchant At Fairs: Notwithstanding subsection B of this
Section, every transient merchant, which shall include any person doing
business at a fixed place of business for a period of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days and who is participating in a charitable or a civic event such
as a fair, shall pay a business license tax of ten dollars ($10.00), which
shall cover the period during which the charitable or civic event is open to
the public.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
4-2-43: WAREHOUSES:
Every person engaged in the business of operating a warehouse or storage
facility shall pay a license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
year plus seventeen cents ($0.17) per square foot of space used for such
purpose for each business location within the city. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd.
Ord. 1643, 12-13-2022)
4-2-44: TAX REDUCTIONS AND SUSPENSIONS:
The city council may suspend or reduce tax rates imposed by this title by
resolution. (Ord. 1439, 4-13-2010)
CHAPTER 3
BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Permits Required
4-3-3: Exemptions And Exclusions
4-3-4: Applications Required; Fee
4-3-5: Investigation
4-3-6: Issuance Of Permits; Notification
4-3-7: Alarm Business Permit; Grounds For Denial
4-3-8: Permit Fees
4-3-9: Police Department Response Service
4-3-10: Notice Of Decision
4-3-11: Appeal Procedure; Filing Fee
4-3-12: Waiver
4-3-13: Public Hearing
4-3-14: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
4-3-15: Filing Of Appeal; Council Determination
4-3-16: Reinstatement
4-3-17: Audible Alarm Requirements
4-3-18: False Alarms
4-3-19: Malfunction Repair
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed
herein as set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context
that a different meaning is intended:
   ALARM BUSINESS: The business by an individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity of: selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
replacing, moving or installing any burglary and robbery alarm system or
causing it to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered,
replaced, moved or installed in or on any building, structure, or facility;
provided, however, that the provisions of this Section do not include the City
which may be engaged in the nonprofit installation and maintenance of tactical
alarm systems and a firm which maintains an alarm terminal register within the
El Segundo Police Department; provided, further, that alarm business shall not
include the sale of alarm systems or alarm system components where the seller
does not provide any installation or other service off of seller's premises.
   AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on
premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is activated.
   BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical or electrical device which
is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful
act within a building, structure or facility or both, and which emits a sound
or transmits a signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include, but are
not limited to, silent alarms, direct dial telephone devices, audible and
proprietor alarms, in guard shacks. Not included in this definition are
auxiliary devices installed by the telephone company to protect telephone
company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm
system.
   FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal activated through subscriber negligence or for
reasons not of an emergency nature or when activated due to malfunction of any
segment of the alarm system and which necessitates response by the El Segundo
Police Department where an emergency situation does not exist.
   PROPRIETOR ALARM: An alarm system which does not request public response
when activated or is not reasonably expected to result in some public response.
   SILENT ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on
premises which does not generate an audible sound on the premises when it is
activated but transmits a signal directly to the Police Department or alarm
business. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Alarm Business: No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on an alarm
business without first applying for and receiving an alarm business permit
therefor. This permit shall be in addition to all other licenses or permits
required by the City. Provided, however, that any person holding a business
license on the effective date of this Chapter may continue to operate an alarm
business without the permit hereinabove required for the first ninety (90) days
following the effective date of this Chapter. (Ord. 927, 4-19-1977; amd. 2000
Code)
   B.   Alarm System: No person shall have installed on any premises under his
control an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm
system permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord.
921, 2-15-1977; amd. 2000 Code)
4-3-3: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to products of combustion
detection systems, water flow alarm systems, proprietor alarms, audible alarms
affixed to motor vehicles, or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is
to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California
Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 927, 4-19-1977)
4-3-4: APPLICATIONS REQUIRED; FEE:
Applications for all permits required hereunder shall be filed with the
licensing authority and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee. The fee is
established to cover part of the cost of investigating and processing the
applications and permits and is not refundable. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977; amd. Ord.
1127, 11-15-1988)
4-3-5: INVESTIGATION:
Every application for an alarm business permit shall require the fingerprints
of the applicant or, if the applicant is not a natural person, the fingerprints
of the agent applying on behalf of the applicant. The licensing authority shall
refer each application for a permit or renewal of such permit to the Chief of
Police, who upon receipt thereof shall conduct an investigation to determine
whether said permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. The Chief of Police may require additional information of applicants
which he deems necessary to conduct the investigation. The Chief of Police may
dispense with the investigation upon being furnished an authenticated copy of a
current permit issued by another governmental agency located in the County of
Los Angeles. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-3-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS; NOTIFICATION:
Upon completion of the investigation required by Section
4-3-5 of this Chapter, the Chief of Police shall issue all permits described in
this Chapter and shall forward the permit to the licensing authority. The
licensing authority shall notify the permittee of the issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 921, 2-15-1977; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-3-7: ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
Any application for any alarm business permit may be denied if:
   A.   The investigation required in Section
4-3-5 of this Chapter concludes that the character, reputation or moral
integrity of the applicant is inimical to the safety or general welfare of the
community; or
   B.   The applicant knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of a material fact in an application for a permit or in any report or
record required to be filed with the City; or
   C.   The applicant has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving
theft or embezzlement; or
   D.   The applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good
cause within the past year unless the applicant can show a material change in
circumstances since the date of revocation. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-8: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Alarm Business: An annual permit fee for an alarm business permit shall
be fifteen dollars ($15.00), and shall be due and payable on the date of
application and on the anniversary date of such in each subsequent year for
each alarm business. Said permit fee shall not be prorated. (Ord. 921, 2-15-
1977)
   B.   Alarm System: The fee for an alarm system permit shall be a one time
fee. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-3-9: POLICE DEPARTMENT RESPONSE SERVICE:
   A.   Permittee Of Silent Alarms: A service fee shall be paid to the City by
each subscriber of an alarm system, or permittee of a silent alarm not exempt,
for each response made by the Police Department to the location of a false
alarm after the first three (3) responses are made during the same fiscal year.
   B.   Billing: The licensing authority shall cause to be issued a monthly
bill for the unpaid service fees accrued during the billing period and any
prior periods. Such bill shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days
after the billing date. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-3-10: NOTICE OF DECISION:
Notice of decision of the Chief of Police with reference to a permit
application under this Chapter shall be made to the applicant or to any other
person requesting such notice within forty five (45) days after receipt of
application for a permit or renewal of such permit. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-11: APPEAL PROCEDURE; FILING FEE:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police with reference to
the approval or denial of an application for a permit, or renewal of such
permit or suspension of a permit, shall have the right of appeal. An appeal
must be perfected within fifteen (15) days after notice of the decision or
order of suspension by filing with the City Clerk a letter of appeal briefly
stating therein the basis for such appeal, together with a filing and
processing fee in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-12: WAIVER:
Failure to file a letter of appeal within said fifteen (15) days shall
constitute a waiver of appellant's right to a hearing but the City Council in
its discretion may nevertheless grant such a hearing. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-13: PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Notice Of Hearing: The City Clerk shall fix the time and place of the
hearing at a date no more than twenty five (25) days after receipt of the
letter of appeal. The City Clerk shall give the appealing party and any other
person requesting the same at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place
of such hearing. The notice shall be substantially in the following form but
may include other information:
You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held at            , on
            , at the hour of         , at which time you may show cause why the
appeal which you have filed should be sustained.
   B.   Conduct Of Hearing; Burden Of Proof: At the time and place set for the
hearing upon the appeal from the decision of the Chief of Police, the City
Council shall give the appealing party, and any other interested party, a
reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the
determination of the Chief of Police should not be upheld. In all such cases,
the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no
substantial evidence to support the action taken by the Chief of Police. The
determination of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 921, 2-
15-1977)
4-3-14: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Alarm Business: The following shall constitute grounds for suspension
or revocation of any alarm business permit:
      1.   The violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter; or
      2.   Where an alarm system is knowingly activated by an alarm business
permittee, his employee or agent or at the direction of an alarm business
permittee, his employee or agent in a situation where no burglary or robbery is
actually in progress; or
      3.   Where the permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any
false, misleading statement of a material fact in the application for a license
or in any report to be filed with the City agency; or
      4.   Where the permittee has had a similar type permit previously revoked
for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant can show a material
change in circumstances since the date of revocation; or
      5.   Where any alarm business permittee is convicted of a felony or any
crime involving theft, embezzlement or where the character, reputation or moral
integrity of the permit holder or his employee is determined by the Chief of
Police to be inimical to public safety or the general welfare of the community.
   B.   Alarm System: The following shall constitute grounds for suspension or
revocation of any alarm system permit:
      1.   The violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter; or
      2.   Where an alarm system is knowingly activated by a subscriber, his
employee or agent or at the direction of a subscriber, his employee or agent in
a situation where no burglary or robbery is actually in progress; or
      3.   Where the permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any
false, misleading statement of a material fact in the application for a license
or in any report to be filed with the City agency; or
      4.   Where the permittee has had a similar type permit previously revoked
for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant can show a material
change in circumstances since the date of revocation; or (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
      5.   Where an alarm system activates more than seven (7) alarms during
any fiscal year; provided, however, that a permit shall not be suspended or
revoked pursuant to this subsection B5 until after the Chief of Police has
given fifteen (15) days' written notice to the permittee of his intention to
suspend or revoke the permit. During such fifteen (15) day period the permittee
may show cause to the Chief of Police why the permit should not be revoked or
suspended; or
      6.   Where the permittee fails to pay the service charges billed. (Ord.
993, 10-7-1980)
   C.   Order Of Suspension:
      1.   Any permit issued hereunder may be suspended by the Chief of Police
pursuant to the above grounds. The Chief of Police, in the case of such
suspension, shall serve the permittee with a written order of suspension, which
shall state the reasons for such suspension. The order shall be effective
immediately if personally served, or seventy two (72) hours after the same has
been deposited in the course of transmission in said United States Postal
Service.
      2.   Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the permittee
shall cease all operations under such permit, and shall surrender said permit
to the Chief of Police. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-15: FILING OF APPEAL; COUNCIL DETERMINATION:
   A.   The suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after the
order of suspension becomes effective unless the permittee files an appeal of
the order of suspension in the manner set forth in Sections
4-3-11 through
4-3-13 of this Chapter.
   B.   Where an appeal is filed, the order shall be stayed pending a
determination thereon by the City Council which shall act upon the same at a
meeting of the City Council fixed by the City Clerk, in the manner set forth in
Sections
4-3-11 through
4-3-13 of this Chapter. Such suspension shall become a revocation if the City
Council upholds the suspension. The determination of the City Council shall be
final and conclusive. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-16: REINSTATEMENT:
A permit may be considered for reinstatement by the Chief of Police two (2)
months after revocation of said permit if the applicant can show a material
change in the circumstances resulting in the revocation. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-17: AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Provide Names And Phone Numbers: Every person maintaining an audible
alarm shall provide the Chief of Police with the names and telephone numbers of
the persons to be notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises
during any hour of the day or night that the alarm system is activated. It is
the responsibility of every person maintaining an alarm system to assure that
the names and telephone numbers recorded with the Police Department are kept
current.
   B.   Alarm Sounds: No person shall install an audible alarm system which
creates a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil
defense warning system.
   C.   Time Limit On Sound Emission: No person shall install an audible alarm
system which does not automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound
within one-half (1/2) hour after it is activated. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-18: FALSE ALARMS:
A person shall not knowingly turn in a false alarm. This Section does not
prohibit a test of an alarm system as permitted in advance by the Chief of
Police. Activation of audible alarm systems for one second or less shall not be
considered as a false alarm. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-19: MALFUNCTION REPAIR:
After any false alarm caused by a malfunction of the alarm system, an alarm
system permittee shall cause the alarm system to be repaired so as to eliminate
such malfunction before reactivating the alarm. A person shall not reactivate
such alarm until such repairs have been made. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
CHAPTER 4
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Public Convenience And Necessity, Determination
4-4-3: Council Authority To Grant Or Deny Permits
4-4-4: Permit And License Regulations
4-4-5: Duration Of Permit
4-4-6: Permit Issuance; Payment Of License Fees
4-4-7: Insurance Requirements
4-4-8: Adoption Of Rules And Regulations
4-4-9: Operation Permit Required; Exception
4-4-10: Driver's Permit
4-4-11: Vehicle Permit
4-4-12: Uniform Color Scheme And Insignia On Vehicle
4-4-13: Taximeters
4-4-14: Payment Of Fares
4-4-15: Classification Transfer
4-4-16: Operation By Owner Or Employee
4-4-17: Street Stand Occupation Permit
4-4-18: Street Stand Use Regulations
4-4-19: Display Of Signs
4-4-20: Route Requirements
4-4-21: Exclusive Occupancy
4-4-22: Misrepresentation Prohibited
4-4-23: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall, for the
purposes of this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this Section:
   AUTOMOBILE FOR HIRE OR VEHICLE FOR HIRE: Every automobile or motor propelled
vehicle of private appearance, not equipped with a taximeter, used for the
transportation of passengers over the public streets of the City and not over a
defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the
boundary limits of the City, at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day,
per week or per month, and the vehicle is routed under the direction of the
passenger or the person hiring the same.
   DRIVER: Includes every person in charge of, driving or operating any
passenger carrying or motor propelled vehicle, either as agent, employee or
otherwise.
   SIGHTSEEING AUTOMOBILE: Every automobile or motor propelled vehicle used for
the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the City, and not
necessarily over a defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend
beyond the boundary limits of the City, for the purpose of sightseeing or
showing points of interest, and charging a fee or compensation therefor.
   STREET: Any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel.
   STREET STAND: A portion of a street designated by either the City Council or
by the traffic authority for the use, while awaiting employment of any
passenger carrying or motor propelled vehicle.
   TAXICAB: Every automobile or motor propelled vehicle of a distinctive color
or where the driver's seat is separated from the passenger's compartment by a
glass partition, or of public appearance, such as is in common usage in this
country for taxicabs, or equipped with a taximeter, used for the transportation
of passengers for hire over the public streets of the City, and not over a
defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the
boundary limits of the City, at rates for distance traveled or for waiting
time, or for both, and the vehicle is routed under the direction of the
passenger or of the person hiring the same.
   TAXIMETER: A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of
a passenger carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance
traveled or for waiting time, or for both, and upon which the charges shall be
indicated by means of figures.
   TRAFFIC AUTHORITY: The Chief of Police. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-2: PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY, DETERMINATION:
The City Council, in determining whether or not public convenience and
necessity exists in the case of any application for the permit required by
Section
4-4-9 of this Chapter, may take into consideration any and all facts and
conditions which the Council may deem pertinent or proper, including, but not
limited to, a consideration of:
   A.   The financial responsibility of the applicant;
   B.   The effect of the granting of the permit applied for on the businesses
and operations of prior permittees, then operating;
   C.   Whether or not prior permittees, then operating are: 1) under efficient
management earning a fair and reasonable return on their capital devoted to the
service; and 2) under normal conditions adequately serving the public;
   D.   The applicant complies with the minimum standards as prescribed by the
City Council, and other information as the traffic authority may require. (Ord.
826, 12-4-1973)
4-4-3: COUNCIL AUTHORITY TO GRANT OR DENY PERMITS:
The City Council shall have the power to grant or deny any or all the permits
required or authorized by this Chapter when, in the exercise of reasonable
discretion, it has determined that the applicant has or has not complied with
all the provisions of this Chapter relating to the granting of the permits.
(Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-4: PERMIT AND LICENSE REGULATIONS:
The permit required by Section
4-4-9 of this Chapter shall entitle the holder thereof to obtain a license to
engage in the business described in the permit from the City Council upon the
payment of the license fee therefor. The licensing authority shall issue to the
holder of the permit a license setting forth the kind of transportation for
which the license is issued and the year when issued. The permit shall be filed
with the City Clerk. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-4-5: DURATION OF PERMIT:
All permits issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be for a period
not to exceed one year. All these permits shall expire upon December 31 of each
year at midnight, with the exception of the operation permit which shall remain
in effect until revoked or suspended by the City Council; provided, however,
that all permits issued for street stands, except those issued upon the written
consent of a person operating a hotel which may be renewed yearly, shall remain
in full force and effect until the same shall be cancelled, either by the City
Council or traffic authority, or upon the request of the permittee, or the
person who has given the written consent to use the stand has notified the City
Council that the permission has been withdrawn. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973)
4-4-6: PERMIT ISSUANCE; PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
At the time of the issuance of any permit under this Chapter to operate within
the City any of the vehicles defined in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter, the permittee shall pay the license fee required by
Section
4-2-40 of this Title. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-4-7: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Evidence Of Insurance: Before any permit required by Section
4-4-9 of this Chapter is issued for any vehicle defined in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter, the owner shall be required to file with the City and
thereafter keep in full force and effect evidence of insurance. Evidence of
insurance shall consist of one of the following:
      1.   A policy of insurance or a certificate of insurance in such form as
the City Attorney may deem proper, and executed by an insurance company
approved by the City Manager, insuring the public against any loss or damage
that may result to any person or property from the operation of the vehicles;
provided, that the minimum amount of recovery in the policy of insurance
specified shall be not less than the following sums:
         Personal injury - $100,000.00 each person and $300,000.00 each
occurrence
         Property damage - $50,000.00 each occurrence
      2.   File with the City Council a policy of insurance or a certificate of
insurance or other document different from the document required in subsection
A1 of this Section, but which document the City Council approves as providing
adequate protection to the public.
      3.   A certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor
Vehicles of the State pursuant to section 16053 of the State Vehicle Code
together with such financial statements and certificates of insurance that are
necessary to establish to the City Council's satisfaction reasonable ability to
respond to the minimum recoveries heretofore required for permittee to carry
insurance. Such certificates and financial statements when approved by the City
Council shall constitute compliance with the requirements of this Section.
      4.   File with the Police Chief a document or documents which establishes
to the satisfaction of the Police Chief that the permittee is licensed in
another jurisdiction and that said other jurisdiction's requirements will
assure that the permittee is adequately insured.
   B.   Compliance Required: It is unlawful for any permittee to operate or
cause to be operated any vehicle without providing one of the protections
required by subsections A1 through A4 of this Section. (Ord. 1043, 1-4-1983)
4-4-8: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The City Council and also the traffic authority shall have the authority to
adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
service and safety of the operation of the vehicles mentioned in this Chapter.
(Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-9: OPERATION PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any of the
vehicles defined in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter without having first obtained a permit from the City
Council in writing so to do as provided in this Chapter; provided, however,
that no such permit shall be required for the operation of any vehicle which is
being operated in accordance with the terms and conditions of a franchise
granted by the City Council to the operator of the vehicle. (Ord. 826, 12-4-
1973)
4-4-10: DRIVER'S PERMIT:
   A.   Required: No person shall drive any of the vehicles defined in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter and operated from a station within the City without
having first obtained a written driver's permit from the traffic authority of
the City, and no person shall drive any such vehicle operated from a station
outside the City without having in his possession a written driver's permit
from the traffic authority of the City from which the vehicle is dispatched.
(Ord. 652, 5-16-1966)
   B.   Application: Applicants for the permit to drive any of the vehicles
defined in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter shall file with the traffic authority an application upon
forms furnished by the City containing the information required to meet the
minimum standards as prescribed by the City Council, and other information as
the traffic authority may require. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973)
   C.   Qualifications: A driver's permit shall be issued by the traffic
authority only after the applicant has been fingerprinted and investigation has
failed to disclose him to be an unfit or improper person to operate an
automobile for hire. A permit shall not be issued to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years; nor shall a permit be issued except to a citizen of
the United States or to one who has declared his intention to become a citizen.
(Ord. 652, 5-16-1966)
   D.   Issuance: Application for a driver's permit shall be processed upon
payment to the City of a processing fee for the first application by any
applicant and for each application for renewal. Each successful applicant shall
be issued an identification card which he shall have in his immediate
possession while in charge of or driving a taxicab. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
   E.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A, B and D of
this Section, the Chief of Police may waive the requirements for a driver's
permit in the City, provided he finds that the permittee is duly licensed by
another city in the County of Los Angeles and that the requirements of such
other city are adequate to ensure that no unfit or improper person is licensed
to operate an automobile for hire. The Chief of Police may prescribe an annual
fee for such waiver which said fee shall be paid to the City. (Ord. 1024, 6-1-
1982)
4-4-11: VEHICLE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No vehicle, as defined by Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter, shall be operated within the City limits without a
vehicle permit. This permit shall be issued annually upon completion of the
inspection of the vehicle and shall be nontransferable to any new or
replacement vehicle. This permit shall be issued by the traffic authority.
   B.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A, C and D of
this Section, the Chief of Police may waive the requirements for a vehicle
permit in the City, provided he finds that the vehicle is duly licensed by
another city in the County of Los Angeles and that the inspection procedure of
such other city is adequate to ensure the safety of the vehicle being operated
in the City. The Chief of Police may prescribe an annual fee for such waiver
which said fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
   C.   Application: Applicants for a vehicle permit shall file with the
traffic authority an application upon forms furnished by the City, containing
the information prescribed by the City Council, and other information as the
traffic authority may require. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973)
   D.   Issuance: Application for a vehicle permit shall be processed upon
payment to the City of an annual inspection fee. Each applicant shall be issued
a vehicle permit upon successful completion of an inspection of the vehicle.
The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the rear bumper, driver's
side of the vehicle. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-4-12: UNIFORM COLOR SCHEME AND INSIGNIA ON VEHICLE:
   A.   Adoption: No taxicab permit shall be issued to any person until a
standard, distinctive and uniform color scheme, name, monogram or insignia has
been adopted by the applicant and approved by the City Council or traffic
authority, which designates the owner of the vehicle.
   B.   Conflict Or Imitation: No permit shall be issued to any person whose
color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used on such cars shall be in
conflict with, or imitate any color scheme, monogram, name or insignia used by
another concern operating within the City in such a manner as to be misleading
or tend to deceive or defraud the public. (Ord. 406, 5-14-1952)
4-4-13: TAXIMETERS:
   A.   Required; Exception: Unless the owner or operator is permitted in
writing by the City Council or traffic authority to post a schedule of fares in
lieu of a taximeter, it is unlawful for any owner operating any taxicab or
vehicle for hire under the provisions of this Chapter to operate the vehicle,
unless it is equipped with a taximeter of such type and design as may be
approved by the City Council or traffic authority.
   B.   Accuracy Requirements: It shall be the duty of every owner using any
taximeter to at all times keep the meter accurate. The meter shall be subject
to inspection from time to time, and the City Council or any inspector of the
traffic authority or peace officer is authorized at his instance, or upon the
complaint of any person, to investigate the taximeter, and upon the discovery
of an inaccuracy of the taximeter, to remove or cause to be removed any such
vehicle equipped with the taximeter from the streets of the City, until the
taximeter has been correctly adjusted.
   C.   Charges: All taxicabs and vehicles required to have taximeters under
the provisions of this Chapter must base their charges on taximeters. All
taximeters shall be placed so that the reading dial showing the amount to be
charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible by the passenger riding
in the taxicab.
   D.   Operation: It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab or vehicle for
hire while carrying passengers to display the flag attached to the taximeter in
such a position as to denote that the taxicab or vehicle is not employed, or to
throw the flag of the taximeter in a recording position when such cab or
vehicle is not actually employed, or to fail to throw the flag of the taximeter
in a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. (Ord.
283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-14: PAYMENT OF FARES:
   A.   Issuance Of Receipt Upon Request: It is unlawful for the operator of
any taxicab or vehicle for hire upon receiving full payment for a fare as
indicated by the taximeter or schedule of fares, when the schedule is permitted
in lieu of taximeter, to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any
passenger making the payment.
   B.   Failure To Pay Fare: It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the
legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this Chapter after having hired
the same. Any person who shall hire the vehicle with the intent to defraud the
person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 283, 8-16-
1945)
4-4-15: CLASSIFICATION TRANSFER:
It is unlawful for the owner, driver or operator of a vehicle operating under
one classification as defined in this Chapter to transfer the same to or use
the same in another classification, unless and until the public convenience and
necessity shall have been established so to do as set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-16: OPERATION BY OWNER OR EMPLOYEE:
No vehicle as described in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter for which a permit has been issued shall be operated by
anyone but the owner thereof or an employee of the owner. It is unlawful for
the owner or any driver of the vehicles to enter into any contract, agreement
or understanding between themselves, by the terms of which the driver pays to
or for the account of the owner a fixed or determinable sum for the use of the
vehicles. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-17: STREET STAND OCCUPATION PERMIT:
   A.   Application: The permit authorized by subsection B of this Section
shall not be granted except upon the written application of the person desiring
a street stand, filed with the traffic authority, to include the minimum
standards as prescribed by the City Council, and other information as the
traffic authority may require. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973)
   B.   Issuance: Permits may be issued as provided in this Section by the City
Council or traffic authority to the owners of the vehicles defined in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter, allowing any such vehicles while awaiting employment to
stand at certain designated places upon the streets of the City; provided,
however, that nothing contained in this Section shall authorize the
establishing of a stand at any place in the City where the standing of vehicles
is prohibited by law. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-18: STREET STAND USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Operation From Stand Required: It is unlawful for an automobile for
hire, vehicle for hire, sightseeing automobile or a taxicab to be operated from
any place except a stand granted by the City Council or traffic authority in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, or from a private or public
garage or parking space on private property.
   B.   Hotel Stands: In front of any building used for hotel purposes
containing more than one hundred (100) guest rooms, stand permits may be issued
on the basis of one vehicle for every one hundred (100) guest rooms, or a major
fraction thereof; provided, however, that none of such vehicles shall be
permitted to stand within a distance of fifteen feet (15') on either side of a
line drawn from the center of the entrance of the building and at right angles
to the street upon which the entrance is located.
   C.   Block Stands: Except as otherwise provided in this Section, not more
than three (3) vehicles shall be permitted to stand on any one side of a street
within the limits of any one block having a frontage of five hundred feet
(500') or more, nor shall more than two (2) such vehicles be permitted to stand
upon any one side of the street within the block having a frontage of less than
five hundred feet (500'); provided, however, that no permit shall be issued for
any stand to be located within fifty feet (50') of another such stand on the
same side of any street; provided, further, however, that the City Council or
traffic authority may, after exercising reasonable discretion, grant from time
to time renewals or extensions of permits for stands existing upon the
effective date hereof.
   D.   Stand Near Public Transportation System: In addition to the number of
cabs that may be permitted to stand upon the street within the limits of any
block as provided in subsection A of this Section, the City Council or traffic
authority may grant permission to a cab owner or company who has a stand upon
the public street at the station of any steam, interurban or bus transportation
system, for additional cabs at the stand located in front of or along the side
of the steam, interurban or bus transportation system as may be necessary to
meet the needs of the traveling public; provided, however, that the consent of
the owner or operator of the steam, interurban or bus transportation system is
first obtained by the cab company for the additional cabs.
   E.   Assigned Stand: It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any of the
vehicles defined in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter to stand or cause or permit the vehicle to stand while
awaiting employment at any place other than a stand designated by the City
Council or traffic authority and assigned to the owner of the vehicle.
   F.   Period Of Occupancy: All stands may be occupied for the full period of
twenty four (24) hours.
   G.   Leaving Vehicle Unattended In Stand: It is unlawful for the owner or
driver of any of the vehicles defined in Section
4-4-1 of this Chapter to leave the vehicles unattended in a stand for a period
of time longer than three (3) minutes. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-19: DISPLAY OF SIGNS:
   A.   Sign Display: Every vehicle used for carrying passengers for hire while
standing upon any street in the City awaiting employment may display a sign
with the words thereon "For Hire". The sign shall be of metal or other material
approved by the traffic authority, and of a uniform size of six inches by nine
inches (6" x 9"). Every vehicle used for carrying passengers for sightseeing
purposes while standing upon any street in the City awaiting employment may
display a sign with the words thereon "Sightseeing Bus," giving route, points
visited or destination. Every such sign shall be of metal or of other material
approved by the traffic authority and of a uniform size of eight inches by
twenty four inches (8" x 24"). The outer surface of all signs specified in this
Section shall be painted, printed or enameled a dark color and the letters and
figures appearing thereon shall be white.
   B.   Information Card Display: Every taxicab and vehicle for hire used for
carrying passengers for hire shall display in the rear of the driver's seat and
in the passenger's compartment and in full view of the passengers a card not
less than two inches by four inches (2" x 4"), nor more than two and one-half
inches by five inches (21/2" x 5"), which shall have printed thereon the
owner's name or the corporate or fictitious name under which the owner operates
and the business address and telephone number of the owner, together with the
rates to be charged for the vehicle.
   C.   Identification Display: Every taxicab or vehicle for hire shall have
conspicuously displayed thereon at one or more locations on the outside thereof
the name of the owner or the corporate or fictitious name under which the owner
operates, together with the company's telephone number and the cab or vehicle
number.
   D.   Electrically Lighted Vacant Signs: Every taxicab or vehicle for hire
may display an electrically lighted vacant sign attached to the top of the cab.
Every such sign shall not be more than two and one-half inches high by nine
inches (21/2" x 9") in length.
   E.   Prohibited Sign Display: It is unlawful to display any signs other than
those provided in this Chapter on any taxicab, vehicle for hire or a vehicle
carrying passengers for sightseeing purposes, without first obtaining the
written permission of the City Council or traffic authority. (Ord. 283, 8-16-
1945)
4-4-20: ROUTE REQUIREMENTS:
Any driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most
direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely, lawfully and
expeditiously to their destination. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-21: EXCLUSIVE OCCUPANCY:
When a taxicab or vehicle for hire is engaged, the occupants shall have the
exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment, and it
is unlawful for the owner or driver of the taxicab to solicit or carry
additional passengers therein. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-22: MISREPRESENTATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any owner, driver or agent soliciting patronage for any of
the vehicles mentioned in this Chapter to misrepresent by word, sign, hat band,
insignia or badge the true identity of the vehicle for which the patronage is
sought. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-23: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   From the time of the revocation or during the suspension of any permit
granted under the provisions of this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person
whose permit is suspended or revoked to drive, operate or to be in charge of
any of the vehicles mentioned in this Chapter, or to cause or to permit the
vehicles on which the permit has been suspended or revoked to engage in the
several classes of business mentioned in this Chapter, or to allow the vehicle
to stand while awaiting employment at a location designated in the suspended or
revoked permit or at any other location within the City, until a new permit has
been procured or until the period of suspension has expired.
   B.   Provided, however, that the traffic authority may, and he is hereby
authorized to suspend any of the permits mentioned in this Chapter when the
permittee has not complied with the provisions of this Chapter, or has been
arrested for, or convicted of, the commission of a felony, or has been arrested
for, or convicted of, reckless driving, pandering, or use, sale, possession,
furnishing information regarding or transportation of narcotics or intoxicating
liquors, or for assault or battery, or has charged rates other than those which
the permittee has on file with the City Council, or violated any of the rules
and regulations of the City Council or traffic authority pertaining to the
operation of, and the extent, character and quality of the services of
taxicabs, automobiles for hire and sightseeing automobiles. The action of the
traffic authority in suspending any of the permits is to be subject to the
ratification and approval of the City Council at any of its meetings held
subsequent to the action of the traffic authority, but not later than twenty
one (21) days thereafter. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
CHAPTER 5
AUCTIONS AND AUCTION HOUSES
SECTION:
4-5-1: License Fee For Auction Houses
4-5-2: Auctioneer's License Fee
4-5-3: Inspection Of Inventory
4-5-1: LICENSE FEE FOR AUCTION HOUSES:
   A.   Fees Imposed:
      1.   Auction Houses And Employees: A license fee for an auction house and
for each employee thereof, in excess of ten (10) employees, shall be required.
      2.   Square Feet: In addition, each auction house shall pay a fee per
square foot of floor area occupied for the business purpose in excess of five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
      3.   Additional Business Location: In addition, each auction house shall
pay a fee for each additional business location within the City.
   B.   Determination Of Number Of Employees:
      1.   For the purpose of determining the number of employees of the
business subject to this Section, the term "employee" shall mean any person
employed by the business; and shall include an independent contractor, and
persons employed by the independent contractor, unless the independent
contractor and/or persons employed by the independent contractor has a valid
City business license as prescribed in Chapters 1 and 2 of this Title.
      2.   The total number of employees for the business for purposes of this
Section shall be determined by averaging the total number of employees employed
by the business during each of the four (4) calendar quarters preceding the
date the tax is payable.
   C.   Floor Area Defined: For the purpose of this Section, "floor area" means
the total floor space in terms of square footage occupied by an owner, lessee
or renter in a building except: 1) elevator shafts; 2) stairwells; 3) courts or
atriums uncovered and open to the sky; 4) rooms exclusively housing building
operating equipment; and 5) parking area. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-5-2: AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE FEE:
Any person commencing or conducting the business of an auctioneer, auctioning
real estate, goods, wares, merchandise or property or conducting any public
auction sale within the City as the auctioneer shall pay a license fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day, or two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year. (Ord.
1070, 2-19-1985)
4-5-3: INSPECTION OF INVENTORY:
Not later than seventy two (72) hours before conducting any auction sale under
any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the
licensee must make available for inspection by the Chief of Police, or his
authorized representative, the entire inventory of all items of personal
property to be offered for sale at the auction sale. (Ord. 1029, 8-17-1982)
CHAPTER 6
SECONDHAND STORES AND JUNK SHOPS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: License Required; Fee
4-6-3: Buy-Forms
4-6-4: Repairable Machinery Retention
4-6-5: Merchandise Disposal
4-6-6: Hours Of Operation For Auto Wrecking Business
4-6-7: Misdemeanors
4-6-8: Chapter Compliance
4-6-9: Revocation Of License For Violation
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words when used in this Chapter shall, for the purposes of this
Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
   AUTO WRECKER: A person who buys or receives any motor vehicle, as the term
"motor vehicle" is defined in the California State Vehicle Code, for the
purpose of dismantling or disassembling, or who dismantles or disassembles, the
motor vehicle for the purpose of reconditioning any other vehicle, or for the
purpose of selling or otherwise dealing in the materials or parts of the
vehicle or vehicles.
   BUY-FORM: The form furnished by the Chief of Police to the licensee for the
purpose of the recording and furnishing by the licensee to the Chief of Police
of the required information relative to purchases, pledges or consignments.
   CHIEF OF POLICE: Means and designates the Chief of Police of the City.
   JUNK COLLECTOR: A person not having a fixed place of business in the City
who goes from house to house, or from place to place, gathering, collecting,
buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans,
papers, metal or other articles commonly known as junk.
   JUNK DEALER: A person (not an auto wrecker) having a fixed place of business
in the City and engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of
buying, selling or otherwise dealing in, either at wholesale or retail, any old
rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal or other articles known as junk.
   PAWNBROKER: A person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of pawnbroking; or the business of lending money upon personal
property, pawns or pledges; or the business of purchasing articles of personal
property and reselling, or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or
their assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the times of such purchase.
   PAWNSHOP: Any room, store, building or other place in which any such
business of a pawnbroker is engaged in, carried on or conducted.
   SECONDHAND DEALER: A person (other than a used car dealer or a dealer in
secondhand books or magazines) engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on a
business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares or
merchandise. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
Before engaging in any of the businesses hereinabove defined or referred to in
Section
4-6-1 of this Chapter, the licensee shall obtain the required business license
so to do, and in addition thereto the licensee shall be subject to each and all
of the terms, conditions and provisions of this Chapter. A nonrefundable fee
shall be established to cover the cost of investigation and processing and the
amount therefor shall be fixed from time to time by City Council resolution.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-6-3: BUY-FORMS:
   A.   Distribution: The Chief of Police shall cause to be prepared from time
to time such numbers of the "buy-form" as may be necessary in order to enable
the respective licensees to execute and file the same, and shall furnish the
forms free for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Chapter Copy: A copy of this Chapter, together with any amendment or
amendments, shall be furnished each new licensee upon the first delivery to the
licensee of the buy-form and the licensee shall be furnished with a copy of any
subsequent amendment to this Chapter that affects the type of business of the
licensee. A reasonable number of additional copies of this Chapter and
amendments thereof may be procured from the Chief of Police by any licensee
upon request.
   C.   Procurance: Every licensee shall, and it is hereby made the duty of the
licensee to, obtain from the Chief of Police and to fill out and complete in
quadruplicate an appropriate buy-form covering each day's transactions except
those transactions enumerated in subsection H of this Section. Within three (3)
hours after the close of business of any business day, each such licensee shall
mail or deliver to the Chief of Police the original buy-form, together with two
(2) duplicate copies thereof, covering the business transacted on that day.
   D.   Information: The buy-forms shall contain a full, true and complete
report of all goods, wares and merchandise or things received on deposit,
consigned, pledged or purchased during the day covered by such forms, and shall
also contain such other information as may be required by the Chief of Police
and which, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, considering the type of
business of the licensee, may assist in the detection of stolen property. Every
licensee shall enter upon the buy-form positive identification furnished by the
seller, pledgemaker or consignor, such as driver's license number, work badge
number, auto or truck license number and junk collector's business license
number in addition to the true name and address of the seller, pledgemaker or
consignor. In lieu of the positive identification mentioned above, the licensee
shall require the seller, pledgemaker or consignor to furnish a plain
impression print of his right index finger upon the face side of the original
sheet of the buy-form.
   E.   Preserve Records:
      1.   Every licensee shall preserve for a period of at least two (2) years
the fourth or quadruplicate copy of the buy-form provided for that purpose,
containing a carbon copy record thereon of the original writing made by the
licensee. Every such record shall be produced by the licensee for inspection by
any peace officer within the two (2) year period, and any property pledged,
purchased or received by the licensee which is described in the buy-form shall
likewise be produced for inspection by any peace officer upon request, if the
request is made within the period during which the licensee is required
hereunder to hold the property.
      2.   The Chief of Police shall also maintain a file consisting of the
originals of all buy-forms for a period of at least two (2) years after receipt
thereof, and the file shall be open to inspection by any peace officer.
   F.   Language And Signature:
      1.   Every such buy-form report or record made by or through the licensee
as required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be written or printed
entirely in the English language in a clear and legible manner.
      2.   Every person making out any buy-form report shall sign his true name
and give the true name and correct address of the licensee. No person shall
write or subscribe the name of any other person as a signature to any buy-form
report, as all such buy-forms shall bear as signatures only the true names of
the persons so subscribing the same.
   G.   Identification Information: Every person who sells, pledges, or
consigns any property to any licensee in the course of business covered by the
license of the licensee shall furnish on the buy-form report true positive
identification to the licensee by which the person can be located by the Chief
of Police. The person shall also sign his true name and write or print his true
address upon the buy-form in the space provided for same at the time the
business is transacted.
   H.   Exceptions To Filing Buy-Forms: The provisions of this Chapter
requiring withholding and the making and filing of buy-forms shall not be
deemed to apply:
      1.   Certain Purchases By Junk Dealers Or Collectors: To the purchase or
sale by junk dealers or junk collectors of rags, bottles (other than milk or
cream bottles), secondhand sacks, barrels, cans, scrap metal, shoes, lamps,
stoves or household furniture (with the exception of sewing machines and all
musical instruments or any item or items to which the manufacturer thereof has
assigned a serial number); or
      2.   Household Furniture: To the purchase or sale by secondhand dealers
of household furniture (with the exception of sewing machines, all musical
instruments, typewriters, or any other item or items to which the manufacturer
thereof has assigned a serial number); or
      3.   Secondhand Articles Traded On New Articles: To the receipt or sale
of a secondhand article by any person who received the secondhand article as
part payment of a new article, if the person is the authorized representative
or agent of the manufacturer of the new article sold. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-4: REPAIRABLE MACHINERY RETENTION:
A foundry or junk dealer shall not melt, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of
any metal purchased or received by the dealer which is, or by economically
feasible repair can be made, usable for the purpose for which it was originally
designed, except as provided in subsection
4-6-5E of this Chapter until at least twenty one (21) days after making a
report to the Chief of Police that the metal has been received by the foundry
or junk dealer. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-5: MERCHANDISE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Generally: No person shall melt, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of
any article, goods, wares, merchandise or thing obtained or used in any
business subject to the provisions of this Chapter, except those exempt by
subsection
4-6-3H of this Chapter until at least fourteen (14) days after making the
report to the Chief of Police that the article, goods, wares, merchandise or
thing has been purchased or received by the person, except that metal products
must be retained at least twenty one (21) days as required by Section
4-6-4 of this Chapter.
   B.   Hold Order: The Chief of Police may place a hold order upon any
property acquired by the licensee in the course of any business subject to the
provisions of this Chapter for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days, and
in this case the licensee shall retain the property for the prescribed period
and shall not dispose of the same in the meantime unless upon written release
of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may also require the licensee to
keep a true record of property and to ascertain and report therewith the true
name and address of the person to whom the property was sold, transferred, or
otherwise disposed of.
   C.   Inspection; Release: The Chief of Police in his discretion may, in
writing, release any property covered by this Chapter which he has inspected,
either personally or through his authorized officers, if after the inspection
he is satisfied that the property is in the lawful possession of the licensee.
   D.   Licensee Transfer: Goods, wares and merchandise covered by duly
executed and filed buy-forms and with respect to which any waiting periods
provided for herein are being observed, may be sold or conveyed by the licensee
possessing the same to any other licensee in the City engaged in the same or a
similar business who is complying with the provisions of this Chapter without
the necessity of executing and delivering new buy-forms therefor; provided,
however, that both the seller and the buyer in such case shall notify the Chief
of Police, in writing, of the transfer at or before the time the same is
actually made, and provided that the transferee shall observe all unexpired
withholding periods with reference to any such goods, wares or merchandise.
This does not apply to purchases made by junk dealers and junk collectors or to
transfers of property between such dealers and collectors.
   E.   Exceptions To Section
4-6-4: The waiting period required by Section
4-6-4 of this Chapter does not apply to property purchased on a bill of sale or
invoice from a regularly established place of business. As used in this
subsection, an "established place of business" means a place of business within
the County of Los Angeles which has been dealing in the type of articles
purchased at the same location for not less than two (2) years.
   F.   Alteration: Until any articles, goods, wares, merchandise or thing
pledged or consigned to, or purchased by, any licensee subject to the
provisions of this Chapter are held for the time required or released by the
Chief of Police, the licensee shall not clean, alter, repair, paint or
otherwise change the appearance of the articles, goods, wares, merchandise or
things. At all times during business hours the licensee shall expose the same
to public view.
   G.   Inspection: A licensee subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall
not export from the City any goods, wares, merchandise, or things pledged or
consigned to or received by such licensee in his capacity as the licensee until
the Chief of Police has inspected and released the property. (Ord. 537, 2-9-
1959)
4-6-6: HOURS OF OPERATION FOR AUTO WRECKING BUSINESS:
No person shall transact the business of an auto wrecker within the City for
the purpose of buying or selling wrecked or used automobiles or vehicles or any
parts or accessories therefor, between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following day. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959; amd.
2000 Code)
4-6-7: MISDEMEANORS:
   A.   Signing Fictitious Name: Every person required by this Chapter to sign
any paper or form who signs a fictitious name or any other than his or her true
name and every person who gives any address other than his or her true and
correct address is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Failure To Submit Buy-Form: Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who
fails, refuses or neglects to submit the buy- forms to the Chief of Police
within the time required by, and in full compliance with, the provisions of
this Chapter, if the forms have not been so submitted by some other person, and
if the person is:
      1.   A person required by this Chapter to obtain a license; or
      2.   A person in charge of the business of the person required by this
Chapter to obtain a license; or
      3.   An agent or employee of the person required by this Chapter to
obtain a license; and the duties of the agent or employee include the
submission of the buy-form. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-8: CHAPTER COMPLIANCE:
It is unlawful for any person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on
any business affected by, or to which this Chapter relates, to fail, refuse or
neglect to make or file any buy-form, statement or report required hereunder,
in the form, in the manner, at the time and in all respects as required by and
in full conformity with the requirements of this Chapter; or to fail, refuse or
neglect to keep the records herein required in the form and in the manner
required by this Chapter; or to fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to the Chief
of Police or to any police officer of the City, or other duly authorized person
immediately upon demand for the privilege of the inspection, any record or any
goods, wares or merchandise in his, its, or their possession, or control. (Ord.
537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR VIOLATION:
Any license issued to carry on any of the businesses defined in Section
4-6-1 of this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council upon evidence
satisfactory to the City Council of any fraud, false advertising, unfair
business practice, wilful breach of contract, or other misdealing by the
licensee in the conduct of the business. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
CHAPTER 7
POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definition
4-7-2: Application And Permit; Fees
4-7-3: Posting Of Chapter Copy
4-7-4: Hours Of Operation
4-7-5: Minors
4-7-6: Revocation Of Permit
4-7-1: DEFINITION:
A "poolroom" or "billiard room" is any commercial premises which has available
for the use of its patrons three (3) or more pool and/or billiard tables, or
which utilizes more than thirty percent (30%) of total floor area for the play
of pool or billiards. (Ord. 1223, 6-7-1994)
4-7-2: APPLICATION AND PERMIT; FEES:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, carry on, operate or maintain in the
City, any public poolroom or billiard room without a written application for
permit or renewal of such permit therefor granted by the City Council. The
permit shall be required in addition to any license required by any ordinance
of the City. The permit shall be granted or refused by the City Council, in its
discretion, upon formal written application, therefor by the person, and the
application shall specify the name of the person applying for the permit and
the location of the premises where it is proposed to conduct the poolroom or
billiard room, and that the applicant is the only person to be in any manner
connected with the management and control of the poolroom or billiard room. The
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee which is established to
cover the cost of the investigation and processing of applications. (Ord. 1252,
4-9-1996)
4-7-3: POSTING OF CHAPTER COPY:
A copy of this Chapter furnished by the City Clerk shall be conspicuously
posted and at all times kept posted in each room of every pool or billiard
establishment in the City by the person conducting the same, and the failure to
post and keep posted such copy of this Chapter shall be deemed a violation of
this Chapter by the person, and printed copies of this Chapter shall be
furnished every person by the City Clerk upon application. (Ord. 8, 2-28-1917)
4-7-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No pool or billiard room shall be kept open on any day between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1223, 6-7-1994)
4-7-5: MINORS:
   A.   Allowing In Poolroom Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person
conducting any public poolroom or billiard room in the City or any servant or
employee of the person to permit, suffer or allow any minor under the age of
sixteen (16) years unaccompanied by his parent or guardian to enter, visit or
remain in any public poolroom or billiard room conducted by or in charge of the
person or any servant or employee thereof.
   B.   Entering Poolroom Prohibited: It is unlawful for any minor under the
age of sixteen (16) years unaccompanied by his parent or guardian, to enter or
remain in any public poolroom or billiard room in the City.
   C.   Age Misrepresentation: It is unlawful for any person, for the purpose
of gaining entrance to any such public poolroom or billiard room in this City,
to misrepresent his age. (Ord. 627, 10-15-1964)
4-7-6: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation And Hearing: Any poolroom or billiard room permit
issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council for cause,
which would include, but not be limited to, a public nuisance, an action which
is intrusive to adjacent residential areas, a violation of any provision of
this Chapter, the City Code, or any other law. Revocation proceedings may be
initiated by the City by giving the permittee at least five (5) days' prior
notice in writing of the grounds for the revocation of his or her permit and
the time and place of a hearing before the City Council and shall require him
to show cause why his permit shall not be revoked. The service of such grounds
and notice of the hearing shall be done by depositing the same in the United
States mail, addressed to the applicant at his address given in the
application.
   B.   Defense Presented: At any such hearing the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and defend himself and he may call witnesses on his
behalf.
   C.   Council Decision: After conducting such hearing, the City Council may
revoke, suspend or further condition any permit held by such permittee. The
City shall notify the permittee thereof in writing within three (3) days after
the decision.
   D.   Continuing Violation; Suspension: If the violation which forms the
grounds for the proposed revocation continues after the original notification
of such violation to the permittee, the City Manager may suspend the permit
until the time of the hearing. Such suspension shall be effective immediately
upon giving written notice thereof to the applicant or the person in charge at
the poolroom or billiard room. During such suspension, no person shall be
allowed to play pool or billiards on the permittee's premises. (Ord. 1223, 6-7-
1994)
CHAPTER 8
ENTERTAINMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-8-1: Purpose
4-8-2: Definitions
4-8-3: Permit Required; Exceptions
4-8-4: Written Applications Required; Fees
4-8-5: Contents Of Application
4-8-6: Notice Of Change
4-8-7: Investigation, Identification And Inspection
4-8-8: Identification Cards; Fee
4-8-9: Inspection
4-8-10: Approval Or Denial Of Permit
4-8-11: Notice Of Decision
4-8-12: Appeal Procedure
4-8-13: Waiver
4-8-14: Public Hearing
4-8-15: Issuance And Limitations Of Permit
4-8-16: Duration Of Permit
4-8-17: Display Of Permit
4-8-18: Assignment Of Permit Prohibited
4-8-19: Rules And Regulations; Posting
4-8-20: Solicitation Of Drinks
4-8-21: Hours Of Entertainment
4-8-22: Conduct Upon Premises
4-8-23: Public Nuisance Abatement
4-8-24: Suspension Of License; Procedure
4-8-25: Revocation Of License; Appeal
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth rules and regulations governing
entertainment at certain premises within the territorial limits of the city and
require a permit therefor. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed
herein as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context
that a different meaning is intended:
   APPELLANT: A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
   APPLICANT: A person, firm, or corporation who, or which files an application
for a new or renewal permit as provided herein.
   DAY: A calendar day.
   ENTERTAINMENT:
   A.   Any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, dance, act, or song and dance
act, performed by one or more persons, whether or not such person or persons
are compensated for such performances; or
   B.   Any form of dancing upon the premises by patrons thereof; or
   C.   Any fashion or style show, except when the same is conducted by a
person as a part of a commercial business which primarily involves the sale or
manufacture of clothing or wearing apparel.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any religious, governmental or nonprofit association
or institution exempt from real property taxation under either article XIII of
the constitution or the Revenue And Taxation Code of the state.
   NOTICE: Written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee, or,
given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be
notified at his last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective
upon the completion of personal service, or upon the placing of the same in the
custody of United States postal service.
   PERFORMER: Any person who performs any entertainment.
   PERMITTEE: Any person, firm, or corporation who, or which shall be granted a
permit as provided herein, and his or its agents and representatives.
   PERSON: Natural person, firm, corporation, or association. (Ord. 782, 3-13-
1972)
4-8-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Requirement: It shall be unlawful for any person conducting, operating,
owning, or in control of any premises open to the public, or private club
within the city to allow any entertainment including dancing, upon the
premises, or in or upon any adjoining room or premises, unless there has been
granted to such person a valid permit therefor, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Exemptions:
      1.   Nonprofit Organizations: An entertainment permit shall not be
required of any bona fide nonprofit organization.
      2.   City Property: An entertainment permit shall not be required of any
person in connection with the use of city property, unless such property is
leased for a period which exceeds seven (7) consecutive days. (Ord. 782, 3-13-
1972)
4-8-4: WRITTEN APPLICATIONS REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   Filing Of Application; Payment Of Fee: An application for an
entertainment permit or renewal of such permit must be filed in writing, filed
with the city, on forms provided by the city and be accompanied by an
application fee established by city council resolution.
   B.   Fee Nonrefundable; Verification Of Application: The application fee
required by this section is established to cover part of the cost of the
investigation and processing of applications and is not refundable. (Ord. 1475,
1-15-2013)
4-8-5: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Each application shall contain:
   A.   A complete identification of the applicant.
   B.   Names, residence and business addresses of any copartners, including
limited partners; or, if the applicant is a corporation, the name of the
corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of
incorporation together with the date and place of incorporation, the names and
residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder
owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If one or
more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this Section
pertaining to a corporate applicant apply.
   C.   The names, residences and business addresses of the managers and person
to be in charge.
   D.   The name, residence and business address and written consent of the
owner of the premises, who shall indicate his consent by signing the
application in the space provided.
   E.   The address and the particular room or rooms for which the permit is
required, the square foot area thereof to be used for dancing or entertainment,
and the seating capacity for service of meals.
   F.   The exact nature of the proposed business for which the permit is
requested, and the name under which it is to be operated.
   G.   Whether or not any person referred to in subsections A, B, C, or D of
this Section has had a permit for the same or any similar business suspended or
revoked anywhere, and, if so, the circumstances of such suspension or
revocation. The suspension or cancellation of a liquor license shall be
considered as being included within the purpose of this subsection. (Ord. 782,
3-13-1972)
   H.   Whether or not any person mentioned in subsections A, B, C, or D of
this Section has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony offense; and if
so, the details of the conviction, the nature of the charge and its
disposition. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. 2000 Code)
   I.   A statement in detail of the kind of entertainment which is to be
conducted on the premises.
   J.   The hours of operation. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
   K.   Such other related information as the licensing authority may require.
(Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-6: NOTICE OF CHANGE:
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by
Section
4-8-5 of this Chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give notification of
such change to the licensing authority within twenty (20) days after such
change or at any hearing conducted under this Chapter if such hearing is
conducted before the above notification has been given. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972;
amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-7: INVESTIGATION, IDENTIFICATION AND INSPECTION:
The licensing authority shall refer each application for a permit or renewal of
such permit to the Chief of Police, who upon receipt thereof, shall conduct an
appropriate investigation to determine whether said permit should be issued in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter as hereinafter set forth. The
Chief of Police may request the assistance of any City department for the
purpose of such investigation and he shall consider any relevant factual
material relating to such application. The City may cause the fingerprints to
be taken of any person referred to in subsections
4-8-5A, B, C, or D of this Chapter. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-
15-1988)
4-8-8: IDENTIFICATION CARDS; FEE:
   A.   Requirement: The Chief of Police may require permittees, their
employees or their performers to carry identification cards issued by the
Police Department.
   B.   Issuance: The Chief of Police may require and issue identification
cards to permittees, their employees, or performers in such form as the Police
Department deems necessary to identify the permittee, employee or performer.
   C.   Surrender Of Card: Each permittee shall immediately surrender to the
Police Department any identification card issued by the Police Department upon
the revocation, suspension or cancellation of his permit. Each permittee shall
immediately surrender to the Police Department any identification card issued
to an employee or performer of the permittee by the Police Department when any
such employee leaves the permittee's employ or when such permittee's permit is
revoked, suspended, cancelled or at the expiration of such permit without
renewal.
   D.   Violation: No person shall carry or use any identification card issued
to him pursuant to this Section after his permit or his employer's permit has
been revoked, suspended, cancelled or expires without renewal. No person shall
use the identification card issued to another person.
   E.   Term Of Validation: The identification card shall be valid for a period
of one year, after which time it can be renewed. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
   F.   Fee: Permittee shall pay a fee for any such identification card
required by this Chapter. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-8-9: INSPECTION:
The Police Department, in addition to its other duties, shall inspect any and
all establishments licensed pursuant to this Chapter. Police officers and any
official inspectors while on official business shall be allowed by every
permittee to enter such establishment free of charge for the purpose of
inspection. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-10: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
After an investigation, the licensing authority shall approve the application
for the entertainment permit or renewal of such permit if he finds:
   A.   A completed written application form therefor has been filed.
   B.   The required application fee therefor has been paid to the City
Treasurer.
   C.   As a result of his investigation all applicable provisions of this
Chapter, with regard to such permit application, have been, or will be, met.
   D.   That the operation by the applicant will be carried on in a building,
structure and location which complies with and meets all of the heath, zoning,
fire, building and safety requirements and standards of the laws of the State
and this Code applicable to such business operation.
   E.   That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or
associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate
or manager:
      1.   Has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final
judgment, of:
         a.   An offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or performance
of an obscene production, motion picture or play; or
         b.   An offense involving lewd conduct; or
         c.   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the
person of another; or
         d.   An offense involving misconduct with children; or
         e.   An offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance in connection
with the same or similar business operation.
      2.   Has not committed within the last five (5) years any offense
described in subsections E1a through E1e of this Section.
      3.   Has not allowed or permitted acts of sexual misconduct to be
committed within prior business operations.
   F.   That the business is not a public nuisance or has not been a public
nuisance at any time within the last five (5) years.
   G.   That the applicant, his employee, agent, or any person connected or
associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate, or manager has not knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the licensing authority.
   H.   That the applicant has not had a similar type permit previously revoked
for good cause within the past year unless the applicant has shown a material
change in circumstances since the date of revocation. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972;
amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-11: NOTICE OF DECISION:
Notice of decision of the licensing authority with reference to a permit
application under this Chapter shall be made to the applicant or to any other
person requesting such notice within forty five (45) days after receipt of
application for a permit or renewal of such permit. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd.
Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the licensing
authority with reference to the approval or denial of an application for a
permit or renewal of such permit or suspension of a permit, shall have the
right of appeal. An appeal must be perfected within fifteen (15) days after
notice of the decision or order of suspension by filing with the City Clerk a
letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal, together
with a filing and processing fee in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord.
782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
   B.   Adoption Of Resolution: Procedures for appeals and hearings under this
Chapter may be adopted by a resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 782, 3-13-
1972)
4-8-13: WAIVER:
Failure to file a letter of appeal within said fifteen (15) days shall
constitute a waiver of appellant's right to a hearing but the City Council in
its discretion may nevertheless grant such a hearing. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-14: PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Notice Of Hearing: The City Clerk shall fix the time and place of the
hearing at a date no more than twenty five (25) days after receipt of the
letter of appeal. The City Clerk shall give the appealing party and any other
person requesting the same at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place
of such hearing. The notice shall be substantially in the following form, but
may include other information:
You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held at             , on
       , at the hour of       , at which time you may show cause why the appeal
which you have filed should be sustained.
(Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
   B.   Hearing Before Council: At the time and place set for the hearing upon
the appeal from the decision of the licensing authority, the City Council shall
give the appealing party, and any other interested party, a reasonable
opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the
licensing authority should not be upheld. In all such cases, the burden of
proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no substantial
evidence to support the action taken by the licensing authority. The
determination of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 782, 3-
13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-15: ISSUANCE AND LIMITATIONS OF PERMIT:
If the application for a permit or renewal of such permit is approved, the
licensing authority shall issue the permit, and shall strictly limit such
permits to the terms of the application. (Ord. 782, 3-3-1972; amd. Ord. 1127,
11-15-1988)
4-8-16: DURATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire on December 31 of the
year of issuance; provided, however, that permits issued after October 31 of
any year shall expire on December 31 of the next succeeding year. (Ord. 782, 3-
13-1972)
4-8-17: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Every person holding a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall keep the
same posted in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises in open and clear
view. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-18: ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT PROHIBITED:
The assignment or attempt to assign any permit issued hereunder is unlawful and
any such assignment or attempt to assign a permit shall render the permit null
and void. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-19: RULES AND REGULATIONS; POSTING:
Every person holding a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall keep the
rules and regulations contained in Sections
4-8-20 through
4-8-22 of this Chapter and such supplemental rules and regulations as may be
recommended by the City Manager and adopted by resolution of the City Council,
posted immediately adjacent to the permit in a conspicuous place upon the
licensed premises in open and clear view of customers. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-20: SOLICITATION OF DRINKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person employed in any establishment for which a
permit is required under this Chapter to solicit or accept drinks of alcoholic
beverages from any customer while so employed. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-21: HOURS OF ENTERTAINMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, show, stage, perform, produce,
or permit any entertainment between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in any establishment for which a permit is required
under this Chapter except by specific prior written authorization of the Chief
of Police and under the conditions therein set forth. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-22: CONDUCT UPON PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the following rules and
regulations:
   A.   Dancing:
      1.   Hours: Dancing is prohibited between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day.
      2.   Remuneration Prohibited: No person shall pay or receive any fee or
remuneration to be a dancing partner with any other person. This provision
shall not apply to professional paid entertainers when performing as such.
   B.   Lighting: The room, hall or other place where dining and dancing are
permitted shall be kept well and adequately lighted with uniform intensity at
all times and with a minimum light of three (3) foot-candles thirty inches
(30") from the floor. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-23: PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
Any business establishment providing entertainment maintained contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter shall be, and the same hereby is declared to be,
unlawful, and a public nuisance and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in
lieu of any criminal action taken hereunder, commence an action or proceeding
for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and
shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief to
abate or remove such establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from
operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment where entertainment
is provided contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-24: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Findings: The Chief of Police shall suspend any permit issued
hereunder, if he finds:
      1.   That the operation, as conducted by the applicant, does not comply
with all the health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and
standards of the laws of California and this Code applicable to such business
operation.
      2.   That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or
associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate
or manager:
         a.   Has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final
judgment of:
            (1)   An offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or
performance of an obscene production, motion picture, or play; or
            (2)   An offense involving lewd conduct; or
            (3)   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the
person of another; or
            (4)   An offense involving misconduct with children; or
            (5)   An offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance in
connection with the same or similar business operation.
         b.   Has committed within the last five (5) years any offense
described in subsections A2a(1) through A2a(5) of this Section.
         c.   Has allowed or permitted acts of sexual misconduct to be
committed within business operations.
      3.   That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or
associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate, or manager has knowingly made false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in a report or
record required to be filed with any City agency.
      4.   That the business is a public nuisance or has been a public nuisance
at any time within the last five (5) years.
      5.   That the applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked
for good cause and has not shown a material change in circumstances since the
date of revocation.
   B.   Police Chief Determination Appealable: The determination of the Chief
of Police with regard to matters of suspension shall be appealable in the time
and manner set forth in Sections
4-8-12 through
4-8-14 of this Chapter.
   C.   Order Of Suspension:
      1.   The Chief of Police, in the case of such suspension, shall serve the
permittee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for
such suspension. The said order shall be effective immediately if personally
served, or forty eight (48) hours after the same has been deposited in the
course of transmission in said United States Postal Service.
      2.   Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the permittee
shall cease all operations under such permit. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-25: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL:
   A.   Filing Appeal: The suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15)
days after the order of suspension becomes effective unless the permittee files
an appeal of the order of suspension in the manner set forth in Sections
4-8-12 through
4-8-14 of this Chapter.
   B.   Order Stayed Pending Determination: Where an appeal is filed, the order
shall be stayed pending a determination thereon by the City Council which shall
act upon the same at a meeting of the City Council fixed by the City Clerk, in
the manner set forth in Sections
4-8-12 through
4-8-14 of this Chapter. Such suspension shall become a revocation if the City
Council upholds the suspension. The determination of the City Council shall be
final and conclusive. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
CHAPTER 9
FORTUNETELLING
SECTION:
4-9-1: Purpose And Findings
4-9-2: Definitions
4-9-3: Permit Required
4-9-4: Permit Application
4-9-5: Investigation
4-9-6: Hearing And Decision By Licensing Authority
4-9-7: Approval Of Permit
4-9-8: Term Of Permit
4-9-9: Business License Fees
4-9-10: Posting Of Information And Fees
4-9-11: Receipts
4-9-12: Client's Record Of Consultation
4-9-13: Exceptions
4-9-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
   A.   The practice of "fortunetelling", as defined in this Chapter, has
historically been subject to abuse by certain unscrupulous practitioners using
the practice to commit fraud and larceny upon clients.
   B.   It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate the practice of
fortunetelling in such a manner as to reduce the risk of fraud and larceny to
clients while allowing fortunetellers to provide their services to clients with
only minimal restrictions.
   C.   The provisions of this Chapter requiring a permit, posting of fees,
providing receipts and allowing client recordation of the consultation, will
make it more difficult for an unscrupulous fortuneteller to commit fraud or
larceny, and yet, as informational regulations, will not affect the nature of
the information conveyed by the fortuneteller nor the manner in which it is
conveyed. These regulations require only minimal expense and effort on the part
of the fortuneteller and will not, therefore, impose any undue burden on their
practices.
   D.   "Fortunetelling" for entertainment purposes, as defined in this
Chapter, does not create the same risk of fraud and larceny by an unscrupulous
practitioner as would the practice with an individual client because it is done
with a group at a public place for the purpose of entertaining and not to deal
with the private concerns of an individual.
   E.   For these and other reasons, the provisions of this Chapter are
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. (Ord.
1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
   FOR PAY: For a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.
   FORTUNETELLING: Means and includes telling of fortunes, forecasting of
future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the
ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty
or force, including, but not limited to, clairvoyance, clairaudience,
cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship,
seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading,
telepathy, or other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism,
magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, or magic, of any kind or
nature. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or practice
fortunetelling or cause the same to be done for pay without having first
obtained a permit therefor. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Every natural person who, for pay, conducts, engages in, carries on, or
practices fortunetelling shall file a separate verified application for a
permit with the licensing authority. The application shall contain: (Ord. 1080,
2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
   A.   The name, home and business address, and home and business telephone
number of the applicant;
   B.   The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor
traffic violations;
   C.   The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the Police
Department;
   D.   The address, City and state, and the approximate dates where and when
the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with
others; and
   E.   A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by Council resolution.
(Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-5: INVESTIGATION:
Upon the filing of the application, it shall be referred to the Police
Department for investigation, report and recommendation. The investigation
shall be conducted to verify the facts contained in the application and any
supporting data. The investigation shall be completed and a report and
recommendation made in writing to the licensing authority within fourteen (14)
days after the filing of the application, unless the applicant requests or
consents to an extension of the time period. If the report recommends denial of
the permit to the applicant, the grounds for the recommended denial shall be
set forth therein. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
4-9-6: HEARING AND DECISION BY LICENSING AUTHORITY:
The licensing authority shall consider the application and the Police
Department report and recommendation at a hearing held not less than seven (7)
nor more than fourteen (14) days following receipt of the Police Department
report described in Section
4-9-5 of this Chapter. Notice of the time and place of the hearing and a copy
of the Police Department report shall be given to the applicant personally or
by certified mail by the licensing authority at least five (5) days prior to
the hearing. Any interested party shall be heard at the hearing. City shall
have the burden of proof to show the permit should be denied. The decision of
the licensing authority to approve, deny or conditionally approve the permit
shall be in writing, and if adverse to the applicant, shall contain findings of
fact and a determination of the issues presented. Unless the applicant agrees
in writing to an extension of time, the licensing authority shall make his or
her decision approving, denying, or conditionally approving the permit within
twenty four (24) hours after completion of the hearing on the application for a
permit and shall notify the applicant of his or her action by personal service
or certified mail. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
4-9-7: APPROVAL OF PERMIT:
The licensing authority shall approve or conditionally approve the permit if he
or she makes all the following findings:
   A.   All the information contained in the application and supporting data is
true;
   B.   The applicant has not, within one year from the date of the
application, been convicted of any violation of this Chapter or crimes
involving prediction of future events by the occult arts, larceny, perjury,
bribery, extortion, fraud, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude;
   C.   The applicant has paid the required business license fee; and
   D.   The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions of the
permit and applicable laws. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
4-9-8: TERM OF PERMIT:
The term of the permit shall be for no more than the term of the business
license. A renewal application shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the permit and shall be processed in the same manner
as a new application. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-9: BUSINESS LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees Established: Every person engaged in operating a fortunetelling
business "for pay", as defined in Section
4-9-2 of this Chapter, shall pay a license fee in accordance with the following
schedule:
      1.   Basic Fee; Employees: A basic fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year
and sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for each employee.
      2.   Square Feet: In addition, each such person shall pay a fee of five
cents ($0.05) per square foot of floor area occupied for such business purpose;
and
      3.   Additional Locations: In addition, each such person shall pay ten
dollars ($10.00) per year for each additional business location within the
City.
   B.   Determination Of Number Of Employees:
      1.   For the purpose of determining the number of employees in any
business subject to this Section, the term "employee" shall mean any person
employed in a full-time, part-time, or temporary capacity and working in said
business for a wage, salary, commission, fee or board and room.
      2.   The number of employees of the said business, for the purposes of
this Section, shall be determined by totaling the number of hours worked by all
employees (as defined herein) during the license period, and thereafter
dividing that number by forty (40), and the result thereof by fifty two (52),
or a number less than fifty two (52) which reflects the number of weeks the
business operated during the license period.
   C.   Floor Area Defined: For the purpose of this Section, "floor area" means
the total floor space in terms of square footage occupied by an owner, lessee
or renter in a building except:
      1.   Elevator shafts;
      2.   Stairwells;
      3.   Courts or atriums uncovered and open to the sky;
      4.   Rooms exclusively housing building operating equipment; and,
      5.   Parking areas. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-10: POSTING OF INFORMATION AND FEES:
   A.   Requirement; Information: Each person required to obtain a permit
pursuant to Section
4-9-3 of this Chapter shall post on his or her business premises a sign
containing the following information:
      1.   The true name of the fortunetelling practitioner;
      2.   Each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner;
      3.   The fees charged for each service provided by the fortunetelling
practitioner; and
      4.   The statement: By law, this business is prohibited from charging or
soliciting any fee, payment or remuneration beyond these established rates.
   B.   Visibility Of Sign: The sign required by this Section shall be
prominently posted in the interior of the business premises at a point near the
entry and shall be conspicuously visible to every person seeking the services
of the fortuneteller. The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each
letter at least one- half inch (1/2") in height.
   C.   Other Location: If the fortunetelling service is provided at a location
other than the fortuneteller's permanent place of business, the fortuneteller
shall provide the information required by this Section on eight and one-half
inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") paper and legibly printed or typewritten. The
paper shall also include the name and permanent address of the person providing
the fortunetelling services. A true, correct and complete copy of such paper
shall be given to each client prior to providing any fortunetelling services.
   D.   Fee Charged To Comply With Sign: No person shall charge any fee,
payment, remuneration, or item of value for fortunetelling services in excess
of the fees set forth on the sign or paper required by this Section. (Ord.
1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-11: RECEIPTS:
Prior to the acceptance of any money or specific item of value from a client,
other than the acceptance of a gratuitous tip given voluntarily by the client,
the fortuneteller shall issue a written receipt to the client, clearly showing:
   A.   Date;
   B.   Name of client;
   C.   Amount of money received or specific description of item of value
received; and
   D.   Purpose for which the money or item of value was received. (Ord. 1080,
2-4-1986)
4-9-12: CLIENT'S RECORD OF CONSULTATION:
No person engaging in fortunetelling services shall prohibit a client from
making an audio recording or taking written notes of the information conveyed
by the fortuneteller. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-13: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Entertainment: The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any
person engaged solely in the business of entertaining the public by
demonstrations of fortunetelling at public places and in the presence of and
within the hearing of all other persons in attendance, and at which no
questions are answered as part of such entertainment except in a manner to
permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.
   B.   Religious Practice: The provisions of this Chapter shall not be
applicable to any person conducting or participating in any religious ceremony
or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister,
missionary, medium, healer, clairvoyant, or similar position (hereinafter
collectively referred to as minister) from any bona fide church or religious
association having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by
all churches of like faith which provides for fortunetelling; provided, that:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B3 of this Section, the minister's
fees, gratuities, emoluments, and profits shall be regularly accounted for and
paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious
association, as defined in this Section; (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
      2.   The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide
church or religious association, as defined in this Section, shall file with
the licensing authority a certified copy of the minister's certificate of
ordination and the minister's name, age, street address, and telephone number
in this City where the activity set forth in this Section is to be conducted;
and
      3.   Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this
Section, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a
percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church or religious
association and the minister which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed
in the minutes of such church or religious association. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986;
amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 10
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Purpose
4-10-2: Definitions
4-10-3: Administration
4-10-4: Certifications Required
4-10-5: Permit Required
4-10-6: Business License Required
4-10-7: Massage Establishment Owner Background Check Required
4-10-8: Additional Requirements
4-10-9: Display Of Permit
4-10-10: Massage Technician Certificates Required
4-10-11: Prohibited Conduct
4-10-12: Facilities And Operations
4-10-13: Exceptions
4-10-14: Public Nuisance Abatement
4-10-15: Revocation
4-10-16: Civil Liability And Penalties
4-10-17: Appeal
4-10-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter establishes new permitting standards intended to comply
with California law and establish zoning, business licensing, and health and
safety guidelines for massage establishments.
   B.   This chapter is not intended to be exclusive and compliance will not
excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are
uniformly applied to other professional or personal services businesses
including, without limitation, all zoning applications; business license
regulations; building, fire, electrical, and plumbing codes; and health and
safety code laws and regulations applicable to professional or personal
services businesses.
   C.   This chapter establishes a local regulatory system that allows only
state certified massage therapists and massage practitioners to operate within
the city. This chapter is also intended to allow the city to exercise broad
control over land use in regulating massage establishments and to impose and
enforce reasonable and necessary fees and regulations, in keeping with the
requirements of existing law, while being mindful of the need to protect
legitimate business owners and massage professionals. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning
set forth elsewhere in this code, the Business And Professions Code, or
Government Code.
   CALIFORNIA MASSAGE THERAPY COUNCIL (CAMTC): The California massage therapy
council created pursuant to Business And Professions Code section 4600 et seq.
   CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER: A person who is currently certified as a
massage practitioner by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for
compensation.
   CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST: A person who is currently certified as a
massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for compensation.
   CITY: The city of El Segundo.
   DIRECTOR: The planning manager or such other person designated by the city
manager.
   MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external
parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder,
cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any massage establishment, parlor,
or any room, place or institution where massage is given or administered by a
massage technician as the primary service of the business establishment.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN: Any person, who gives, performs or administers to
another person a massage for any form of consideration.
   PERSON: Means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships,
associations or other forms of business organization or group.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means and includes any of the following human
anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses or female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes all of the following:
   A.   Fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas;
   B.   Sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral copulation,
or sodomy;
   C.   Masturbation; or
   D.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any specified
sexual activity listed in this definition. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The director is authorized to administer this chapter and to promulgate
administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations
set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013)
4-10-4: CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Massage Establishment: It is unlawful for any person to own, operate or
maintain a massage establishment unless all massage technicians employed by the
massage establishment hold a current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a
massage practitioner or massage therapist.
   B.   Massage Technician: It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or
carry on the business or activities of a massage technician without a
certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist.
   C.   Off Premises Massage Service: It is unlawful for any person to own,
operate, or maintain an off premises massage service in the city unless all
massage technicians employed by the off premises massage service hold a
current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner
or certified massage therapist. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013)
4-10-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every person conducting, managing, operating, owning or in control of a massage
establishment or any other place that is open to the public or is a private
club, where facial massages, fomentations, massages, electric or magnetic
treatments, or alcohol rubs are administered or given, or any public bathing
place, which has in connection therewith a steam room, dry or hot room plunge,
swimming pool, shower, bath, or sleeping accommodations, must obtain a
conditional use permit. A conditional use permit issued pursuant to this
section must include, as a condition of approval, a requirement that the
permittee notify the city of any change in ownership. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-6: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
Before operating any massage establishment or becoming engaged in the
occupation of a massage practitioner or massage technician, the individual
proposing to conduct the business must obtain the required business license to
do so and, in addition, unless otherwise specified, is subject to each and all
of the terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter. A business license is
not transferable. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-7: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT OWNER BACKGROUND CHECK REQUIRED:
   A.   Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to
operate a massage establishment, that will own five percent (5%) or more of the
massage establishment, and that is not a certified massage practitioner or
certified massage therapist, must make an application to the director for an
investigation of the applicant's background and history. A nonrefundable fee,
in an amount set by resolution, must accompany the submission of each
application to defray the cost of investigation, inspection and enforcement of
this chapter. An annual nonrefundable renewal fee will also be charged to
defray associated costs of investigation, inspection and enforcement.
   B.   Each applicant for a background check must submit the following
information:
      1.   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant.
      2.   The present address and telephone number of the applicant.
      3.   Driver's license number and social security number.
      4.   The proposed address of the massage establishment.
      5.   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the three
(3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive
dates for such address.
      6.   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
      7.   Applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair.
      8.   Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two
inches (2" x 2") taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the
application.
      9.   Applicant's business, occupation and employment history for the ten
(10) years immediately preceding the date of application.
      10.   The business license or permit history of the applicant, including
whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency
or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any
professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended and the
reason(s) for the revocation.
      11.   All criminal convictions for any of the offenses set forth in this
chapter, and a statement of the dates and places of such convictions.
      12.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation must
be set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation or charter,
together with the state and date of incorporation and names and residence
addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder
holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application must set forth the names and
residence addresses of each of the partners, including the limited partners. If
the applicant is a limited partnership, it must furnish a copy of its
certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more
partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to
corporate applicants will apply. The applicant corporation or partnership must
designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible
managing officer. Such person must complete and sign all application forms
required of any individual applicant under this chapter, but only one
application fee will be charged.
      13.   The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property
upon or in which the massage establishment is to be operated, and a copy of the
lease or rental agreement. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the
property, a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a
massage establishment will be located on his or her property is required for
each massage establishment permit location.
      14.   The full true names and other names used, the present addresses and
telephone numbers, driver's license numbers, and social security numbers, and
state certificates from the CAMTC or transitional licenses for all massage
technicians who will be working as employees or independent contractors at each
massage establishment permit location. The applicant must provide the director
with any changes in the massage technicians that work at the massage
establishment during the permit period within ten (10) working days of each
change.
      15.   The director may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when
needed for the purpose of verifying identification.
      16.   Such other identification and information as may be required by the
director in order to verify the information to be included in the application.
   C.   The city is allowed a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days,
in which to investigate the information on the application. During the
investigation of the background information, a city representative including,
without limitation, a member of the police department, fire department,
building and safety department, planning department, or any authorized
representative thereof, may inspect, with or without notice during regular
business hours, the proposed place of business to determine whether it conforms
to the requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of the inspection, the
city representative must inform the director in writing of the findings of the
inspection.
   D.   Background clearance will be issued, within sixty (60) days of receipt
of the application, to any applicant who has furnished all of the information
required by this section in the application for such license, provided:
      1.   The applicant has not made a material false statement in the
application and that all massage technicians who will be working as employees
or independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location
possesses certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage
therapist;
      2.   The applicant, if an individual, or in the case of an applicant
which is a corporation or partnership, any of its officers, directors, holders
of five percent (5%) or more of the corporation's stock, has not, within five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application been
convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following
offenses: Penal Code sections 243.4; 261; 266a through 266j; 267; 314 to 316;
318; or 647(a, b, d); any offense requiring registration under Penal Code
section 290 or Health And Safety Code section 11590; or any felony offense
involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation,
furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health And
Safety Code sections 11054 to 11058, as amended; or any offense in another
state which, if committed in California, would have been punishable as one or
more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; or any offense involving the use of
force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft,
embezzlement or moral turpitude;
      3.   The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; and
      4.   The applicant has not had a massage technician, massage
establishment, escort service, nude entertainment, nude photo studio or similar
type of license or permit suspended within one year or revoked within three (3)
years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, unless
the applicant can show a material change in circumstances or that mitigating
circumstances exist since the revocation or suspension. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013;
amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-8: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Before operating a massage establishment in the city, massage establishment
owners must comply with all applicable codes adopted by the city, including,
without limitation, the building, electrical, and plumbing codes. (Ord. 1476,
2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-9: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Any owner of a massage establishment or off premises massage service must
display the CAMTC certificates for all massage technicians prominently in a
conspicuous place, capable of being viewed by customers or city
representatives, at every location where massage is performed or conducted, and
carry photo identification card while on the premises of the massage
establishment and/or performing massage services. For off premises massage
services, massage workers must also carry a copy of their CAMTC certificate and
photo identification card and display it to customers upon request. Any
advertising for a massage technician must include the name under which he or
she is certified and his or her certificate number. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd.
Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-10: MASSAGE TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off site massage
services to allow any person to perform massage that is not a certified massage
therapist or certified massage practitioner. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord.
1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-11: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off premises massage
services, or massage technicians, to conduct or allow any of the following
activities:
   A.   It is unlawful for any massage technician or any other employee working
in a massage establishment or for an off premises massage service, or
customers, patrons, or guests of the establishment or service, to engage in any
specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage establishment or
the off premises massage location.
   B.   It is unlawful for any massage technician or other employee of a
massage establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in the presence of
any patron, customer, or guest.
   C.   In the course of administering the massage, it is unlawful for any
massage technician or other massage establishment employee to make intentional
physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any customer, patron or
guest. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-12: FACILITIES AND OPERATIONS:
It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate unless the massage
establishment premises and operation comply with the following minimum
requirements:
   A.   Signs: A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance identifying
the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, however, that all such
signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of this code.
   B.   Lighting: Minimum lighting must be provided in accordance with the
California building code, as adopted by this code, and, in addition, at least
one unobstructed artificial light of not less than nine hundred (900) lumens
must be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are
being performed on a patron.
   C.   Ventilation: Minimum ventilation must be provided in accordance with
the California building code, as adopted by this code.
   D.   Disinfection Of Instruments: Instruments used for massage must be
disinfected before each use. Where instruments for massage are employed,
adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available during all
hours of operation.
   E.   Water: Hot and cold running water must be provided at all times.
   F.   Linen Storage: Closed cabinets must be utilized for the storage of
clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be removed and stored
in a separate container until laundered.
   G.   Sanitary Conditions: All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and vapor
rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be
kept in good repair and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   H.   Clean Linen: Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be provided for
patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens is
permitted.
   I.   Compliance With Laws: The premises to be used must at all times comply
with all applicable state and local laws and regulations.
   J.   Use Of Massage Rooms: Any room in which a massage establishment
provides massage services may not be used for residential sleeping purposes.
   K.   Register Of Technicians; Business License: A register of all
individuals employed as massage technicians, and copies of their current CAMTC
certifications and the massage establishment owner's business license, must be
maintained and available for inspection at all times during regular business
hours.
   L.   Certified Employee Only Areas: Each person present in any area of the
massage establishment outside the waiting area or other areas open to any
member of the public must be a certified massage practitioner or certified
massage therapist or the massage establishment owner.
   M.   Display Of Permits And Certifications: The permits and certifications
required by this chapter must be displayed in an open and conspicuous public
place on the premises. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-13: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no
CAMTC certification is required of such persons, while engaged in the
performance of the duties of their respective professions:
   A.   Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in
the state of California.
   B.   Barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists with respect to scalp, feet,
hands, and face massages, who are duly permitted pursuant to Business And
Professions Code section 7301 et seq., in accordance with the limitations of
their permits.
   C.   Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the state of
California.
   D.   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists
who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in the state of
California, or provide professional services in lawful compliance with
Corporations Code section 13401(a). (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-
2015)
4-10-14: PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney
is authorized, in addition to or in lieu of any other legal or criminal
proceedings, to commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or
enjoinment of such massage establishment in the manner provided by law. The
city attorney may seek a court order to grant such relief to abate or remove
such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating,
conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-15: REVOCATION:
   A.   Grounds For Revocation: The director or city attorney may revoke
approvals issued under this chapter for one or more of the following grounds:
      1.   Fraud Or Deceit: That the applicant practiced fraud or deceit in
obtaining an approval under this chapter;
      2.   Violation Of Chapter: That the massage establishment owner,
operator, massage technician, or its employee, agent, independent contractor or
other representative violated a provision or provisions of this chapter;
      3.   Criminal Conviction: That the massage establishment owner, operator,
massage technician, or its employee, agent, independent contractor or other
representative has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any
offense described in this chapter;
      4.   Improperly Maintained Facilities: That the facilities and operations
of the massage establishment are not kept in compliance with this chapter, and
that the owner or operator has failed to promptly remedy any deficiency of
which they have been notified. For purposes of this subsection, "notice" means
notice given personally or by leaving notice at the massage establishment
premises, or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address designated by
the massage technician or establishment in accordance with this chapter;
      5.   Employment Of Uncertified Technicians: That the massage
establishment has employed, allowed or permitted an uncertified person to
perform massage in the massage establishment;
      6.   Error: That the approval was issued in error;
      7.   Civil Penalties: Assessment of three (3) or more civil penalties as
provided by this chapter during any six (6) month period; or
      8.   Prohibited Conduct: A massage establishment owner, operator, massage
technician, or its employee, agent, independent contractor or other
representative has been found to have engaged in prohibited conduct in
violation of this chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation: Upon a determination on the grounds to revoke an
approval under this chapter, the director or city attorney must cause a notice
of revocation to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the address
designated by the massage technician or establishment pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use
permit issued to a massage establishment may be suspended or revoked pursuant
to
title 15, chapter 23 of this code. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-16: CIVIL LIABILITY AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is liable in a civil
action brought by the city attorney for an amount up to five hundred dollars
($500.00) per violation. Such person is also liable for reasonable attorney
fees and costs incurred by the city attorney in any civil proceeding filed to
enforce this chapter.
   B.   Enforcing this chapter through civil action may be filed as an
alternative to criminal enforcement. Civil enforcement does not require the
violation to be knowing or wilful. A civil action cannot be filed if the person
is being criminally prosecuted.
   C.   Each violation of this chapter is a separate offense subject to the
civil penalty.
   D.   The city attorney may settle any civil enforcement before or after the
filing of a civil action by imposing a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding
the potential civil liability, including attorney fees, set forth in this
section. If such civil penalty is paid in full, the city attorney can agree not
to file civil or criminal actions or, if action has already been filed, may
dismiss such action. Imposition of all civil penalties is public record.
   E.   All civil fines must be deposited into the general fund. (Ord. 1476, 2-
5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-17: APPEAL:
Any person denied an approval under this chapter or a massage establishment
owner or operator whose approval has been revoked may appeal the denial or
revocation in writing pursuant to the appeal procedures provided by section
1-2A-15 et seq., of this code. Such appeal must be in writing and must be filed
with the city clerk not more than fifteen (15) days following the director's
deposit into the mail of the notice of denial or revocation sent to the
applicant or massage establishment owner or operator to the address listed by
the applicant or massage establishment owner or operator pursuant to this
chapter. Any successful appeal will result in approval or reinstatement of an
approval and refund of any fines collected by the city. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any appeal of a suspension or revocation of a conditional use permit
issued to a massage establishment must comply with
title 15, chapter 23 of this code. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
CHAPTER 11
MOTION PICTURE, RADIO AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-11-1: Purpose
4-11-2: Definitions
4-11-3: Permit Required; Exemptions
4-11-4: Additional Agreements
4-11-5: Administration
4-11-6: Application For Permit; Contents
4-11-7: Application And Permit Fees
4-11-8: Direct Overhead Expenses
4-11-9: Cash Deposit For Fees And Security Deposit Required
4-11-10: Security Deposit Retention; Appeal
4-11-11: Review By City Officers
4-11-12: Time Requirements
4-11-13: Action On Permit Application; Permit Issuance
4-11-14: Action On Permit Application; Permit Denial
4-11-15: Alternative Time, Place, Or Manner
4-11-16: Administrative Policies And Procedures
4-11-17: Maximum Number Of Filming Days Allowed
4-11-18: Indemnification Agreement
4-11-19: General Permit Conditions; Liability Insurance
4-11-20: Notice To Residences And Businesses; Generally
4-11-21: Proximity Zone Protests
4-11-22: General Permit Conditions; Special Effects; Fire Permit
4-11-23: General Permit Conditions; Additional Requirements
4-11-24: Subsequent Conditions
4-11-25: Emergency Suspension Of Filming
4-11-26: Land Use And Parking Regulations Inapplicable
4-11-27: Cordoning Off The Route Or Filming Site
4-11-28: Public Conduct During Filming
4-11-29: Prohibitions
4-11-30: Misrepresentation
4-11-31: Permit Modification
4-11-32: Procedure For Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit
4-11-33: Appeals To City Council
4-11-34: Expedited Review
4-11-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers for the purpose of
establishing a permit system to regulate motion picture and television
production in the city of El Segundo. Application of this chapter is intended
to protect community health, safety, welfare, and property rights by ensuring
that motion picture and television production within the city has minimal
impact upon businesses and residents. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of words and phrases used in this
chapter:
   ADMINISTRATOR: The city manager or designee.
   APPLICANT: A person seeking a filming permit pursuant to this chapter.
   CURRENT NEWS: Regularly scheduled news programs (excluding documentary
programs) and special news programs which are not preplanned and are broadcast
within seventy two (72) hours after filming.
   FILMING: Includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial
motion pictures, video shows, programs, or commercials, and commercially
prepared radio broadcasts. Filming also includes any noncommercial filming that
obstructs, delays, disrupts, or otherwise interferes with the ordinary use of
city streets, parking facilities, sidewalks or other public rights of way,
including, without limitation, on street parking and vehicle traffic within
neighborhoods.
   FILMING SITE: The location designated by a valid permit issued pursuant to
this chapter for filming and all ancillary uses including, without limitation,
catering, storage, and parking.
   LOW IMPACT FILMING: Filming where: a) the filming site involves limited use
of the public right of way, is in nonresidential areas, or experiences little
or no vehicle traffic; or b) the filming does not include lighting, noise, or
special effects.
   NEIGHBORS: Persons residing at residential dwelling units, including all
residents in multi-tenant buildings, or operating at business addresses within
a proximity zone.
NO IMPACT FILMING: Filming that occurs pursuant to the terms of a valid permit
that is conducted in a manner where light, sound, smell, or vibrations
resulting from the filming, or activities ancillary to filming, is
imperceptible from properties other than the property on which the filming is
being conducted.
   PERMITTEE: Any natural person, entity, or combinations thereof possessing a
film permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
   PROXIMITY ZONE: The area within a two hundred seventy five foot (275')
radius surrounding a filming site which is presumed to be affected by filming
and activities ancillary to filming. It is presumed that residential areas
beyond the proximity zone are not impacted by filming.
   STILL PHOTOGRAPHY: Means and includes all activity attendant to staging or
shooting commercial still photographs. Still photography does not require a
permit if it involves only hand carried equipment (tripod, interchangeable
lenses, flash), and does not involve product or service advertisement, or use
of models, props or sets. Normally this type of photography involves less than
ten (10) people and is completed in less than four (4) hours. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-
2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
4-11-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Required: Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person
to engage in, conduct, or carry on filming or commercial still photography on
any public or private property, facility, or residence without a valid permit
issued pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Issued: A permit is not deemed issued until the administrator receives
the applicant's written acceptance in accordance with this chapter.
   C.   Exemptions:
      1.   Current News: This chapter does not apply to or affect reporters,
photographers, or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio
broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in broadcasting current news
concerning those persons, scenes, or occurrences which are in the news and of
general public interest.
      2.   Studios: This chapter does not apply to or affect a motion picture,
television, or radio broadcasting studio operating within its physical confines
at an established or fixed place of business in the city.
      3.   Charitable Purposes: A permit fee is not required for any permit
issued for filming when the administrator determines, based upon reasonable
evidence, that filming is conducted or carried on wholly for a charitable or
nonprofit purpose either directly or indirectly, by any individual.
      4.   Educational Purposes: A permit fee is not required for any permit
issued for filming when the administrator determines, based upon reasonable
evidence, that filming is conducted or carried on wholly for student and class
photographs, sports pictures, Independent Student Media film class activities,
photography class activities and student cable filming. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-4: ADDITIONAL AGREEMENTS:
In addition to, or in lieu of, a permit required by this chapter, use of any
public facility within the city may require a rental or use agreement. (Ord.
1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-5: ADMINISTRATION:
The administrator is authorized to receive applications, issue and revoke
permits, and otherwise implement this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-6: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS:
   A.   Information Required: The following information must be included in the
application:
      1.   The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the
person who will be present during, and responsible for, the filming;
      2.   The address or place at which the activity is to be conducted;
      3.   The specific location(s) at such address or place;
      4.   The inclusive times and dates such activity will transpire;
      5.   A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed
activity;
      6.   The number of personnel to be involved;
      7.   Anticipated use of any animals, pyrotechnics, fire, or explosives;
      8.   The food servicing arrangements;
      9.   Requests for special assistance at the location, including, without
limitation, street closure, traffic control, and emergency services;
      10.   Whether the activity to be filmed includes vehicle chases or other
activities dangerous to the participants or to the public, with a description
of the activity to be filmed;
      11.   The amount and type of equipment to be involved including, without
limitation, the number and size of vehicles, location of all vehicles and
ancillary equipment, and the name of the person responsible for keeping the
filming site clear and clean; (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
      12.   A declaration regarding notification of residences and businesses
within the proximity zone as required by this chapter; and (Ord. 1424, 10-7-
2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
      13.   Such other information as the administrator deems appropriate.
   B.   Compliance With Regulations: In addition to the provisions of this
chapter, any applicant engaging in activity that requires compliance with
federal, state, or local regulations, including additional licenses or permits,
must present evidence of satisfactory compliance with those requirements. (Ord.
1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-7: APPLICATION AND PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Motion Picture, Radio, Or Television Productions:
      1.   A nonrefundable application fee for motion picture, radio or
television productions as set by resolution of the city council must be paid.
      2.   A permit fee set by city council resolution must be paid whenever
the permittee uses any portion of any public street, road, right of way or
building, other than a building located in a public park, owned or controlled
by the city.
      3.   The use of public parks and buildings located in public parks to the
exclusion of the general public is discouraged; however, when such permit is
granted, the permit fee will be fixed by city council resolution.
   B.   Still Photography:
      1.   A nonrefundable application fee for still photography commercial
advertising as set by resolution of the city council must be paid.
      2.   A permit fee set by city council resolution must be paid whenever
the permittee uses any portion of any public street, road, right of way or
building, other than a building located in a public park, owned or controlled
by the city.
      3.   The use of public parks and buildings located in public parks to the
exclusion of the general public is discouraged; however, when such permit is
granted, the permit fee will be fixed by city council resolution. (Ord. 1424,
10-7-2008)
4-11-8: DIRECT OVERHEAD EXPENSES:
In addition to the fees and charges established, the permittee must pay all
costs and direct overhead of the city for supervising, controlling, and
managing permittee's operation. This includes, without limitation, all
personnel costs, all material and supply costs, and all other direct costs and
expenses of the city. These costs and expenses will be computed at the
conclusion of the project and be deducted from the deposit required. (Ord.
1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-9: CASH DEPOSIT FOR FEES AND SECURITY DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Cash Deposit: After the application fee is paid and the application
approved and before any permit is issued, permittee must deposit with the city
a cash deposit computed as follows: Twice the amount determined by the city to
be the total cost to the city plus a sum equal to all permit and license fees.
   B.   Conditions For Refund Of Security Deposit: At the conclusion of the
project, the total of the deposit will be applied to the city's permit and
license fees and to the city's costs and direct overhead of administering and
supervising the permit; and the balance, if any, will be deemed a security
deposit. The security deposit must be refunded by the city to the permittee if
the permittee has fully complied with all of the conditions of the permit and
all requirements of law. If the permittee has not complied with all conditions
of the permit and all requirements of law, the security deposit will be
retained by the city. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-10: SECURITY DEPOSIT RETENTION; APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the administrator's determination concerning the amount
of the deposit or the amount of any refund may file a written appeal as
provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-11: REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS:
   A.   After a film permit application is filed, the administrator must
forward the application to directors, or designees (collectively “reviewing
officers”), whose departments are affected by the proposed event for their
recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without limitation:
      1.   The fire chief;
      2.   The police chief;
      3.   The director of recreation, parks, and library; and/or
      4.   The public works director;
      5.   The El Segundo Unified School District superintendent when filming
will occur along a route or at a location adjacent to a school or classroom.
   B.   Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers must consider the
application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide the administrator
with written recommendations regarding:
      1.   Any special conditions for a permit;
      2.   Whether, based on the scope of the proposed filming, a prefilming
operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be necessary, the
administrator will notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting
within a reasonable time before filming; and
      3.   Any additional recommendations.
   C.   The reviewing officers must complete their review before the
administrator can make a decision on the application. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008;
amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
4-11-12: TIME REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, completed applications
for a film permit must be filed in the administrator's office at least:
      1.   Three (3) business days before the filming date for a permit that
does not require city services and is low impact filming; or
      2.   Five (5) business days before the filming date for filming involving
stunts or traffic control; or
      3.   Ten (10) business days before the filming date for filming involving
closure of public streets or rights of way, or use of pyrotechnics, fire, or
explosives for special effects, except that an application may be filed
pursuant to subsection A1 of this section if special effects are limited to the
use of "squibs" as defined in title 19, section 980 of the California Code of
Regulations, or any successor regulation, and the fire department determined
the pyrotechnic operator's license to be in good standing within the previous
twelve (12) months.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, completed applications
for a film permit must be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the
administrator within the applicable time periods established by subsections A1
through A3 of this section. Following his/her decision, the administrator will
promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally and in writing.
   C.   Unless otherwise provided, the applicant's acceptance of the approval
or conditional approval must be received by the administrator before the
filming date. Failure to accept the decision or failure to file a request for
appeal constitutes a withdrawal of the application. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-13: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   The administrator must issue a permit if:
      1.   The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
      2.   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
      3.   Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional approval in
writing.
   B.   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform to the
general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special permit
conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the administrator to protect public
safety and/or welfare. Such special conditions may include, without limitation,
conditions for controlling pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic, for protecting
public and/or private property, and/or for protecting public health and safety.
(Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-14: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT DENIAL:
   A.   A permit may be denied for the following reasons:
      1.   The application is incomplete;
      2.   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application
information requested by the administrator;
      3.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
      4.   Applicant seeks approval for filming that is so close in time and
location to another event scheduled for the same date as to cause unreasonable
traffic congestion and/or to overextend public safety and/or emergency
services;
      5.   Filming time and/or methodology will unreasonably interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the filming site;
      6.   The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles at the
filming prevents public safety and/or emergency services from reaching areas at
or contiguous to the event;
      7.   The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles at the
filming on or adjacent to public institutions or schools prevents normal egress
and ingress into the facility;
      8.   The size of filming will overextend public safety and/or emergency
services to the extent that the safety of filming participants, attendees, and/
or the remainder of the city will be seriously jeopardized; provided, however,
that nothing authorizes denial of a permit because of the need to protect
participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit conditions can be
imposed;
      9.   The filming location will substantially interfere with construction
or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or along the city
street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right of way to be occupied
by the event;
      10.   The filming will occur along a route or location adjacent to a
hospital or extended care facility, and the noise created by the filming would
substantially disrupt the operation of the hospital or extended care facility
or disturb the patients within;
      11.   The filming will occur at a location adjacent to a library and the
noise created by the filming will substantially disrupt the library's operation
or disturb a library's patrons;
      12.   The application is not timely submitted and there is insufficient
time to investigate and process the application pursuant to the time lines in
this chapter; (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
      13.   The application fails to include a declaration regarding
notification of residences and businesses within the proximity zone as required
by this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
   B.   The administrator must consult with the city attorney before denying a
filming permit. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-15: ALTERNATIVE TIME, PLACE, OR MANNER:
If the administrator denies a film permit that would be acceptable by changing
filming time, place, or manner, then the administrator may inform the applicant
of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the alternative time, place,
or manner then the administrator will issue a permit in accordance with this
chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-16: ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The city manager is authorized and directed to promulgate administrative
policies and procedures governing the form, time, and location within the city
to implement this chapter. The rules and regulations can be based upon the
following criteria:
   A.   Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city;
   B.   The written consent of all property owners or occupants in possession
of property within the proximity zone, as determined by the administrator and
in accordance with this chapter;
   C.   The safety and convenience of all persons;
   D.   The disruption of normal activities of all persons at particular
locations within the city;
   E.   The safety of property within the city;
   F.   Whether particular types of equipment are required for certain film
sites to reduce the impact on neighbors. Such equipment may include, without
limitation, tow plant generators; and
   G.   Whether a film monitor is required to oversee filming at certain
filming sites. If a film monitor is required, permittees must also abide with a
filming code of conduct identified by the administrator. The cost of a monitor
must be borne by permittees. (Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
4-11-17: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FILMING DAYS ALLOWED:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, no permit can be issued if it will result
in any address being located within a proximity zone for more than twenty five
(25) days during a calendar year.
   B.   For filming proposed east of Sepulveda Boulevard and south of El
Segundo Boulevard, no permit can be issued if it will result in any address
being located within a proximity zone for more than eighty (80) days during a
calendar year.
   C.   The administrator may increase the twenty five (25) day maximum if
there are no neighbor protests from within the proximity zone of the filming
site.
   D.   There are no maximum filming days for no impact filming. (Ord. 1436,
12-1-2009)
4-11-18: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city which, in
part, indemnifies the city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any
liability arising from permittees' filming in a form approved by the city
attorney. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-19: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   Insurance Requirements: Permittee must obtain public liability
insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of
California and having a financial rating in "Best's Insurance Guide" of not
less than "A VII". Such insurance must provide "occurrence" coverage against
liabilities for death, personal injury, or property damage arising out of or in
any way connected with filming. Such insurance shall be based upon the size and
nature of filming, the risks foreseeably involved, and must be in the amount of
at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), combined single limit, and name
the city and the city's officers, employees, agents, and volunteers as
additional insureds under the coverage afforded. The city's risk manager may
increase this minimum limit depending on the risk involved with the proposed
filming. In addition, such insurance must be primary and noncontributing with
respect to any other insurance available to the city and include a severability
of interest (cross liability) clause. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served
during filming, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor
liability in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   B.   Certificates Of Insurance: A copy of the policy or a certificate of
insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form approved by the
city's risk manager, must be filed with the administrator not less than five
(5) business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before filming
unless the administrator for good cause waives the filing deadline.
   C.   Bonds: A bond/cash deposit may be required for purposes of repairing
any damage and restoring city facilities to original condition. The amount will
be determined by the administrator. In the event of such damage, city will
provide written notice to the permittee specifying the damage to be repaired
and/or city facilities to be restored. If, after providing permittee with such
written notice, the requested repairs and/or restoration of city facilities
have not been commenced and/or completed within seven (7) days, city may draw
upon the bond/cash deposit to effect said repairs and/or restoration of city
facilities. In the event of damage requiring emergency repairs and/or
restoration of city facilities by the city, the permittee is required to
reimburse the city in full for all costs incurred within thirty (30) days of
receipt of invoice from city. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-20: NOTICE TO RESIDENCES AND BUSINESSES; GENERALLY:
Before the administrator issues a filming permit, an applicant must notify
neighbors within a proximity zone as follows:
   A.   The applicant must make every reasonable effort to notify neighbors
within the proximity zones, by any reasonable means specified by the
administrator, regarding the filming's nature, date, and time. (Ord. 1424, 10-
7-2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
   B.   Notifications must include applicant's name, address, telephone number,
date(s), and time(s) of filming. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
   C.   The applicant must submit a declaration, signed under penalty of
perjury, with a permit application stating that reasonable notice was provided
to every neighbor within the proximity zone.
   D.   The administrator may, at the applicant's cost, prepare documentation
showing the neighbors within a proximity zone. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord.
1436, 12-1-2009)
4-11-21: PROXIMITY ZONE PROTESTS:
   A.   The neighbors within the proximity zone are entitled to one protest per
address. All protests must be received by the administrator at least two (2)
business days before the filming date. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord. 1436,
12-1-2009)
   B.   The administrator cannot issue a filming permit if: (Ord. 1424, 10-7-
2008)
      1.   More than fifty percent (50%) of neighbors within the proximity zone
submit protests against low impact filming. The administrator may, but is not
required to, require a lower percentage of protests based upon the time, place,
or manner of the proposed filming and its consequent impact on surrounding
businesses or residences;
      2.   If the administrator receives at least one protest from a neighbor
within the proximity zone for filming that requires street closures; or
      3.   More than ten percent (10%) of neighbors within the proximity zone
for all other filming sites submit protests.
   C.   A rebuttable presumption of one hundred percent (100%) approval from
neighbors within a proximity zone is established if the administrator does not
receive any protests from within a proximity zone. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd.
Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
   D.   Neighbors may submit protests for all filming located within three
hundred feet (300') of their property with the administrator. The administrator
will keep a record of such protests until the end of each calendar year and
apply such protests when determining the protest percentages established by
this section. Protests must be resubmitted at the beginning of each calendar
year to be effective. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-22: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; SPECIAL EFFECTS; FIRE PERMIT:
An applicant must obtain a permit from the city fire department for filming
that includes pyrotechnics, fires, or explosives. During filming the permittee
must, at its own expense, use city fire personnel deemed necessary by the city
fire department. All city fire permits must be obtained at least seventy two
(72) hours before filming. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-23: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The permit, in its entirety, must be in the possession of the permittee
at all times while filming.
   B.   A permittee must conduct operations in an orderly fashion. The area
used must be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion and before leaving the
filming site(s). A deposit to assure that a permittee removes all trash and
debris from the filming site(s) may be required. This requirement and the
amount may be determined by the administrator.
   C.   Vehicle parking for all filming related activities must be in
accordance with the administrator's directions.
   D.   All camera cars must have a police escort. The administrator may
determine how many police officers will be required to escort camera cars.
   E.   All filming and ancillary activities must commence not earlier than
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and cease not later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
Filming and ancillary activities east of Sepulveda Boulevard and south of El
Segundo Boulevard must commence and cease at the times indicated by a valid
permit, except for filming and ancillary activities occurring within two
hundred seventy five feet (275') of hotels which must commence not earlier than
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and cease at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   F.   Permittees must protect any neighbors within a proximity zone from
glare caused by lighting used for filming after sunset.
   G.   Production companies cannot place equipment or vehicles on private
property without the private property resident's written consent. (Ord. 1436,
12-1-2009)
4-11-24: SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS:
   A.   Grounds For Subsequent Conditions: The administrator may condition
previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts not previously
disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
   B.   Notice Of Subsequent Conditions: Should subsequent conditions be
required, the administrator will serve written notice on the permittee of this
decision. When acting upon information obtained twenty four (24) hours before
filming, the administrator may orally inform the permittee, and city personnel
overseeing filming, of the new conditions. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-25: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF FILMING:
The city manager, administrator, and/or any sworn public safety officer may
temporarily suspend filming whenever there is an emergency that requires such
action to protect public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and filming
participants must immediately comply with the suspending officer's
instructions. The administrator will immediately attempt to notify the
applicant orally and notify the applicant in writing, within twenty four (24)
hours after the suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the reasons
for the suspension. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-26: LAND USE AND PARKING REGULATIONS INAPPLICABLE:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or the terms and conditions of a
permit issued under this chapter, those provisions of this code regulating land
use and parking do not apply to a permittee. All other provisions of this code
are applicable to the permittee's conduct except as specifically provided in
the permit. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-27: CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR FILMING SITE:
The administrator, or designee, is authorized and directed to establish traffic
and/or crowd control devices on or within the city's streets, parking
facilities, sidewalks, or other public rights of way, and to undertake other
actions necessary to cordon off the filming site. In addition, the
administrator, can, when appropriate, cause the filming site to be posted as a
no parking zone for the duration of filming and sufficiently in advance thereof
as may be necessary to prevent vehicles from parking along the route or at the
filming location. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-28: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING FILMING:
   A.   Interference With Filming: It is unlawful for any person to physically
obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise interfere with any filming authorized by
a permit or with any person, animal or vehicle participating or used in
filming.
   B.   Driving Through The Filming Site: It is unlawful for any person to
drive a vehicle between vehicles or persons authorized by a film permit when
such vehicles or persons are in motion.
   C.   Prohibited Parking: It is unlawful for any person to park along or
within any portion of the route or filming site, when the filming site is
designated as a no parking zone by the administrator in the manner authorized
by this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-29: PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in filming that would constitute a
hazard to public safety or interfere with or endanger the public peace or
rights of residents and other occupants of property to the quiet, peaceful,
unmolested enjoyment of their property. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-30: MISREPRESENTATION:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any
officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring the permit
provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-31: PERMIT MODIFICATION:
   A.   If, due to inclement weather or other, similar, unforeseen
circumstances, it is necessary to change the filming date and/or time, the
administrator may, upon permittee's request, issue a film permit addendum
authorizing filming at the same location for new times and dates. Permittee
must comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, including
notification, and pay any reasonable administrative fee that permit reissuance
may cost.
   B.   If there is any substantial change in the filming from that described
in the permit application, an applicant must pay the permit application fee and
obtain an amended permit before the filming date. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-32: PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Facts Not Previously Disclosed: The administrator can revoke a film
permit upon learning or discovering facts requiring permit denial not
previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
   B.   Violation Of Permit Terms: The administrator may revoke a film permit
when the permittee and/or filming violates the permit's terms and conditions,
or when filming participants violate applicable laws or regulations; provided,
however, that this subsection does not authorize revoking a permit because of
the need to protect participants from the conduct of others; and, provided
further, that the administrator cannot revoke a permit without warning the
permittee and allowing him/her to correct the violation(s) within a reasonable
time.
   C.   Notice Of Revocation: If the administrator revokes a permit before the
filming date, the administrator must immediately serve written notice of
revocation on the permittee and provide copies of the notice to all city
personnel charged with carrying out any responsibility under this chapter. If
the administrator revokes a permit on the day of filming after learning of
facts justifying revocation less than twenty four (24) hours before the filming
commenced, the administrator must announce such action to the filming
participants, city officers and employees monitoring or controlling traffic
during the filming, and the person in charge of the filming, if such person can
be located at the filming location. Written notice must be delivered after such
action to the permittee.
   D.   Hearing: An applicant is entitled to an administrative hearing before a
hearing officer designated by the city manager provided:
      1.   The applicant appeals the administrator's decision within twenty
four (24) hours of receiving notice of such conditions;
      2.   Filming is scheduled at least forty eight (48) hours after the
hearing time;
      3.   The hearing will be at the administrator's office at four o'clock
(4:00) P.M. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed
upon. The hearing officer will issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the
hearing and also notify the applicant and the administrator in writing of the
hearing officer's decision;
      4.   Any notification of action, whether oral or written, must describe
with particularity the facts and the reasons for the decision.
   E.   Consultation With City Attorney: The administrator must consult with
the city attorney before revoking a filming permit.
   F.   Appeals To Council: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
administrator may appeal to the council in the manner provided by this chapter.
   G.   Failure To Appeal: In the event no appeal is taken by the permittee,
the decision of the administrator revoking or suspending such permit becomes
final and conclusive on the expiration of the time fixed for the appeal as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-33: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Procedures: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the administrator
or of any other officer of the city made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the council within fifteen (15) days after notice thereof
by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal, briefly stating in
such notice the grounds relied upon for appeal. If such appeal is made within
the time prescribed, the city clerk will schedule a hearing before the council
within thirty (30) days after the date of the receipt of such notice of appeal,
giving the appellant not less than ten (10) days' notice in writing of the time
and place of the hearing. The findings and determinations of the council at
such hearing are final and conclusive and within three (3) days after such
findings and determinations are made, the city clerk will give notice thereof
to the appellant.
   B.   Council Determination: For appeals relating to the suspension or
revocation of permits issued pursuant to this chapter, the council's
determination becomes effective on the second day after the city clerk gives
notice thereof to the appellant, unless otherwise provided by the council.
(Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-34: EXPEDITED REVIEW:
Pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8(c), and any
successor statute or regulation, the permits under this chapter are designated
for expedited judicial review pursuant to the procedure set forth in California
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8, or any successor statute or regulation.
(Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
CHAPTER 12
FIREARMS SALES, LICENSING AUTHORITY
SECTION:
4-12-1: Licensing Authority
4-12-2: Application
4-12-3: Investigation
4-12-4: Permit Issuance Or Renewal
4-12-1: LICENSING AUTHORITY:
   A.   Designation: The licensing authority is designated the duly authorized
licensing authority of the City for the sale of pistols, revolvers and other
firearms capable of being concealed upon the person.
   B.   Compliance With State Law: The licensing authority is directed to
comply with the provisions of section 12071 of the State Penal Code. (Ord. 876,
7-15-1975; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-12-2: APPLICATION:
An application shall be filed in writing with the licensing authority on forms
provided by the City. (Ord. 876, 7-15-1975; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-12-3: INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Conduct Of Investigation; Factors: The licensing authority shall refer
each application for a permit, or renewal of such permit, to the Chief of
Police, who, upon receipt thereof, shall conduct an appropriate investigation.
Such investigation shall include, at a minimum, the following factors:
      1.   The security of the premises on which the business is conducted;
      2.   The criminal record or lack thereof of the applicant;
      3.   Compliance with all applicable sections of United States and
California law governing the sale of firearms.
   B.   Fingerprinting Required: The Chief of Police may cause the fingerprints
to be taken of any person who files an application pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 876, 7-15-1975; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-12-4: PERMIT ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL:
After investigation, the licensing authority may issue or renew the permit if
he finds:
   A.   The applicant, his employee, agent or any person associated with the
applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager has
not been convicted of a felony;
   B.   The premises in which the business will be carried on provides secure
protection against theft, loss or misplacement of concealable firearms, and
complies with and meets all health, zoning, fire, building and safety
requirements;
   C.   That the applicant will comply with all applicable provisions of law
concerning the sale of firearms. (Ord. 876, 7-15-1975; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-
1988)
CHAPTER 13
BINGO GAMES FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES
SECTION:
4-13-1: Definition
4-13-2: Organizations Eligible For City License
4-13-3: Application For License
4-13-4: Qualifications Of Applicant
4-13-5: Contents Of Application; Fee
4-13-6: Investigation Of Applicant
4-13-7: Contents Of License; Posting
4-13-8: Summary Suspension Of License; Hearing
4-13-9: Revocation Of License; Alternative Procedure
4-13-10: Appeal Of Revocation To City Council
4-13-11: Maximum Amount Of Prize
4-13-12: Proceeds Kept In Separate Fund Or Account
4-13-13: Financial Interest In Licensee Only
4-13-14: Exclusive Operation By Licensee
4-13-15: Bingo Games Open To Public
4-13-16: Attendance Limited To Occupancy Capacity
4-13-17: Bingo Games Conducted Only On Licensee's Property
4-13-18: Prohibited Acts
4-13-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are
awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform
to numbers or symbols selected at random. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-2: ORGANIZATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR CITY LICENSE:
Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporations tax by
section 23701 et seq., of the state Revenue and Taxation Code, mobile home park
associations and senior citizens' organizations, are eligible to apply to the
city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of
section 326.5 of the state Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter;
provided, however, that the receipts of such games are used only for charitable
purposes. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984; amd. 2000 Code)
4-13-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license to conduct bingo games
in the city shall file an application in writing therefor with the licensing
authority on a form to be provided by the city. The issuing authority shall be
the licensing authority upon authorization of the city council. The license
issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to a
renewal and an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus an additional fee of
one percent (1%) of the monthly gross receipts collected in excess of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). If an application for a license is denied, one-
half (1/2) of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord.
1069, 2-19-1984; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-13-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT:
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an
eligible organization under section
4-13-2 of this chapter and its application conforms to the requirements, terms
and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-5: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   Contents: Said application for a license shall contain the following:
      1.   The name of the applicant's organization and a statement that
applicant is an eligible organization under section
4-13-2 of this chapter.
      2.   The name and signature of at least two (2) officers of the applicant
organization.
      3.   The particular property within the city, including the street
number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office
or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized,
together with the occupancy capacity of such place. Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the
organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.
      4.   Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games.
      5.   That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict
accordance with the provisions of section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this
chapter as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license
to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city manager upon violation of any
of such provisions.
   B.   Signature Required: The applicant under penalty of perjury shall sign
said application.
   C.   Annual Fee: The annual license or renewal fee shall be set by a
resolution of the city council and shall accompany the application.
   D.   Certificate Of Exemption: Where applicant shall also submit, with its
application, a certificate or determination of exemption under section 23701 et
seq., of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the
exemption division of the franchise tax board in Sacramento showing exemption
under one of the eligible Revenue and Taxation Code sections. (Ord. 1334, 4-17-
2001)
4-13-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the licensing authority
shall refer the same to interested departments of the city including, but not
limited to, the city manager, city attorney, police department, fire
department, community development department for investigation as to whether or
not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the
property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as
property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy
and other applicable restrictions. A period of not less than thirty (30) days
shall be allowed for the purpose of conducting said investigation. (Ord. 929,
4-19-1977; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022)
4-13-7: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; POSTING:
   A.   Contents: Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified
under law to conduct bingo games in the City, upon authorization by the City
Council the licensing authority shall issue a license to said applicant, which
shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is
issued.
      2.   The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted. (Ord.
943, 11-1-1977; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
      3.   The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be
conducted as set forth on the certificate of occupancy and/or posting or room
capacity as specified in the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the City. A
description of where the room is located at the address, room site, number of
exits, type of seating that will be provided participants and other pertinent
information shall be listed.
      4.   The date of the expiration of such license.
      5.   Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Posting: The licensee shall cause the license to be visibly posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises where bingo games are authorized to be
conducted, and shall immediately produce such license for inspection upon
demand of any police officer. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
4-13-8: SUMMARY SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
   A.   Authority Of Police Chief: Whenever it appears to the Chief of Police
that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to
summarily suspend the license and operation of any bingo game.
   B.   Continuing To Conduct Bingo After Suspension: Any person who continues
to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as
provided in Section
1-2-1 of this Code.
   C.   Hearing Request: The summary suspension shall include the notification
of the licensee that it shall have ten (10) days from the date of such
suspension to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be
revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the City Council
within said ten (10) day period, shall result in a revocation of the license.
(Ord. 929, 4-19-1977; amd. 2000 Code)
   D.   Notice Of Hearing: Upon such request by the licensee, whose license has
been summarily suspended, for a hearing to determine whether such license shall
be revoked, the City Council shall provide such hearing within thirty (30) days
after receipt of such request by the City, or at a time thereafter agreed upon,
at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the City Council for
the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No
license shall be revoked under this Section unless notice of the time and place
of such hearing shall have first been given at least five (5) days before the
hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to
said suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice
shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the suspension
and revocation.
   E.   Council Action: Any organization whose license is revoked under this
Section shall not conduct any bingo game in the City until such time as the
City Council makes a determination as to whether the license shall be
reinstated. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall be final.
(Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Revocation; Hearing: Whenever it appears to the City Manager that the
licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of
this Chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and
no summary suspension is ordered, under Section
4-13-8 of this Chapter, the license may be revoked; provided, however, the
licensee may appear before the City Council at the time fixed by the City
Manager, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be
revoked. No license shall be revoked under this Section unless written notice
shall have first been given at least five (5) days before the hearing thereof
by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said licensee at
the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of
the ground advanced as the basis of the revocation.
   B.   Reinstatement: Any organization whose license is revoked under this
Section shall not conduct any bingo game in the City until such time as the
City Council, on an appeal, makes a determination as to whether the license
shall be reinstated. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall
be final. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-10: APPEAL OF REVOCATION TO CITY COUNCIL:
Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this Chapter shall have
the right, within ten (10) days after receiving notice in writing of the
revocation, to file a written appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall set
forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The City Council
shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days after its receipt by
the City, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to
be given at least ten (10) days' written notice of such hearing. At the
hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to
present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of its
appeal. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall be final.
(Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-11: MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PRIZE:
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall
not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for
each separate game which is held. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977)
4-13-12: PROCEEDS KEPT IN SEPARATE FUND OR ACCOUNT:
   A.   Disposition Of Proceeds: All proceeds derived from a bingo game shall
be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other
fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes,
except as follows:
      1.   Such proceeds may be used for prizes. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977)
      2.   A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property,
overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses,
security equipment and security personnel. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
   B.   Records Of Income And Expenses: The licensee shall keep by separate
books full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and
described in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision or
any other phase of bingo games authorized by this Chapter. The City, by and
through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such
records at any reasonable time and licensee shall fully cooperate with the City
by making such records available. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977)
4-13-13: FINANCIAL INTEREST IN LICENSEE ONLY:
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the
licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.
(Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-14: EXCLUSIVE OPERATION BY LICENSEE:
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee
organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any
bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the
promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. Security personnel may
be paid from proceeds of a bingo game if not members of the licensee
organization. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977; amd. Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
4-13-15: BINGO GAMES OPEN TO PUBLIC:
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the
licensee organization. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-16: ATTENDANCE LIMITED TO OCCUPANCY CAPACITY:
Bingo games shall be conducted only within structures approved for public
assembly as such is defined in the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City
and as evidenced by a valid certificate of occupancy as set forth in the
Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City. Bingo games shall be permitted
only in the interior of such structures and licensee shall not reserve seats or
space for any person. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
4-13-17: BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED ONLY ON LICENSEE'S PROPERTY:
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it,
or property whose use is donated to the organization, for ninety (90) or more
days prior to date of application and which property is used by such
organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the
organization is organized. The license issued under this Chapter shall
authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the
address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described
property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the
purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further
force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization,
upon application under this Chapter, when it again owns or leases property used
by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the
organization is organized. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977; amd. Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
4-13-18: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages: The serving and consumption of
alcoholic beverages is prohibited in the room where bingo games are being
conducted.
   B.   Minors: No persons under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be
allowed to participate in any bingo game.
   C.   Intoxicated Persons: No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be
allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
   D.   Participant Must Be Present: No person shall be allowed to participate
in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place
in which the bingo game is being conducted.
   E.   Interference With Inspection: No person shall interfere with, prevent,
or refuse to permit a police officer to make an inspection or examination of
any premises where bingo games are authorized to be conducted, for the purpose
of determining whether the licensee is complying with the provisions of section
326.5 of the State Penal Code and the provisions of this Chapter.
   F.   Receipt Of Profit: It is a misdemeanor under section 326.5(b) of the
State Penal Code for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage, or salary
from any bingo game authorized under this Chapter, a violation of which is
punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which
fine shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977)
CHAPTER 14
MARIJUANA
SECTION:
4-14-1: Definitions
4-14-2: Commercial Marijuana Activity Prohibited
4-14-3: Cultivation Of Marijuana For Personal Use
4-14-4: Severability
4-14-5: Interpretation
4-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
   COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY: The cultivation, possession, manufacture,
distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
transportation, distribution, delivery, or sale of marijuana and marijuana
products.
   CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing, cultivating,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or processing of marijuana.
   DELIVERY: The commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a
customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer or independently licensed under
this title that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial
transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products.
   MARIJUANA: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or
not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include:
   A.   Industrial hemp, as defined in Health And Safety Code section 11018.5;
or
   B.   The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare
topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.
   MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES: Any equipment, products or materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into the
human body.
   MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY: An entity licensed to cultivate, prepare,
and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to
marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation
facilities, but not to consumers.
   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: A marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana
testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, or a retail
marijuana store.
   MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY: An entity licensed to purchase
marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell
marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing
facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers.
   MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant
material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited
to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana
or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
   MARIJUANA STORAGE FACILITY: Any entity or premises used for the storage of
marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana accessories.
   MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY: An entity licensed to analyze and certify the
safety and potency of marijuana.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE: A house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other
similar habitable dwelling.
   RETAIL MARIJUANA STORE: Any entity licensed to purchase marijuana from
marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from
marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana
products to consumers; or any premises, whether licensed or unlicensed, where
marijuana, marijuana products, or devices for the use of marijuana or marijuana
products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail
sale, including an establishment that delivers marijuana and marijuana products
as part of a retail sale. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
4-14-2: COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY PROHIBITED:
No license can be issued for, nor shall any person operate, a marijuana
cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana delivery business, marijuana storage facility,
retail marijuana store, marijuana establishment, or any commercial marijuana
activity in the city of El Segundo. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
4-14-3: CULTIVATION OF MARIJUANA FOR PERSONAL USE:
   A.   Outdoor Cultivation: Cultivation of marijuana outdoors is prohibited,
except for the personal cultivation of marijuana conducted in accordance with
Health And Safety Code section 11362.2, subd. (a).
   B.   Indoor Cultivation: Cultivation of marijuana indoors is prohibited,
except for the personal cultivation of not more than six (6) plants at one time
within a single private residence pursuant to Health And Safety Code section
11362.2, subd. (a). (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
4-14-4: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The
invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or portion
of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or
the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 1544,
12-6-2016)
4-14-5: INTERPRETATION:
The intent of this chapter is to prohibit commercial marijuana activities and
the personal cultivation of marijuana, whether medical or recreational in
nature, to the maximum extent allowed under state law. Nothing in this chapter
shall be interpreted as allowing behavior otherwise prohibited by state law and
nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as prohibiting conduct that the
city is expressly preempted from prohibiting under state law. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-
2016)
CHAPTER 15
SIDEWALK VENDOR PROGRAM
SECTION:
4-15-1:    Purpose
4-15-2:    Definitions
4-15-3:    Sidewalk Vendor Permit Required; Exemption
4-15-4:    Application
4-15-5:    Location Requirements
4-15-6: Operating Requirements
4-15-7:    Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit
4-15-8:    Violations And Penalties
4-15-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers and Government
Code sections 51036 et seq., including any successor statutes, for the purpose
of regulating the sale of food and merchandise on the City's sidewalks and
pedestrian paths.
(Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
4-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply. Words and
phrases undefined in this Code have the same meaning as such words and phrases
in title 8 of the Public Health Code of Los Angeles County:
CERTIFIED FARMER'S MARKET: A California agricultural product point-of-sale
location that is registered under, and operated in accordance with Food and
Agriculture Code sections 47000, et seq.
JUNK FOOD: Any food or beverage that is low in essential nutrients, protein,
vitamins or minerals and high in calories, sodium, sugar and fat. “Junk Foods”
include, without limitation, soda, candy, chips, ice cream, hot dogs or
processed meat and chocolates.
PEDESTRIAN PATH: A footpath, not adjacent to a road, which is intended for use
only by pedestrians, tricycles, strollers or baby carriages.
ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR: A sidewalk vendor who sells food or merchandise while
continuously moving from place to place and who only stops temporarily to
complete a transaction.
SIDEWALK VENDOR: A vendor who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand,
display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized
conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or pedestrian path.
SPECIAL EVENT: Includes an event that requires a City-issued permit for the
temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk or other public area,
including, without limitation, an encroachment permit, special event permit, or
temporary event permit. For purposes of this chapter, "Special Event" also
includes organized youth sports league events and games and City-sponsored
events.
STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR: A sidewalk vendor who sells food or merchandise
from a fixed location.
SWAP MEET: As defined in Business and Professions Code section 21661, as may be
amended.
VENDOR: A person, individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, or any other group or combination acting as an entity, that sells,
offers for sale, solicits for purchase, or exposes or displays for sale, any
food, beverage or merchandise, or to require someone to negotiate or establish
to pay a fee before providing food, beverages or merchandise, even if
characterized as a donation.
(Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
4-15-3: SIDEWALK VENDOR PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTION:
   A.   No person or vendor may operate as a sidewalk vendor on a public
sidewalk, park, parkway, median, land, property, pedestrian path or any other
land or property under the City's control, unless the City has issued such
person a sidewalk vending permit and city business license.
   B.   No pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack
or other non-motorized conveyance may be used for the sale of food or
merchandise from the public sidewalk, park, parkway, median, land, property,
pedestrian path or any other land or property under the City's control,
anywhere in the City without first obtaining a sidewalk vending permit for such
activity.
   C.   The sidewalk vending permit is valid for twelve (12) months after being
issued, unless revoked or suspended, and may be renewed at any time before
expiration. A maximum of one (1) sidewalk vending permit may be issued to a
vendor. A sidewalk vending permit may not be issued to pushcarts, wagons, or
other non-motorized conveyances. Sidewalk vending permits are non-transferable.
   D.   A bona fide charity is exempt from the permit requirements of this
Chapter and is otherwise regulated pursuant to Business and Professions Code
sections 17510 et seq.
   E.   City-permitted filming and special event permits shall have priority
over sidewalk vending permits.
(Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
4-15-4: APPLICATION:
   A.   To apply for a sidewalk vending permit, the applicant must provide to
the City all of the following information under penalty of perjury:
      1.   The applicant's full name and a social security number or California
driver's license, California identification card number, or individual taxpayer
identification number;
      2.   Proof of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration
seller's permit;
      3.   The name, telephone number and current mailing address of the
sidewalk vendor;
      4.   The name and business address of the principal if the sidewalk
vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership or corporation;
      5.   A complete description of the food or merchandise offered for sale
or exchange. Any applicant who intends to sell food must also provide proof of
either a food handler card or certified food protection manager certificate, if
applicable, pursuant to Health and Safety Code sections 113700 through 114437,
and certify that the pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon,
showcase, rack or other non-motorized conveyance used has been approved by the
County Health Department for that particular type of food;
      6.   Proof of liability insurance and signed indemnification in favor of
the City, in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000)
for property damage, including injury resulting in death, caused by the
operation of the vending business; and
      7.    A complete description of any ancillary items that the applicant
intends to use in conjunction with sales including, without limitation, small
tables, trash receptacles, chairs, umbrellas and umbrella stands, or other
similar items.
   B.   Applicants must agree in writing to abide by the location and
operational requirements stated in this Chapter.
   C.   Each application must be in writing on forms approved by the City, and
the application must be accompanied by the non- refundable fee established by
City Council resolution.
   D.   Sidewalk vendors may not be permitted as a permanent or proprietary
location in any property within the City.
   E.   The Finance Director or designee is responsible for issuing sidewalk
vending permits and may promulgate any additional requirements for the issuance
of such permits, provided such requirements comply with this chapter, this Code
and state law. The Director's decision with respect to a sidewalk vendor permit
application may be appealed to the City Manager. The City Manager's decision is
the City's final decision.
(Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
4-15-5: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sidewalk vendors must maintain a clearance of no less than four feet
(4') (forty eight inches (48")) upon every sidewalk or pedestrian path in order
to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-
336).
   B.   Stationary sidewalk vendors may not operate in any of the City's
residential zones; roaming sidewalk vendors may sell food or merchandise within
residential zones, provided the vendor moves continuously and only stops
temporarily to complete a transaction.
   C.   Sidewalk vendors may not offer junk food within three hundred feet
(300') of any kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school or senior
high school, between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:
00) P.M., when such school is in session.
   D.   Sidewalk vendors may not operate within three hundred feet (300') of a
certified farmer's market, swap meet, or area designated for a special event,
during the event's limited duration. City-permitted filming and special event
permits shall have priority over sidewalk vending permits.
   E.   Stationary sidewalk vendors may not operate within any City-owned park
with an operative agreement between the City and a concessionaire for the
exclusive sale of food or merchandise by the concessionaire.
   F.   Sidewalk vendors may not operate:
      1.   Where placement impedes the flow of pedestrian traffic by reducing
the clear space to less than six feet (6'), or impedes egress from, access to
or the use of abutting property; or
      2.   In any location were vending operations endangers the safety of
persons or property including, but not limited to, three feet (3') from any
parking lot or driveway apron, or as determined on a site-specific basis by the
City Engineer or Police Department.
   G.   No vendor may use the median strip of a divided roadway.
(Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
4-15-6: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A cart approved by the Health Department to vend one particular type of
food may not be used to vend a different type of food.
   B.   A cart used for sidewalk vending must not exceed a length of seventy
two inches (72") (six feet (6')), a width of fifty four inches (54" (four and
one half feet (4.5')), or a height, including a roof or awning, of seventy
eight inches (78") (six and one half feet (6.5')). An applicant may request,
and the City may approve, a table for condiments to be used in conjunction with
a cart selling food. Such table must not exceed a length of forty eight inches
(48") (four feet (4')) and a width of twenty four inches (24") (two feet (2')).
A vendor may only set up and use furniture as expressly approved by the City.
   C.   All sidewalk vendors must allow a police officer, firefighter, code
enforcement officer, health inspector or other government official charged with
enforcing laws relating to street vendor activities, at any time, to inspect
the vendor's cart for compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and to
ensure the safe operation of any heating elements used to prepare food.
   D.   A vendor must operate according to its approved hours of operation. The
Finance Director may impose reasonable hours of operation for sidewalk vendors,
provided that for sidewalk vending in non-residential areas, the Director may
limit the hours of operation in a manner consistent with other businesses or
uses on the same street(s) in such areas. Vending in City parks is only
permitted during park operating hours.
   E.   Stationary sidewalk vendors must provide a trash receptacle and
recycling container for customers and ensure proper disposal of customer trash,
when necessary, during all hours of operation. The trash receptacle and
recycling container must be large enough to accommodate customer trash without
resorting to existing trash receptacles and recycling containers provided by
the City for use by the general public. A sidewalk vendor may not dispose of
customer trash in existing receptacles provided by the City. Sidewalk vendors
must prevent the accumulation of solid waste in quantities that are
unreasonable or detrimental to the public health or safety.
   F.   Sidewalk vendors must keep the immediate area around them clean and
free of trash or liquids during hours of operation. Vendors must pick up and
properly discard any trash associated with the vendor's activities, and clean
up any spilled or leaked liquids on the sidewalk or pedestrian path before
leaving the area.
   G.   All applicable permits, including the City-issued sidewalk vending
permit, must be displayed in plain view at all times.
   H.   A pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack or
other non-motorized conveyance, or ancillary vending items or equipment must
not be left unattended or chained or fastened to any pole, sign, tree or other
object in the public right-of-way, or be left unattended and intruding in the
public right-of-way. Any pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon,
showcase, rack or other non-motorized conveyance in violation of this
subsection may be confiscated.
   I.   A sidewalk vendor must provide their own, independent source of
electricity and other utilities for the cart's operation. A sidewalk vendor may
not connect a cart to an external source of electricity, water or any other
utilities while located on public property.
   J.   A sidewalk vendor may not burn wood or barbeque briquettes.
   K.   Merchandise may not be placed directly onto the public right-of-way
without the City's express approval.
   L.   Sidewalk vendors may not offer services or any illegal or counterfeit
merchandise. No sidewalk vendor may sell any alcohol-related beverage, tobacco
or electronic vaping products; cannabis products; weapons, including knives,
guns or explosive devices; pharmaceuticals; or other similar products.
   M.   All signs associated with a sidewalk vendor must be affixed to the cart
or conveyance. A sidewalk vendor must not display any signage that is
potentially distracting to motorists, including but not limited to, flashing
signs, LED lights or lasers.
   N.   Vendors must comply with the noise requirements outlined in
Chapter 7-2 of this Code, particularly with regard to the amplification of
voices, music or sound.
   O.   Sidewalk vendors may not operate vending tricycles, icicle trikes,
bicycle vending carts or the like, in any City park.
(Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
4-15-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Whenever any person fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter,
or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto, or with any other provision
or requirement of law, including, but not limited to, this Code or any grounds
that would warrant the denial of initial issuance of a permit hereunder, the
City Manager, after giving such person ten (10) days' notice in writing to the
address stated on the application and specifying the time and place of hearing
and requiring him/her to show cause why his/her permit should not be revoked,
will conduct a hearing. If permit violations are shown by substantial evidence,
the City Manager may revoke or suspend any permit. The City will not issue a
new permit after the revocation of a permit unless it is satisfied that the
applicant will thereafter comply with all provisions of this Chapter and the
rules and regulations adopted thereunder and all other applicable provisions of
law, and until the City Manager collects a fee in an amount sufficient to
recover the actual costs of processing the re-application.
   B.   The City Manager will provide the permittee with written notice of the
revocation by certified mail addressed to the permittee's address.
   C.   Any person who vends, peddles or sells any goods or merchandise after
such person's permit has been suspended or revoked, and before such suspended
or revoked permit has been reinstated or a new permit issued, is subject to
administrative penalties pursuant to section
4-15-8.
(Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
4-15-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any violation of this Chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and
each day such condition continues will be regarded as a new and separate
offense. Violations of this Chapter will be subject to administrative
penalties, enumerated in subsections C and D below and administered pursuant to
Chapter 1-2A of this Code. Any administrative fines issued pursuant to this
Chapter may be appealed pursuant to
Chapter 1-2A of this Code.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person engaged in sidewalk vending, solicitation
or peddling as described herein to fail or refuse to display or show the
identification card upon demand for the display thereof by an officer of the
City, or by any person being solicited by the solicitor.
   C.   Any vendor who operates without a duly-issued sidewalk vending permit
will be subject to the following fines:
      1.   An administrative fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a
first violation;
      2.   An administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a
second violation within one (1) year of the first violation;
      3.   An administrative fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a
third or subsequent violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
      The city may reduce these fines for any vendor who subsequently obtains a
valid permit.
   D.   A person who violates any provision of this Chapter other than vending
without a duly-issued sidewalk vending permit is subject to the following
fines:
      1.   An administrative fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation;
      2.   An administrative fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation within one (1) year of the first violation; and
      3.   An administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third
or subsequent violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
Alternatively, the City may revoke the permit issued upon a fourth or
subsequent violation.
   E.   When assessing an administrative fine, the City must take into
consideration the violator's ability to pay the fine. If either of the
following are true, the violator may remit to the City twenty percent (20%) of
the administrative fine imposed:
      1.   The violator is receiving public benefits under one (1) or more of
the following programs: (i) Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and State
Supplementary Payment (SSP); (ii) California Work Opportunity and
Responsibility to Kids Act (CalWORKs) or a federal Tribal Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (Tribal TANF) grant program; (iii) Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program or the California Food Assistance Program; (iv) County
Relief, General Relief (GR), or General Assistance (GA); (v) Cash Assistance
Program for Aged, Blind, and Disabled Legal Immigrants; (vi) In-Home Supportive
Services (IHSS); or (vii) Medi-Cal; or
      2.   The violator's monthly income is one hundred twenty five percent
(125%) or less of the current poverty guidelines updated periodically in the
Federal Register by the United States Department of Health and Human Services
under the authority of paragraph (2) of section 9902 of title 42 of the United
States Code.
   F.   Any fine required to be paid under the provisions of this Chapter shall
be deemed a debt owed by the person to the City. Any person owing money to the
City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought
in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.
(Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
CHAPTER 16
HOME SHARING PERMIT PROGRAM
SECTION:
4-16-1: Purpose
4-16-2: Definitions
4-16-3: Permit Required
4-16-4: Application For Permit; Fee
4-16-5: Permit Expiration
4-16-6: Review Of Permit Application
4-16-7: Conditions Of Permit Issuance And Operational Conditions
4-16-8: Registry
4-16-9: Hosting Platform Responsibilities
4-16-10: Prohibitions
4-16-11: Enforcement; Penalties
4-16-12: Remedies Not Exclusive
4-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to require the owner of a residentially-zoned
dwelling unit that is used for home sharing to apply for and secure a permit
authorizing such use in the manner provided for in this Chapter. (Ord. 1614, 7-
21-2020; amd. Ord. 1653, 12-5-2023)
4-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES: Regulations promulgated by the Director and approved
by the City Council that may include, but are not limited to, application
requirements, interpretations, conditions, reporting requirements, hosting
platform safe harbor requirements, enforcement procedures, and disclosure
requirements to implement the provisions of this Chapter.
BOOKING: A reservation for home sharing.
BOOKING TRANSACTION: Any reservation or payment service provided by a person
who facilitates a transaction for home sharing, between a prospective transient
user and a host.
CHILD or CHILDREN: A person or persons under the age of 13.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof that is used as a complete,
independent living facility for one or more persons containing permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, as required
by the California Building Code.
HOME SHARING: Renting, for a period of 30 consecutive days or less, of one or
more bedrooms in a dwelling unit that is the primary residence of the host,
while the host lives on site, in the dwelling unit, throughout the transient
user’s stay. Home sharing is also considered to be a short-term rental.
HOME SHARING UNIT: A dwelling unit that is made available for home sharing. A
home sharing unit has historically been, and continues to be, included in the
definition of “hotel” for purposes of Title 3, Chapter 4 of this Code.
HOST: Any person who is an owner of a residential dwelling unit offered for use
as home sharing.
HOSTING PLATFORM: A person or entity that participates in the short-term rental
business by providing booking services through which an operator may offer a
short-term rental unit. Hosting platforms usually, though not necessarily,
provide booking services through an online platform that allows an operator to
advertise the short-term rental unit through a website provided by the hosting
platform and the hosting platform conducts a transaction by which potential
renters arrange use and payment, whether the renter pays rent directly to the
operator or to the hosting platform.
LIVES ON-SITE: Maintains a physical presence in the dwelling unit including,
without limitation, all of the following: the storing of one’s clothes and
other personal effects, sleeping overnight, preparing and eating meals, and
engaging in other activities of the type typically engaged in by a person
residing in a dwelling unit.
OWNER: The person, persons, or a trustee of a family trust, which holds legal
or equitable title to a property used for home sharing.
PERSON: A natural person.
PRIMARY RESIDENCE: The residential unit where an owner resides for at least 183
nights per year. A host can only have one primary residence.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: The rental of any portion of any structure for occupancy,
dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes for a period of 30 consecutive calendar
days or less. (Ord. 1614, 7-21-2020)
4-16-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person may rent, offer to rent, or advertise short-term home sharing
rental of a dwelling unit to another person without a valid Short-term Home
Sharing Rental Permit approved and issued in the manner provided for in this
Chapter.
   B.   Any type of short-term rental within the city that does not constitute
home sharing as defined by Section
4-16-2 is not eligible for a permit under this program. (Ord. 1614, 7-21-2020)
4-16-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
An application for a Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit must be made on a
form approved by the Director and must contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the unit for
which the permit is to be issued.
   B.   Evidence that a City business license has been applied for or obtained
for operating a short-term home sharing business.
   C.   Evidence that a valid Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate has
been issued by the City for the home sharing unit.
   D.   Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit and an executed agreement to
indemnify, defend, and hold the City harmless from any and all claims and
liabilities of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the short-
term home sharing rental activity.
   E.   An affidavit signed by the property owner attesting that the property
to be used for short-term home sharing rental is the owner's primary residence
as defined in Section
4-16-2.
   F. Such other information as required by the Administrative Guidelines or as
the Director deems reasonably necessary to administer this Chapter.
   G. The Short-term Home Sharing Permit Application must be signed by the
property owner and notarized.
   H. An application for a Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit must be
accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council.
4-16-5: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
Upon a change of property ownership, the Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit
will automatically expire. For purposes of this Chapter, a change of ownership
has the definition set forth in Revenue and Taxation Code section 60 et seq.
(Ord. 1614, 7-21-2020; amd. Ord. 1642, 12-6-2022; Ord. 1653, 12-5-2023)
4-16-6: REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application for a Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit that meets the
conditions of permit issuance described in Section
4-16-7 must be approved. An application for a Short-term Home Sharing Rental
Permit must be denied if any information submitted by the applicant in
connection with the application is materially false. Further, a permit may not
be issued for any dwelling that is delinquent in the payment for its associated
water service. (Ord. 1614, 7-21-2020)
4-16-7: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT ISSUANCE AND OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   All Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permits are subject to the following
standard conditions:
      1.   No Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit may be issued for a
dwelling unit that does not serve as the property owner’s primary residence. A
host can only have one primary residence.
      2.   Parking must be provided on-site at a ratio of not less than one
parking space per bedroom in the main residence/unit on the parcel and must be
available for use by the short term rental guest(s). Parking spaces may include
garage or driveway spaces. Tandem parking spaces are acceptable provided each
tandem space measures at least 9 feet by 20 feet and does not extend into any
sidewalk or other public right-of-way. If any of the required parking is
provided in a garage, each garage space must be kept clear of debris and able
to accommodate a vehicle at all times.
      3.   The home sharing unit must at all times provide operable basic
health and safety features, including fire extinguishers, smoke detectors, and
carbon monoxide detectors.
      4.   The property of the home sharing unit shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Trash and refuse shall not be left outdoors and shall
not be left stored within public view, except in proper containers for the
purpose of collection by the trash collectors.
      5.   No signs or displays advertising a home sharing unit are allowed on
the subject property.
      6.   The owner must maintain a transient occupancy registration
certificate and must ensure the timely remittance of all transient occupancy
taxes due in accordance with Title 3, Chapter 4 of this Code.
      7.   A home sharing unit is for overnight lodging accommodations only and
may not be used for, or advertised for use for weddings, parties, bachelor or
bachelorette parties, conferences, or similar events. The owner is responsible
for the content of all advertising with respect to the home sharing unit. At no
time during a home sharing stay may the total number of rental guests and
invitees of such guests on the subject parcel exceed 6, excluding children.
      8.   The total occupancy of each home sharing unit may not exceed two
adult guests for each bedroom available for home sharing. The applicable
maximum occupancy must be included in every advertisement, posting, and listing
for a home sharing unit.
      9.   The Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit number must be included in
every advertisement, posting, and listing for a home sharing unit.
      10.   An accessory dwelling unit may not be used for short-term rental.
      11.    The short-term rental of space within any dwelling unit or garage
for the purpose of storing personal property for compensation is prohibited in
all residential zones.
   B.   Home sharing is permitted in the residential unit that is the primary
residence of the property owner within the R-1, R-2, or R-3 Zones, pursuant to
section
15-4A-1 of this Code.
   C.   Reserved.
   D.   A Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit may not be issued if a Short-
term Home Sharing Rental Permit for the unit was previously revoked pursuant to
section
4-16-11(C) or (D) within the previous 12 months.
   E.   The City Manager and the Director have the authority to impose
additional standard conditions, applicable to all home sharing units, as
necessary to achieve the objectives of this Chapter.
   F.   The City Manager and the Director have the authority to impose
additional conditions on any permit in the event of any violation of the
conditions of the permit or the provisions of this Chapter.
   G.   The Director may direct a hosting platform to remove a listing for any
unpermitted home sharing or short-term rental unit or for any home share unit
that had its permit revoked or suspended pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1614,
7-21-2020; amd. Ord. 1642, 12-6-2022; Ord. 1653, 12-5-2023)
4-16-8: REGISTRY:
All owners and their respective property permitted for home sharing pursuant to
this Chapter will be listed on a registry created by the City and updated
periodically. The City shall make a copy of the registry available
electronically to any person upon request. (Ord. 1614, 7-21-2020)
4-16-9: HOSTING PLATFORM RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless an alternative arrangement is authorized by the Administrative
Guidelines, a hosting platform shall be responsible for collecting all
transient occupancy taxes applicable to bookings completed through the hosting
platform and for remitting the same to the City. The hosting platform shall be
considered an agent of the owner for purposes of such transient occupancy tax
collections and remittance responsibilities as set forth in Title 3, Chapter 4
of this Code.
   B.   The hosting platform shall require the host to input the home share
unit’s corresponding Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit number, consistent
with the City’s alphanumeric format, before the listing can be displayed. Any
short-term rental unit listing that predates this ordinance and that does not
have a corresponding Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit number shall be
removed by the hosting platform consistent with this Section.
   C.   A hosting platform shall not complete any booking transaction for any
residential property or unit unless it is listed on the City’s registry created
under Section
4-16-8 at the time the hosting platform receives a fee for booking the
transaction. Upon request from the Director made in a manner specified in the
Administrative Guidelines, the hosting platform must remove a home share or
short-term rental listing or take other action consistent with the
Administrative Guidelines.
   D.   On a quarterly basis, the hosting platform shall provide the City with
a report detailing the total number of nights all home sharing units were
rented through the platform during the applicable reporting period.
   E.   A hosting platform shall not collect or receive a fee or other
financial benefit, directly or indirectly through an agent or intermediary, for
facilitating or providing services ancillary to an unregistered home sharing
unit, including, but not limited to, insurance, concierge services, catering,
restaurant bookings, tours, guide services, entertainment, cleaning, property
management, or maintenance of the residential property or unit.
   F.   Safe Harbor. A hosting platform shall be presumed to be in compliance
with this Chapter if it does either of the following:
      1.   Operates in compliance with subsections (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E)
above, or
      2.   Complies with the Administrative Guidelines issued by the Director
and approved by the City Council that describe how the hosting platform must
satisfy the hosting platform responsibilities in this Chapter.
   G.   The provisions of this Section shall be interpreted in accordance with
otherwise applicable State and Federal laws and will not apply if determined by
the City to be in violation of, or preempted by, any such laws. (Ord. 1614, 7-
21-2020)
4-16-10: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful to offer, operate, maintain, authorize, aid, facilitate
or advertise the home sharing of any portion of any residential dwelling unit
in the city without a valid Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit.
   B.   It is unlawful to offer, operate, maintain, authorize, aid, facilitate
or advertise the short-term rental of any portion of any residential dwelling
unit in the city, other than for home sharing.
   C.   It is unlawful to operate or maintain a home sharing unit in violation
of Section
4-16-7.
   D.   Only a qualifying residential dwelling unit or portion thereof may be
made available for home sharing subject to this Chapter and Title 15.
   E.   It is unlawful to offer, operate, maintain, authorize, aid, facilitate
or advertise the short-term rental of any place or vehicle, other than a
permitted home sharing unit, for purposes of overnight lodging (for example, a
tree house, recreational vehicle, tent, etc.) (Ord. 1614, 7-21-2020)
4-16-11: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or any hosting
platform that fails to meet its obligations under Section 4-16-9, is guilty of
either (i) an infraction which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$2,500 for the first violation and $5,000 for each additional violation within
a twelve-month period, or (ii) a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than six months, or by both.
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or hosting
platform that violates its obligations under Section 4-16-9, shall be subject
to administrative citations and penalties pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 2A of
this Code.
   C.   If the property upon which a short-term home sharing rental unit is
located is the subject or the site of two violations of any of the provisions
of this Chapter, or of Chapters 1, 2, or 13 of Title 7 of this Code, the Short-
term Home Sharing Rental Permit for the unit shall be automatically revoked. In
such a case, no new Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit may be issued for the
unit for the earlier of either three months from the effective date of
revocation; or a change of the ownership of the unit to a new person.
   D.   In addition to the penalties set forth herein, if the short-term home
sharing rental property is the site of a loud or unruly gathering in violation
of Section
7-12-3 that results in the issuance of an administrative citation or criminal
charge, the Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit will be automatically revoked
if and when the administrative citation becomes final (i.e., the time for
administrative or judicial review has passed or a final court judgment has been
entered upholding the citation) or a criminal conviction is obtained. In such a
case, no new Short-term Home Sharing Rental Permit may be issued for the unit
for the earlier of either three months from the effective date of revocation;
or a change of the ownership of the unit to a new person.
   E.   The City may issue and serve administrative subpoena, pursuant to
Government Code §§ 34104 et seq., as necessary to obtain specific information
regarding short-term home sharing rental listings located in the City,
including, without limitation, the names of the persons responsible for each
such listing, the address of each such listing, the length of stay for each
such listing, the listing price, and any other information necessary for the
City to determine compliance with this Chapter.
   F.   The remedies provided in this Section are not exclusive, and nothing in
this Section shall preclude the City’s use or application of any other
remedies, penalties or procedures established by law. (Ord. 1614, 7-21-2020;
amd. Ord. 1642, 12-6-2022; Ord. 1653, 12-5-2023)
4-16-12: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this Chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available to the City under any applicable federal, state or local law and it
is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 1614,
7-21-2020)
CHAPTER 17
CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
SECTION:
4-17-1: Title
4-17-2: Authority And Purpose
4-17-3: Intent
4-17-4: Definitions
4-17-5: Tax Imposed
4-17-6: Registration, Reporting, And Remittance Of Tax
4-17-7: Payments And Communications -- Timely Remittance
4-17-8: Payment -- When Taxes Deemed Delinquent
4-17-9: Notice Not Required By City
4-17-10: Penalties And Interest
4-17-11: Refunds And Credits
4-17-12: Refunds And Procedures
4-17-13: Personal Cultivation Not Taxed
4-17-14: Administration Of The Tax
4-17-15: Appeal Procedure
4-17-16: Enforcement -- Action To Collect
4-17-17: Apportionment
4-17-18: Constitutionality And Legality
4-17-19: Audit And Examination Of Premises And Records
4-17-20: Other Licenses, Permits, Taxes, Fees Or Charges
4-17-21: Payment Of Tax Does Not Authorize Unlawful Business
4-17-22: Deficiency Determinations
4-17-23: Failure To Report -- Nonpayment, Fraud
4-17-24: Tax Assessment -- Notice Requirements
4-17-25: Tax Assessment -- Hearing, Application, And Determination
4-17-26: Relief From Taxes -- Disaster Relief
4-17-27: Conviction For Violation -- Taxes Not Waived
4-17-28: Violation Deemed Misdemeanor
4-17-29: Severability
4-17-30: Remedies Cumulative
4-17-31: Amendment Or Modification
4-17-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance. This
Chapter shall be applicable in the City of El Segundo, California which shall
be referred to herein as "City." (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes, pursuant
to Sections 37101, and 37100.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, upon cannabis
and hemp businesses that engage in business in the City. The Cannabis Business
Tax is levied based upon business gross receipts except for commercial cannabis
cultivation or commercial industrial hemp cultivation which shall be taxed on
square footage. It is not a sales and use tax, a tax upon income, or a tax upon
real property and shall not be calculated or assessed as such. The Cannabis
Business Tax shall not be separately identified or otherwise specifically
assessed or charged to any member, customer, patient, or caretaker. The
Cannabis Business Tax is a general tax enacted solely for general, governmental
purposes of the City and not for specific purposes. All of the proceeds from
the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be placed in the City's general fund and
be available for any lawful City purpose. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-3: INTENT:
The intent of this Chapter is to levy a tax on all cannabis or industrial hemp
businesses that operate in the City, regardless of whether such business would
have been legal at the time this chapter was adopted. Nothing in this Chapter
shall be interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would
not otherwise be legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at
the time the activity is undertaken. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when
used in this chapter:
ARM’S LENGTH TRANSACTION: A sale entered into in good faith and for valuable
consideration at a sales price that reflects the fair market value in the open
market between two informed and willing parties, neither under any compulsion
to participate in the transaction.
BUSINESS: Shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in
within the City, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade,
profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, whether or not
carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by
an employee to his or her employer.
CALENDAR YEAR: January 1 through December 31, of the same year.
CANNABIS: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or
Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude
or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" shall not include "industrial
hemp," unless otherwise specified.
CANNABIS BUSINESS: Any business activity involving cannabis or industrial hemp,
including but not limited to cultivating, transporting, distributing,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing,
packaging, delivering, testing, dispensing, retailing, and wholesaling of
cannabis, cannabis products, industrial hemp, industrial hemp products or of
ancillary products and accessories, whether or not carried on for gain or
profit.
CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX: The tax due pursuant to this chapter for engaging in a
cannabis business in the City.
CANNABIS PRODUCT: Raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw
agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible
product, or a topical product. "Cannabis product" also means cannabis products
as defined by Section 11018.1 of the California Health and Safety Code and is
not limited to medicinal cannabis products.
CANOPY: All areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis or industrial hemp
plant whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. When plants occupy
multiple horizontal planes (as when plants are placed on shelving above other
plants) each plane shall be counted as a separate canopy area.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION: Cultivation of cannabis or industrial hemp
undertaken in the course of conducting a cannabis business.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS PERMIT: A permit, license, certificate, or other approval
issued by the City to a person to authorize that person to operate a cannabis
business or engage in business as a cannabis business within the City.
CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying,
curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis or industrial hemp and includes, but
is not limited to, the operation of a nursery.
EMPLOYEE: Each and every person engaged in the operation or conduct of any
business, whether as owner, member of the owner's family, partner, associate,
agent, manager, or solicitor, and each and every other person employed or
working in such business for a wage, salary, commission, barter or any other
form of compensation.
ENGAGED IN BUSINESS AS A CANNABIS BUSINESS: The commencing, conducting,
operating, managing, or carrying on of a cannabis business, whether done as
owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, or otherwise,
whether operating from a fixed location in the City or coming into the City
from an outside location to engage in such activities. A person shall be deemed
engaged in business within the City if:
   1.   Such person or person's employee maintains a fixed place of business
within the City for the benefit or partial benefit of such person;
   2.   Such person or person's employee owns or leases real property within
the City for business purposes;
   3.   Such person or person's employee regularly maintains a stock of
tangible personal property in the City for sale in the ordinary course of
business;
   4.   Such person or person's employee regularly conducts solicitation of
business within the City; or
   5.   Such person or person's employee performs work or renders services in
the City.
The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning of
"engaged in business."
EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS: Evidence such as, without limitation, use of signs,
circulars, cards, or any other advertising media, including the use of internet
or telephone solicitation, or representation to a government agency or to the
public that such person is engaged in a cannabis business in the City.
FISCAL YEAR: July 1, through June 30, which is the period used by the City for
financial reporting and budgeting.
GROSS RECEIPTS: Except as otherwise specifically provided, means, whether
designated as a sales price, royalty, rent, membership fee, ATM service fee,
delivery fee, slotting fee, any other fee, vaping room service charge,
commission, dividend, or other designation, the total amount (including all
receipts, cash, credits, services and property of any kind or nature) received
or payable for sales of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance of
any act or service of any nature for which a charge is made or credit allowed
(whether such service, act or employment is done as part of or in connection
with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not), without any deduction
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials
used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any other
expense whatsoever. In the event the business is involved in a "non-arms"
length transaction the gross receipts will be subject to the fair market value
using a methodology approved by the Tax Administrator. However, the following
shall be excluded from Gross Receipts:
   1.   Cash discounts were allowed and taken on sales;
   2.   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase
price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
   3.   Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers to
the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or
return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts;
   4.   Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or surplus
trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in the
regular course of the taxpayer's business;
   5.   Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or
units of the same business located in the City of El Segundo and if authorized
by the Tax Administrator in writing in accordance with Section
4-17-14 (B);
   6.   Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which
reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible
in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in
the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or
portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected,
they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they
are recovered;
   7.   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when
forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded;
   8.   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent
or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom
collected. These agents or trustees must provide the Tax Administrator with the
names and the addresses of the others, and the amounts paid to them. This
exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained
by the agent or trustees;
   9.   Retail sales of non-cannabis products, such as t-shirts, sweaters,
hats, stickers, key chains, bags, books, posters, rolling papers, cannabis
accessories such as pipes, pipe screens, vape pen batteries (without cannabis
or industrial hemp) or other personal tangible property which the Tax
Administrator has excluded in writing by issuing an administrative ruling per
Section
4-17-14 shall not be subject to the cannabis business tax under this chapter.
   10.   Payments made by the tax-reporting cannabis business (Seller) to a
cannabis business (Buyer) for the difference in the original acquisition price
and subsequent renegotiated or finalized selling price of products or services
sold to a specific end customer. This type of transaction is referred to as a
"Billback". The tax-reporting cannabis business must provide supporting
documentation to substantiate the transaction in order to be eligible for an
exemption.
   11.   Any business which sells industrial hemp and/or hemp products or
offers services or activities related to industrial hemp or hemp products and /
or which is not required to obtain a cannabis or industrial hemp permit or
license from the City or the State for the purpose of cultivating, growing,
drying, curing, manufacturing, processing, packaging, transporting,
distributing, testing or selling of industrial hemp either wholesale or retail
shall be exempt from the cannabis tax provided that such business does not
generate more than 50% of their total gross receipts in the reporting period
from the business from industrial hemp activities. However, the exemption may
be amended by the City Council by resolution or ordinance pursuant to Section
4-17-5 (B) to increase or decrease the percentage of the business's hemp and/or
hemp products gross receipts reporting from zero to 100%. To the extent the
gross receipts from the hemp activities do not meet the relevant percentage to
be included, this exclusion shall reduce the gross receipts to zero for the
sole purpose of calculating the cannabis tax.
INDUSTRIAL HEMP: A crop that is limited to types of the plant Cannabis sativa
L. having no more than three-tenths of 1% tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) contained
in the dried flowering tops, whether growing or not; the seeds of the plant;
the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds
or resin produced therefrom. However, should the federal or state legislative
body increase or decrease the percentage of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) then
this new limit shall be applicable to the tax unless modified by resolution or
ordinance of the City Council pursuant to Section
4-17-31.
INDUSTRIAL HEMP PRODUCTS: Any raw hemp that has undergone a process whereby the
raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible
product, or a topical product. "Hemp product" also means hemp products as
defined by Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.
LIGHTING: A source of light that is primarily used for promoting the biological
process of plant growth. Lighting does not include sources of light that
primarily exist for the safety or convenience of staff or visitors to the
facility, such as emergency lighting, walkway lighting, or light admitted via
small skylights, windows, or ventilation openings.
MEDICINAL CANNABIS or MEDICINAL CANNABIS PRODUCT: Cannabis or a cannabis
product, intended to be sold or sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use
Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the Health and
Safety Code, for a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a
physician's recommendation, or a cannabis card issued pursuant to Health and
Safety Code Section 11362.71.
NURSERY: A facility or part of a facility that is used only for producing
clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used
specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis or
industrial hemp.
NON-ARM’S LENGTH TRANSACTION: A transaction that does not meet the definition
of an "arm's length transaction." In other words, the transaction is not a sale
entered into in good faith and that reflects fair market value in the open
market. One example of a non-arm's length transaction would be when a
cultivator sells cannabis goods to a cannabis distributor at a sales price that
is lower than what the same cultivator would to other cannabis distributors, or
which does not reflect the fair market value in the open market.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural
as well as the singular number.
PROCESSING: A cultivation site that conducts only trimming, drying, curing,
grading, packaging, or labeling of cannabis, industrial hemp and
nonmanufactured cannabis products.
RETAILER: A person as defined in Section
4-17-4 (W) who sells cannabis, cannabis products, hemp and/or hemp products at
their place of business or by delivery to an end user or customer for use or
consumption rather than to another person or business for resale.
SALE, SELL and TO SELL: Means and includes any sale, exchange, or barter either
as a retailer or wholesaler by a person as defined by Section
4-17-4 (W) . It shall also mean any transaction whereby, for any consideration,
title to cannabis, cannabis products, industrial hemp and/or industrial hemp
products are transferred from one person to another and includes the delivery
of cannabis, cannabis products, industrial hemp and/or industrial hemp products
pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same, but does not include
the return of cannabis, cannabis products, industrial hemp and/or industrial
hemp products to the licensee from whom the cannabis, cannabis product,
industrial hemp and/or industrial hemp product was purchased.
STATE: The State of California.
STATE LICENSE, LICENSE or REGISTRATION: A state license issued pursuant to
California Business & Professions Code Section 26050, and all other applicable
state laws, required for operating a cannabis business.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The City Manager of the City of El Segundo or his/her
designee(s).
TESTING LABORATORY: A cannabis business that (i) offers or performs tests of
cannabis, cannabis products, industrial hemp and/or industrial hemp products
(ii) offers no service other than such tests, (iii) sells no products,
excepting only testing supplies and materials, (iv) is accredited by an
accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the
cannabis industry in the state and (v) is registered with the Department of
Cannabis Control or other state agency. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-5: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Beginning January 1, 2023, there is imposed upon each person who is
engaged in business as a cannabis business a cannabis business tax. Such tax is
payable regardless of whether the person has been issued a commercial cannabis
business license, permit, or certificate to operate lawfully in the City or is
operating unlawfully. The City's acceptance of a cannabis business tax payment
from a cannabis business operating illegally shall not constitute the City's
approval or consent to such illegal operations.
   B.   The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, increase or decrease
the rate of the cannabis business tax, including the initial rate of cannabis
business tax. The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, increase or
decrease the rate of the medicinal cannabis business tax, including the initial
rate of the medicinal cannabis business tax, independent of other cannabis
business tax activities. In addition, the City Council may, by resolution or
ordinance, increase or decrease the rate of the cannabis business tax on hemp
or hemp products, including the initial rate of the tax on hemp or hemp
products independent of other cannabis activities. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in no event shall the City Council repeal this tax or set any
adjusted rate that exceeds the maximum rates calculated pursuant to this
chapter.
   C.   The maximum rate of the cannabis business tax shall be calculated as
follows:
      1.   For every person engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation,
including cultivation of industrial hemp, in the City:
         a.   Through January 1, 2026, the annual maximum rate shall be:
            (1)   Twenty dollars ($20.00) per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses exclusively artificial lighting.
            (2)   Fourteen dollars ($14.00) per square foot of canopy space in
a facility that uses a combination of natural and supplemental lighting as
defined in Section
4-17-4 (S) of this chapter.
            (3)   Eight dollars ($8.00) per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses no artificial lighting.
            (4)   Four dollars ($4.00) per square foot of canopy space for any
nursery.
         b.   On January 1, 2026 and on each January 1, thereafter, the maximum
annual tax rates specified in Subsection 4-17-5 (C) (1) (a), shall increase by
the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index ("CPI") for consumers in
the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area as published by the United States
Government Bureau of Labor Statistics. However, no CPI adjustment resulting in
a decrease of any tax imposed by this subsection shall be made.
      2.   For every person engaged in the operation of a testing laboratory
for cannabis, cannabis products, industrial hemp and/or industrial hemp
products the person shall be subject to the maximum tax rate not to exceed two
percent (2%) of gross receipts.
      3.   For every person engaged in retail sales of cannabis, cannabis
products, industrial hemp, and/or industrial hemp products, including as a
retailer (dispensary) or non-storefront retailer (retail delivery business), or
microbusiness, the person shall be subject to the maximum tax rate not to
exceed ten percent (10%) of gross receipts.
      4.   For every person engaged in distribution of cannabis, cannabis
products, industrial hemp and/or industrial hemp products, the person shall be
subject to the maximum tax rate not to exceed ten percent (10%) of gross
receipts.
      5.   For every person engaged in manufacturing or processing of cannabis,
cannabis products, industrial hemp and/or industrial hemp products, or any
other type of cannabis business not described in Section 4-17-5 (C) (1), (2),
(3), or (4) the person shall be subject to the maximum tax rate not to exceed
ten percent (10%) of gross receipts.
   D.   Persons subject to the cannabis business tax shall register with the
City and if applicable pay the registration fee adopted by resolution or
ordinance by the City Council. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-6: REGISTRATION, REPORTING AND REMITTANCE OF TAX:
   A.   Registration Of Cannabis Business: All cannabis businesses shall be
required to annually register as follows:
      1.   All persons engaging in business as a cannabis business, whether an
existing, newly established or acquired business shall register with the Tax
Administrator within thirty (30) calendar days of commencing operation and
shall annually renew such registration within thirty (30) calendar days of the
business registration anniversary date of each year thereafter. In registering,
such persons shall furnish to the Tax Administrator a sworn statement, upon a
form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, setting forth the following
information:
         a.   The name of the business;
         b.   The names and addresses of each owner;
         c.   The exact nature or kind of business;
         d.   The place where such business is to be carried on; and
         e.   Any additional information which the Tax Administrator may
require.
   B.   An annual registration fee in accordance with the current and approved
City fee schedule shall be presented with the sworn statement submitted under
this chapter. This fee shall not be considered a tax as described in Section
4-1-4 and may be adjusted annually by resolution or ordinance of the City
Council.
   C.   The cannabis business tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid, in
arrears, on a monthly basis. Each person owing a cannabis business tax shall on
or before the last day of the month following the close of each month file with
the Tax Administrator a statement ("tax statement") of the tax owed for that
calendar month and the basis for calculating that tax. The Tax Administrator
may require that the tax statement be submitted on a form prescribed by the Tax
Administrator. The tax for each calendar month shall be due and payable on the
same date that the tax statement is due.
   D.   Upon cessation of a cannabis business, tax statements and payments
shall be immediately due for all calendar months up through the calendar month
during which cessation occurred.
   E.   In the event that there is a change in ownership of any cannabis
business:
      1.   The new owner is required to submit an updated registration form to
the Tax Administrator;
      2.   The new owner is subject to an audit by the Tax Administrator; and
      3.   Unless otherwise provided by law, it is the joint and several
liability of both the seller and buyer to remit any taxes, interest, penalties,
and fees due up until the date of sale; otherwise, enforcement action may be
taken pursuant to Section
4-17-16 of this chapter against both the seller and/or buyer in an amount to be
determined by the Tax Administrator.
   F.   The Tax Administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish
alternative reporting and payment periods for any taxpayer as the Tax
Administrator deems necessary to ensure effective collection of the cannabis
business tax. The Tax Administrator may also require that a deposit, to be
applied against the taxes for a calendar month, be made by a taxpayer at the
beginning of that calendar month. In no event shall the deposit required by the
Tax Administrator exceed the tax amount he or she projects will be owed by the
taxpayer for the calendar month. The Tax Administrator may require that a
taxpayer make payments via a cashier's check, money order, wire transfer, or
similar instrument. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-7: PAYMENTS AND COMMUNICATIONS -- TIMELY REMITTANCE:
Whenever any payment, statement, report, request, or other communication is
due, it must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date. A
postmark will not be accepted as timely remittance. If the due date would fall
on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday observed by the City, the due date shall be
the next regular business day on which the City is open to the public. (Ord.
1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-8: PAYMENT -- WHEN TAXES DEEMED DELINQUENT:
Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this chapter,
the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date
as specified in Sections
4-17-6 and
4-17-7. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-9: NOTICE NOT REQUIRED BY CITY:
The City may as a courtesy send a tax notice to the cannabis business which
owes the City a cannabis business tax. However, the Tax Administrator is not
required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to
the provisions of this chapter. Failure to send such notice or bill shall not
affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-10: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   Any person who fails or refuses to pay any cannabis business tax
required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall
pay penalties and interest as follows:
      1.   A penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax, in
addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated
from the due date of the tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per month.
      2.   If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month
beyond the due date, an additional penalty equal to twenty-five percent (25%)
of the amount of the tax, plus interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per
month on the unpaid tax and on the unpaid penalties.
      3.   Interest shall be applied at the rate of one percent (1%) per month
on the first day of the month for the full month and will continue to accrue
monthly on the tax and penalty until the balance is paid in full.
   B.   Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a
cannabis business tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the
bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus
any fees, penalties, and interest as provided for in this chapter, and any
other amount allowed under state law.
   C.   The Tax Administrator may waive the penalties imposed upon any person
under this Section 4-17-10 if:
      1.   The person requests a waiver of penalties by submitting a written
request for waiver to the Tax Administrator no later than June 30 of the second
fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the tax became delinquent; and
      2.   The person provides evidence satisfactory to the Tax Administrator
that the failure to pay timely was due to circumstances beyond the control of
the person and occurred notwithstanding the exercise of ordinary care and in
the absence of willful neglect; and the person paid the delinquent taxes,
penalties, accrued interest, and fees owed prior to applying to the Tax
Administrator for a waiver.
   D.   The waiver provisions specified in Section 4-17-10 (C) shall not apply
to interest accrued on the delinquent taxes and a waiver shall be granted only
once during any twenty-four (24) month period. The Tax Administrator's decision
on a request for a waiver of penalties is final and conclusive and not subject
to appeal under Section
4-17-15. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-11: REFUNDS AND CREDITS:
   A.   No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter,
except as provided in Section
4-17-12.
   B.   No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made
because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a
business. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-12: REFUNDS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Whenever the amount of any cannabis business tax, penalty or interest
has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or
received by the City under this chapter, it may be refunded to the claimant who
paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund signed under the penalty
of perjury is filed with the Tax Administrator within one (1) year of the date
the tax was originally due or paid, whichever came first. A person may only
file a claim for refund if the person paid the tax. No person shall be entitled
to a refund unless the person can support the claim by written records
sufficient to show entitlement thereto. The Tax Administrator's decision on a
claim for refund is final and conclusive and not subject to appeal under
Section
4-17-15.
   B.   The Tax Administrator, his or her designee which may include a third
party, or any other City officer charged with the administration of this
chapter shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business
records of the claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant
to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant
refuses to allow such examination of claimant's books and business records
after requested by the Tax Administrator to do so. The Tax Administrator may
collect a fee adopted by resolution by the City Council to pay for the cost of
examination and audit should the books and records be provided in a form
insufficient to allow the Tax Administrator to make a determination on the
claim for refund.
   C.   In the event that the cannabis business tax was erroneously paid in an
amount in excess of the tax due, and the error is attributable to the City, the
City shall refund the amount of tax erroneously paid; provided that (i) a claim
for refund has been timely filed with the Tax Administrator; and (ii) the
refund cannot exceed, under any circumstance, the amount of tax overpaid during
the twelve (12) months preceding the last month for which the claim states the
tax was overpaid. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-13: PERSONAL CULTIVATION NOT TAXED:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis cultivation
or personal use of cannabis, to the extent those activities are authorized in
the "Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act," as may be
amended. This chapter shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is
specifically exempted from state licensing requirements, that meets the
definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under state law, and
provided that the individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to
that personal cultivation or use. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-14: ADMINISTRATION OF THE TAX:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to collect the taxes,
interest, penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this chapter.
   B.   For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter
generally, the Tax Administrator may from time to time promulgate such
administrative interpretations, rules, and procedures consistent with the
purpose, intent, and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems necessary
to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement.
   C.   The Tax Administrator may take such administrative actions as needed to
administer the cannabis business tax, including but not limited to:
      1.   Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting
of the tax;
      2.   Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of
this chapter;
      3.   Receive and record all taxes remitted to the City as provided in
this chapter;
      4.   Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant to
this chapter;
      5.   Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this chapter;
      6.   Determine amounts owed under and enforce collection pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-15: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A taxpayer aggrieved by a decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to the
amount of tax, interest, penalties, and fees, if any, due under this chapter
may appeal only if a hearing was requested and attended pursuant to Section
4-17-25. An appeal may be made by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within thirty (30) calendar days of the serving or mailing of the Tax
Administrator's decision of the amount due. Upon receipt of a timely notice of
appeal, the City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall fix a time and place for
hearing such appeal with a hearing officer or other appointed body by the City
Council. The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall give at least ten (10)
calendar days' notice of the appeal hearing in writing to such taxpayer at the
last known place of address. The hearing officer shall render a written
decision that shall be served on the taxpayer at the last known place of
address. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive. Any
amount found to be due by the hearing officer shall be immediately due and
payable upon the service of the decision. If no notice of appeal is filed
within the time prescribed in this Section, the Tax Administrator's decision
with respect to the amount of tax, interest, penalties, and fees due is final
and conclusive. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-16: ENFORCEMENT -- ACTION TO COLLECT:
   A.    Any taxes, interest, penalties, and/or fees required to be paid under
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the City. Any
person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable in an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such
debt. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed a limitation upon the
right of the City to bring any other action including criminal, civil and
equitable actions, based upon the failure to pay the tax, interest, penalties,
and/or fees imposed by this chapter or the failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-17: APPORTIONMENT:
If a person subject to the tax is operating both within the City and outside
the City, it is the intent of the City to apply the cannabis business tax so
that the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed
activity actually carried on in the City. To the extent federal or state law
requires that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may
indicate said apportionment on his or her tax return. The Tax Administrator may
promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds
useful or necessary. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-18: CONSTITUTIONALITY AND LEGALITY:
This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United
States and California Constitutions and state law. None of the tax provided for
by this chapter shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon
interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection or due process clauses
of the Constitutions of the United States or the State of California or a
violation of any other provision of the California Constitution or state law.
If a person believes that the tax, as applied to him or her, is impermissible
under applicable law, he or she may request that the Tax Administrator release
him or her from the obligation to pay the impermissible portion of the tax.
(Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-19: AUDIT AND EXAMINATION OF PREMISES AND RECORDS:
   A.   For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of cannabis business tax
owed or verifying any representations made by any taxpayer to the City in
support of his or her tax calculation, the Tax Administrator or his/her
designees which may include a third party shall have the power to inspect any
location where commercial cannabis activity occurs and to audit and examine all
books and records (including, but not limited to bookkeeping records, access to
space utilized for cannabis related activities, METRC data, and/or point-of-
sale data, state and/or federal income tax returns, excise tax returns, and
other records relating to the gross receipts of the business) of persons
engaged in cannabis businesses. In conducting such investigation, the Tax
Administrator, or his/her designees which may include a third party shall have
the power to inspect space utilized for cannabis related activities, any
equipment or software, such as computers, software systems, platforms, and
databases (including METRC), and/or point of sale systems, to include any keys
or access codes for access to and use of the equipment and/or software, that
may contain such records.
   B.   It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and
payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of at least three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the City, which records the Tax Administrator or
his/her designee, which may include a third party, shall have the right to
inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-20: OTHER LICENSES, PERMITS, TAXES, FEES, OR CHARGES:
   A.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be
in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any commercial
cannabis permit, City license, permit, or other certificate required by, under
or by virtue of any provision of any other Chapter of this code or any other
ordinance or resolution of the City, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu
of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or other charge imposed, assessed
or required under any other Chapter of this code or any other ordinance or
resolution of the City. Any references made or contained in any other Chapter
of this code to any licenses, permits, certificates, taxes, fees, or charges,
or to any schedule of license, permit, certificate, or fees, shall be deemed to
refer to the licenses, permits or certificates, and their respective taxes,
fees or charges, or schedule of fees, provided for in other Chapters of this
code.
   B.   A commercial cannabis permit issued under the El Segundo Municipal Code
may be revoked, suspended or not renewed in the event that the business holding
that permit has failed to (i) make a deposit required by the Tax Administrator
pursuant to Section
4-17-6 or (ii) timely pay all taxes, interest and penalties owed by that
business under this chapter. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-21: PAYMENT OF TAX DOES NOT AUTHORIZE UNLAWFUL BUSINESS:
   A.   The payment of a cannabis business tax required by this chapter, and
its acceptance by the City, shall not entitle any person to carry on any
cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements
of this code and all other applicable state laws.
   B.   No tax paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or
any business in violation of any local or state law. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-22: DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS:
If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as required
under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is
correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be paid
and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in
the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or
that may come into his or her possession within three (3) years of the date the
tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of
the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person
discontinues engaging in a cannabis business, a deficiency determination may be
made at any time within three (3) years thereafter as to any liability arising
from engaging in such cannabis business whether or not a deficiency
determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due.
Whenever a deficiency determination is made, a notice shall be given to the
person concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under
Sections
4-17-24 and
4-17-25. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-23: FAILURE TO REPORT -- NONPAYMENT, FRAUD:
   A.   Under any of the following circumstances, the Tax Administrator may
make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person
under this chapter at any time:
      1.   If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the
provisions of this chapter;
      2.   If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this
chapter;
      3.   If the person has not, after demand by the Tax Administrator, filed
a corrected statement, or furnished to the Tax Administrator adequate
substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or
paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter; or
      4.   If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any
cannabis business tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in
addition to penalties and interest otherwise payable under this chapter and any
other penalties allowed by law.
   B.   The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any
tax known by the Tax Administrator to be due or estimated by the Tax
Administrator, after consideration of all information within the Tax
Administrator's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person
assessed, to be due under each applicable provision of this chapter and shall
include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the
date of the notice of assessment. The notice shall state that the person has
thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the notice to make a written request
for an informal hearing before the Tax Administrator. The notice shall also
state that if the person fails to timely request an informal hearing within the
time allowed, the amount determined by the Tax Administrator is final and
conclusive and is immediately due and payable. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-24: TAX ASSESSMENT -- NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal
delivery, by overnight delivery by a nationally-recognized courier service, or
by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon,
addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business or to
such other address as he or she shall register with the Tax Administrator for
the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter; or, should the
person have no address registered with the Tax Administrator for such purpose,
then to such person's last known address. For the purpose of Section 4-17-24, a
service by overnight delivery shall be deemed to have occurred one (1) calendar
day following deposit with a courier and service by mail shall be deemed to
have occurred three (3) days following deposit in the United States mail. (Ord.
1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-25: TAX ASSESSMENT -- HEARING, APPLICATION, AND DETERMINATION:
Within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of service of the notice of
assessment the person may apply in writing to the Tax Administrator for an
informal hearing on the assessment. If application for an informal hearing is
not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the Tax
Administrator shall become final and conclusive. Within thirty (30) calendar
days of the receipt of any such application for an informal hearing, the Tax
Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for an informal hearing before
him or her, or his/her designee, no later than thirty (30) calendar days after
the receipt of the application, unless a later date is agreed to by the Tax
Administrator and the person requesting the informal hearing. Notice of such
informal hearing shall be given by the Tax Administrator to the person
requesting such informal hearing no later than five (5) calendar days prior to
such informal hearing. A hearing under this section shall be informal and need
not follow any formal rules of evidence. At such hearing said applicant may
appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the Tax Administrator
should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing the Tax
Administrator shall determine and reassess (if necessary) the proper amount of
tax, interest, penalties, and fees to be charged and shall give written notice
of the decision to the person in the manner prescribed in Section
4-17-24 for giving notice of assessment. No appeal of a notice of assessment
may be made under Section
4-17-15 unless an informal hearing is timely requested and the person attends
the hearing. If the person fails to appear at the informal hearing, the amount
due determined by the Tax Administrator in the notice of assessment is final
and conclusive. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-26: RELIEF FROM TAXES -- DISASTER RELIEF:
   A.   If a person is unable to comply with any tax requirement imposed under
this chapter due to a disaster impacting its cannabis business, the person may
notify the Tax Administrator of its inability to comply and request relief from
the tax requirement. For purposes of this chapter, "disaster" means fire,
flood, storm, tidal wave, earthquake, or similar public calamity resulting in
physical damage to real property, whether or not resulting from natural causes.
   B.   The person shall provide any information required by the Tax
Administrator including, without limitation, why relief is requested, the time
period for which the relief is requested, and the reason relief is needed for
the specific amount of time. The person agrees to grant the Tax Administrator
or his/her designee access to the location where the cannabis business has been
impacted due to a disaster.
   C.   The Tax Administrator, in his/her sole discretion, may provide relief
from the cannabis business tax requirement for businesses whose operations have
been impacted by a disaster if such tax relief does not exceed ten thousand
($10,000.00) dollars. Such temporary relief may be granted for a reasonable
amount of time, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion, and the amount and
duration of relief should be based upon how long it would reasonably take for
the cannabis business to recover from the disaster. The Tax Administrator may
require that the cannabis business follow certain conditions to receive
temporary relief from the cannabis business tax requirement. The Tax
Administrator's decision on a request for relief and the conditions that may be
imposed for relief under this section are final and conclusive and not subject
to appeal under Section
4-17-15. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-27: CONVICTION FOR VIOLATION -- TAXES NOT WAIVED:
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax
shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt
unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal
prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any state
law requiring the payment of all taxes. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-28: VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-29: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unlawful, unenforceable, or otherwise void, that determination shall have no
effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this
chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions
hereof are severable. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-30: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this Chapter, or which are available
under any other provision of this code and any other provision of law or equity
are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the
use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
4-17-31: AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION:
Except as set forth in this section, this chapter may be amended or modified
but not repealed by the City Council without a vote of the people. However, as
required by Article XIIIC of the California Constitution, voter approval is
required for any amendment that would expand, extend, or increase the rate of
any tax levied pursuant to this chapter beyond the maximums set forth in this
chapter. The people of the City of El Segundo affirm that the following actions
shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:
   A.   The restoration or adjustment of the rate of the tax to a rate that is
no higher than that allowed by this Chapter, in those circumstances where,
among others, the City Council has previously acted to reduce the rate of the
tax or is incrementally implementing an increase authorized by this Chapter;
   B.   An action that interprets or clarifies (i) the methodology of applying
or calculating the tax or (ii) any definition applicable to the tax, so long as
the interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior
interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Chapter; or
   C.   The collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter even if the City had,
for some period of time, failed to collect the tax. (Ord. 1644, 12-13-2022)
TITLE 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Health Code   1
Solid Waste Management   2
Littering Public Places   3
Stormwater And Urban Runoff Pollution Control   4
Hazardous Materials, Wastes   5
Inventory And Emergency Response Plan   5A
Underground Storage   5B
Source Reduction Program   5C
Smoking Regulated Or Prohibited   6
Regulation Of Tobacco Product Sales   6A
Tobacco Retailer License   6B
Planning And Land Development Program Implementation   7
Single-Use Foodware Accessories And Standard Condiments   8
Mandatory Organic Waste Disposal Reduction   9
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH CODE
SECTION:
5-1-1: Adoption Of County Health Code
5-1-2: Interpretation
5-1-3: Food Establishment; Adoption Of County Regulations
5-1-4: Additions And Amendments To County Health Code
5-1-1: ADOPTION OF COUNTY HEALTH CODE:
The "Public Health Code (Ordinance 7583) County Of Los Angeles", adopted by the
County Board of Supervisors, August 25, 1959 and in effect September 25, 1959,
as amended, is hereby adopted with the same force and effect as though set out
herein in full. One copy of said "public health code" is on file, and open to
public inspection, in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 634, 3-22-1965; amd.
2000 Code)
5-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
The following rules shall govern the interpretation of said public health code:
   A.   Whenever the word "County" or any abbreviation thereof appears in said
public health code, it shall be interpreted and deemed to mean the word "City".
   B.   Whenever the words "Los Angeles" or any abbreviation thereof, appear in
said public health code, they shall be interpreted and deemed to mean the words
"City of El Segundo".
   C.   Whenever there is a conflict between any of the provisions of said
public health code and other ordinances of the City heretofore or hereafter
adopted relating specifically to the same subject matter, then the latter shall
prevail.
   D.   The definition or regulation of any activity, condition, or structure
in said public health code shall not be interpreted or deemed to permit or
allow the conduct of any such activity or the construction or maintenance of
any such condition or structure as may be otherwise prohibited or restricted by
any other ordinances of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted. (Ord. 634, 3-
22-1965)
5-1-3: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS; ADOPTION OF COUNTY REGULATIONS:
Pursuant to its authority and State Government Code section 50022.1 et seq.,
the following sections of the Los Angeles County Code are incorporated by
reference into the El Segundo City Code with the same force and effect as
though set out herein in full: (Ord. 1289, 11-4-1998; amd. 2000 Code)
8.04.165   Food Official Inspection Report
8.04.225   Grading And Letter Grade Card
8.04.275   Inspection Score Card
8.04.337   Notice Of Closure
8.04.405   Routine Inspection
8.04.752   Posting Requirements - Penalty For Non-Compliance - Documents
Available For Public Review
8.04.755   Letter Grade Card And Inspection Score Care - Period Of Validity
8.04.943   Public Health Permit Suspension Or Revocation - Notice Of Closure
11.11.010   Definitions
11.11.020   Application And Effect
11.11.030   Procedure For Obtaining A Food Handler's Training Certificate
11.11.040   Food Handler's Training Course
11.11.050   Multiple Food Service Operations
11.11.060   Exemptions
11.11.070   Display Of Food Handler's Training Certificate
11.11.080   Change Of Certified Food Handler
11.11.090   List Of Certified Food Handlers
11.11.100   Expiration
11.11.110   Duplicate Food Handler's Training Certificate
11.11.120   Revocation Of Food Handler's Training Certificate
11.11.130   Right To Appeal Following Revocation
(Ord. 1289, 11-4-1998)
5-1-4: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO COUNTY HEALTH CODE:
Section 308 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 308. Itinerant restaurant defined. "Itinerant restaurant" means any
restaurant operating for a temporary period of time, not to exceed thirty (30)
days at any one location on any one premises and shall include any stand or
facility which is portable and used for the preparation and service of foods,
other than a "Temporary refreshment stand". Itinerant restaurant may include a
vehicle, provided it is maintained in a mobile condition and currently
registered by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.
Section 309 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 309. Temporary refreshment stand. "Temporary refreshment stand" means any
food preparation or dispensing operation conducted in connection with a fair,
circus, or public exhibition or gathering offering food for sale or gift to the
general public for a temporary period of time in one location.
Section 370 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 370. Lunch service dating and labeling requirements.
   (a)   Every box lunch or sandwich prepared for sale, gift or distribution,
at a place other than on the premises where prepared, shall be securely
wrapped, labeled and dated at the place where prepared. The container of every
box lunch and the wrapper of every sandwich to be sold or offered for sale,
must have printed thereon, or stamped, fastened, or otherwise affixed thereto,
so as to be readily visible and legible from the top and outside thereof, in
dimensions not smaller than ten-point, bold face, upper case letters, the name
of the day, or abbreviation thereof as set forth in subsection (c), following
the day on which the box lunch or sandwich was prepared, which shall be known
as "day prepared for" and the name and address of the establishment preparing
the box lunch or sandwich.
   (b)   Exemptions: Box lunches and sandwiches need not be dated, as required
herein under the following circumstances:
   1. When sold from a fixed location where they are held until sold in a
frozen condition in a refrigerator;
   2. When kept in and sold from a refrigerated unit, other than a vending
machine, in a fixed location in which the food is kept at a temperature below
fifty degrees Fahrenheit;
   3. When sold from a vending machine with refrigeration facilities meeting
requirements for the machines which maintain temperatures below fifty degrees
Fahrenheit. However, when the sandwich is not dated as required herein it shall
be code dated in such a manner as will clearly indicate to the health officer
or to officially concerned vending machine operators the "day prepared for".
The code dating shall be as approved by the health officer. The health officer
may adopt rules and regulations specifying the maximum numbers of days after
the "day prepared for" that various types of code dated sandwiches may be sold.
No such code dated sandwich shall be kept for sale from the vending machine
after the date established by the health officer's rules and regulations.
   (c)   The phrase "day prepared for" shall appear in legible print in
dimensions not smaller than six-point type, bold-face, upper case letters
immediately above the name of the day or the abbreviation thereof. The name of
the day shall be written out or abbreviated Sun., Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs.,
Fri., Sat. in legible print not smaller than six point type or abbreviated by
putting the first letter of all of the days of the week consecutively as
follows: S M T W T F S in not smaller than ten-point type. If abbreviated, S M
T W T F S, the letter signifying the "day prepared for" shall be punched,
perforated or otherwise marked as approved by the health officer, at the time
of preparation, to clearly show the one "day prepared for".
   (d)   Packaged foods intended to be heated and sold hot from an industrial
catering vehicle, including: meat pies, stews, T.V. dinners and similar foods,
shall be dated in a manner approved by the health officer, prior to being
placed in a heating or warming device, to show the name of the day when placed
in the warming unit. The day shall be known as the "day prepared for".
   (e)   No foods or components of foods whose packages or containers are
required by this section to be dated shall be rewrapped or reused for human
consumption; nor shall the packages or containers be dated for more than one
day; nor shall the date placed thereon be removed or obliterated.
   (f)   No food whose packages or containers are required by this section to
be dated shall, except as provided in paragraph (b), be in any way disposed of
for human consumption on any day other than the day on which prepared or on the
day originally inscribed upon the container or package.
Section 383 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 383. Equipment standards. The health officer may adopt rules and
regulations interpreting health and sanitation requirements for equipment to be
installed in restaurants, itinerant restaurants and food establishments and for
vending machines, and in doing so shall consider and may adopt nationally
recognized standards. When the health officer requires that equipment shall
comply with the specified standards, no person shall install or use newly
installed equipment which does not comply with the standards, or their
equivalent.
Section 384 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 384. Food equipment and installation - New construction and remodeling.
The health officer may require from the owner or operator submission of the
following data pertaining to construction, remodeling, or installation of new
equipment in restaurants, itinerant restaurants and food establishments:
   (a)   Two copies of a scale drawing or dimensioned sketch showing the
location of all fixed food storage, preparation and processing equipment,
furnishings and machinery, and the location of floor drains and floor sinks.
   (b)   Such specifications, forms, data, drawings and sketches, in duplicate,
as are necessary to indicate that the design, materials, method of
construction, and installation of equipment for food processing, preparation,
storage or utensil washing meet applicable sanitation standards and
requirements.
When the health officer requires submission of plans and data concerning food
equipment, no person shall install or use any equipment in a new or
reconstructed establishment until the plans and specifications have been
approved in writing by the health officer. All the equipment and its
installation shall be in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
unless modifications and changes therefrom have been approved by the health
officer, in which case the equipment and its installation shall be in
accordance with the approved modified plans and specifications.
Section 385 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 385. Itinerant restaurant and temporary refreshment stand time limit and
place of operation. An itinerant restaurant or temporary refreshment stand
shall not be operated at any location on any one premise for more than thirty
(30) days in any one year unless it complies with all of the provisions of this
code applicable to restaurants. Except for itinerant restaurants or temporary
refreshment stands operating from vehicles which do not do business at any
location for over thirty (30) minutes at any one time and during any one day,
all the businesses shall be provided with adequate, convenient toilet
facilities, as approved by the health officer. No such business shall be
conducted except at temporary events, such as carnivals, festivals, circuses,
special temporary attractions or events, or on park property when authorized by
a public agency in charge of the park. No such business shall be operated on
any property where the operation or business is prohibited by any other
applicable code or regulation. The person responsible for the business which is
to be operated at any location for more than thirty (30) minutes at any one
time shall not commence or continue the operation until he has received written
authorization from the health officer for the specific location where the
business is to be conducted.
Section 386 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 386. Itinerant restaurant special requirements. Itinerant restaurants
shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter except toilet
room and dressing rooms, or when specifically exempted by the health officer.
Section 387 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 387. Temporary refreshment stand special requirements. The health officer
shall make an investigation of the premises, equipment and facilities to be
used in the operation of the temporary refreshment stand, and shall, when he
deems it necessary for the protection of public health, restrict the operation
to the preparation and servicing of those foods which in his opinion would not
be injurious to public health when prepared and served with such facilities as
the operator intends to use.
Section 504.1 is amended to read:
Sec. 504.1. Water well defined. "Water well" means any drilled, excavated,
jetted, or otherwise constructed excavation which is used or intended to be
used to extract water from or eject water into the underground for any purpose,
or to observe or test underground waters. This definition shall not include:
(a) salt water wells; (b) wells under the jurisdiction of the State of
California, Division of Oil and Gas, except those wells converted to use as
water wells; or (c) wells used for the purpose of: (1) dewatering excavation
during construction, or (2) stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.
Section 504.2 is amended to read:
Sec. 504.2 Electrode well defined. "Electrode well" means any artificial
excavation in excess of 50 feet deep constructed by any method for the purpose
of installing electrodes or electrical conductors including, but not limited
to, cathodic protection wells and grounding rod wells.
Section 504.3 is amended to read:
Sec. 504.3. Abandoned water well defined. "Abandoned water well" is a
nonoperating well which is not maintained in conformity with Section 519 of
this chapter.
Section 504.4 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 504.4. Nonactive water well defined. "Nonactive water well" is one which
is not in active use but which is maintained in conformance with the provisions
of Section 519 of this chapter.
Section 504.5 is added to read:
Sec. 504.5. Nonconforming electrode well defined. "Nonconforming electrode
well" is one which, at the effective date of this ordinance, has not been
constructed in conformance with Section 520.1, or is not maintained in
conformance with Section 519 of this chapter.
Section 509 is amended to read:
Sec. 509. Pipe line treatment. Every new water main and every repaired section
of an existing water main must be cleared of coliform bacteria by the proper
application of chlorine in sufficient quantities to give a minimum of fifty
(50) parts per million of available chlorine. The new or repaired pipe shall be
thoroughly flushed before and after chlorination. If the first application of
chlorine is not sufficient, the procedure shall be repeated until the water
will meet the standards set forth in the United States Public Health Service
Drinking Water Standards. Means or methods providing equivalent treatment may
be used if approved by the health officer.
Section 513 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 513. Wells and water supplies to be protected. All domestic water wells
and springs shall be sealed with concrete or other impervious material, so as
to protect against surface or subsurface contamination or pollution.
Section 514 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 514. Reservoirs and tanks to be covered. Durable protection and
substantial covers shall be provided and maintained for each reservoir, tank,
cistern, standpipe or other structure used for distribution or storage of
domestic water. Covers shall be watertight and shall be constructed so as to
provide drainage away from the structure. All openings for ventilation shall be
screened with corrosion resistant screen not coarser than one-fourth inch mesh
to exclude rodents and birds or with sixteen mesh screen when the screen is
necessary to control mosquito or insect breeding in the reservoir. All manholes
shall be constructed with curbs raised above the surrounding surface and
installed in a manner to prevent roof or surface drainage from entering the
structure. When it is determined by the health officer that it is impractical
due to size, shape or other unusual conditions, to provide and maintain a cover
as provided for in this section, adequate treatment and protection of the water
shall be provided as required and approved by the health officer.
Any reservoir, standpipe, cistern, forebay, tank, weir box, receptacle, or any
other form of installation used for the production, distribution or storage of
any domestic water supply or water used for human consumption shall be securely
protected against pollution or contamination.
Section 515 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 515. Log of water well. Any person who has drilled, dug, excavated, or
bored a water well shall, within thirty days after completion of the drilling,
digging, excavating, or boring of the water well, furnish the health officer
with a complete log of the water well. This log shall include the type of
casing, the depth of the well, the number and location of the perforations in
the casing and any other data required by the health officer. A copy of the log
providing the information submitted to state agencies satisfies this
requirement.
Section 516 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 516. General location of water wells. It is unlawful for any person to
drill, dig, excavate, or bore any water well in any location in which sources
of pollution or contamination are known to exist at the location whereby water
may become contaminated or polluted when the well is properly constructed and
maintained.
Section 517 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 517. Distance of water wells from sewage disposal systems, animals and
fowl. It is unlawful for a person to drill, dig, excavate, or bore a water well
within one hundred feet (100') of a seepage pit or cesspool, within fifty feet
(50') of a sewage disposal field, a private or public sewer, privy, or place
where animals or fowl are kept. Where special hazards are involved, the
distance required may be increased or special construction required as may be
directed by the health officer.
Where perforations or screens are located at or over one hundred feet below the
ground surface and where sealed and maintained in accordance with Section 519
of this chapter or in such other circumstances as he determines lesser
distances will not subject the water to contamination or pollution, the health
officer may authorize lesser distances than those specified in this section.
Section 519 is amended to read:
Sec. 519. Well sealing. All water wells and electrode wells shall be kept
sealed and maintained in a manner that will prevent the entrance of pump
leakage, surface drainage, or any other contamination or pollution into the
well or the aquifer, except that nonconforming electrode wells need not comply
with this section until such time as the electrode is expended, or the well is
reconstructed, or the well is no longer being used for its intended purpose,
unless, in the judgment of the health officer, such exception constitutes a
threat to the quality of an aquifer.
Section 520 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 520. Construction of water wells.
   (a)   All water wells hereafter drilled, dug, or bored shall have a durable,
watertight casing which shall extend to a depth that will exclude contamination
or pollution by surface drainage and undesirable ground water and extend at
least eighteen inches (18") above the surrounding natural ground level at the
well site after drilling and until the pump is permanently mounted.
   (b)   All gravel packed wells shall have an outside water tight casing
meeting the requirements of subsection (a) hereof. The top of the space between
the outer and inner casings shall be closed or sealed to exclude surface
drainage. The space between the outer casing and the drill hole shall be sealed
as required by Section 513 of this chapter. When an additional pipe is provided
for a "gravel chute", the top thereof shall extend above the floor or ground
level and be fitted with a tight cap or lid unless in a locked room or an
enclosure which is locked, bolted or screwed on tightly.
Section 520.1 is added to read:
Sec. 520.1. Construction of electrode wells. All electrode wells hereafter
constructed shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the health officer in
such a manner as to exclude contamination or pollution of any useable
underground water.
Section 521 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 521. Construction of water wells, slab, curtain, and pedestal. All water
wells hereafter drilled, dug, excavated, or bored shall be provided with:
   (a)   A water tight reinforced concrete slab of a minimum thickness of six
inches (6") shall extend horizontally at least three feet (3') from the well
casing in all directions. The concrete slab shall adequately slope so as to
drain water away from the well casing. The top surface of the slab at its outer
edge shall be at least four inches (4") above the surrounding ground level.
This slab need not be provided, or the size and method of construction thereof
may be modified when the protection intended by this requirement or the
exception of subsection (d) hereof is provided by an alternate method approved
by the health officer.
   (b)   For pumps or pump motors installed above the well casing, the pump or
motor shall be mounted on a concrete pedestal constructed around the well
casing and sealed thereto, the top of which is at least eight inches (8") above
the finished grade at the well site and at least four inches (4") above the
slab surrounding the well.
   (c)   The pedestal, slab (and curtain wall, if required to protect an
existing well) shall be poured monolithically or otherwise constructed as
approved by the health officer to effectively prevent leakage between the
pedestal and the slab.
   (d)   Exemptions: Means or methods other than those specified in (b) and (c)
hereof may be used to provide the required protection when the health officer
determines the alternates are necessary and that they provide equivalent
protection. A submersible type pump may be installed with subsurface discharge
and access when all subsurface entrances to the well or casing, other than into
the aquifer, are effectively sealed, the enclosure is designed and constructed
to exclude surface water or drainage, the area around the casing is provided
with effective drainage and other protective features are provided which the
health officer determines will effectively prevent contamination or pollution
from entering the well or the aquifer.
Section 522 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 522. Water well sanitization pipe. All domestic water wells shall be
provided with a pipe or other effective means through which chlorine or other
disinfecting agents may be introduced directly into the well. The pipe, if
provided, shall be extended to a height equal to the pump pedestal or at least
eight inches (8") above the finished grade, shall be kept sealed and shall be
provided with a threaded or equivalently secure cap. Equivalent protection for
excluding contamination from the well shall be provided for subsurface pump
discharge installations. If an air relief vent is used, it shall terminate
downward and be screened and protected against the possibility of contaminating
material entering the vent.
Section 523 is amended as follows:
Sec. 523. Wells - drilling and destroying. No person shall drill, dig, bore,
deepen or excavate any well, or destroy an existing well, without first making
application and securing a permit from the health officer.
The application shall be made on a form prepared by the health officer which
shall include the location of the proposed or existing well, the type of
casing, the manner of sealing and any other data required by the health
officer.
Section 523.1 is amended to read:
Sec. 523.1. Reconstruction or conversion of existing well for domestic use. Any
person intending to convert any industrial, oil or irrigation well for use as a
domestic water well, shall first apply and secure a permit from the health
officer.
The application shall be made on a form prepared by the health officer which
shall include the location of the well, the type of casing, the manner of
sealing and any other data required by the health officer.
Section 523.2 is amended to read:
Sec. 523.2. Processing of application for well drilling. Upon receipt of an
application the health officer shall make an investigation. If the applicant
has complied with all applicable laws and regulations and the proposed well
location will comply with this chapter, and the drilling, digging, boring,
deepening, excavating, converting, destruction or design of the well will not
create a condition which in the opinion of the health officer can pollute or
contaminate the underground water or the water produced by the well, the health
officer shall issue the permit.
Section 523.3 is amended to read:
Sec. 523.3. Validity of permit for well drilling. A permit shall be valid only
for the location described on the permit. Construction, reconstruction or
destruction of a well shall be carried out in compliance with all applicable
regulations and requirements of the health officer and with all ordinances and
laws of the County of Los Angeles and of the State of California and shall
comply with the terms and conditions specified in the permit. If any of such
conditions, regulations, ordinances or laws are not complied with, the health
officer may suspend or revoke the permit by mailing or personally serving
written notice of suspension or revocation upon the applicant.
Section 523.4 is added to read:
Sec. 523.4. Hearings. Any person whose application for a permit has been
denied, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked, may petition the health
officer for a hearing. Such petition shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and shall set forth in detail the facts and reasons upon which his
petition is based. The time limit within which the petition must be filed is
twenty (20) business days following the date on which the notice of denial,
suspension or revocation was mailed to the applicant. Notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant not less than five (5)
business days prior to such hearing, either by registered mail or in the manner
required for the service of summons in civil actions. At the time and place set
for the hearing, the health officer will give the applicant and other
interested persons an adequate opportunity to present any relevant facts. The
health officer may place any person involved in the matter, including the
applicant, under oath. The health officer may, when he deems it necessary,
continue any hearing by setting a new time and place and by giving notice to
the applicant of such action. At the close of the hearing, or at any time
within ten (10) days thereafter, the health officer will order such disposition
of the application or permit as he has determined to be proper and will make
such disposition known to the applicant.
Section 524 is amended to read:
Sec. 524. Destruction of water wells. All water wells, unless made to comply
with Sec. 513 and 519 hereof, shall be destroyed to the satisfaction of the
health officer by filling with cement grout, puddled clay or similar impervious
material, as approved by the health officer, to thoroughly seal the well
including all voids, annular spaces, gravel envelopes or other spaces, as
necessary to protect the aquifer.
Section 524.1 is added to read:
Sec. 524.1. Destruction of electrode wells. All electrode wells, unless in
compliance with Section 519 of this chapter, shall be destroyed to the
satisfaction of the health officer in such a manner as to exclude contamination
or pollution of any usable underground water.
Section 525 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 525. Construction features for existing or converted water wells. All
water wells used to supply domestic water shall conform to the requirements of
a new water well except the health officer may accept substitute methods when
he finds it is impractical to fully meet the requirements and if he determines
the substitute methods satisfactorily accomplish the intended purpose.
Existing wells shall meet requirements for new wells regarding protection from
flooding or contamination or such protection which the health officer
determines to be equivalent.
Section 525.1 is amended to read:
Sec. 525.1. Disinfection and bacteriological quality of domestic water wells.
Every new, repaired or reconstructed domestic water well, after completion of
construction, repair or reconstruction, and before being placed in service,
shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign substances. The well, including the
gravel used in gravel-packed wells, the pump, and all portions of equipment
coming in contact with well water shall be disinfected with a solution
containing at least fifty (50) parts per million available chlorine, which
shall remain in the well for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours, or by
an equivalent method of disinfection satisfactory to the health officer, and
such procedure shall be repeated, as necessary, to produce water meeting
bacteriological standards as set forth in the United States Public Health
Service Drinking Water Standards. No well water from a new or reconstructed
well shall be used for domestic purposes until the water meets such
bacteriological requirements.
Section 552 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 552. Public swimming area defined. "Public swimming area" means any
portion of a body of water owned, operated or under the control of any person
which is permitted to be used for swimming and bathing except:
   (a)   A swimming pool;
   (b)   A wading pool;
   (c)   Any portion of the Pacific Ocean;
   (d)   Swimming areas owned and controlled by a single family and used only
by that family and its guests.
If a body of water other than described in (a),(b),(c), or (d), above is of
such size, shape and depth that it can be used for swimming or recreative
bathing, it shall be presumed that such is permitted therein unless it is
clearly and plainly posted, in a manner acceptable to the health officer,
warning that swimming or recreative bathing is prohibited.
Section 561 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 561. Swimming pool equipment review, approval and fees. (8588, eff. 5-8-
1964) All recirculation and purification equipment shall be subject to review
and approval by the health officer before installation in connection with a
swimming pool.
It is unlawful for any person to install any recirculation and purification
equipment related to a swimming pool unless the equipment has first been
reviewed and approved by the health officer.
Any person desiring to have recirculation or purification equipment reviewed
shall submit the equipment to the health officer and pay the following fees
which are payable to the county tax collector prior to the time of submission
of each piece of equipment:
   (a) Filters
   (1) First basic individual unit of each manufacturer or of each series of
similar design - $50.00
   (2) Each additional unit of the same make of different filter area in a
series for which the fee required in (a) was paid - $10.00
   (b)   Chlorinators - for each make unit of the same general design
regardless of capacity - $30.00
   (c)   Hypochlorinators - for each type unit of each manufacturer - $20.00
   (d)   Surface skimmers - for each type unit of each manufacturer - $50.00
   (e)   Rate of flow indicators for each series of similar units of each
manufacturer - $45.00
   (f)   Test kits for chlorine or other approved disinfectant and pH - $20.00
   (g)   Pumps
   (1) First basic individual unit of each series of each manufacturer - $25.00
   (2) Each additional unit of same series but different horsepower - $5.00
   (h)   Separation Tanks
   (1) First basic individual unit of each series of each manufacturer - $20.00
   (2) Each additional unit of the same design but different volume - $5.00
Section 561.1 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 561.1. Exemption from swimming pool equipment review fees. Any swimming
pool equipment which has been approved by the National Sanitation Foundation or
other national testing agency found by the health officer to apply equivalent
standards, which is currently listed by the foundation or agency as equipment
permitted to carry its seal of approval or equivalent and which conforms to all
applicable state and local requirements, shall be exempt from payment of the
above fees.
Section 561.2 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 561.2. Swimming pool equipment approval period. Swimming pool equipment
which the health officer determines to acceptably perform the function for
which intended shall be approved for a period not to exceed three (3) years
after which it shall be submitted for re-examination. The fees for the re-
examinations shall be fifty percent (50%) of the above listed fees. Upon the
expiration of the approval period granted for any device, it is unlawful to
install any such device in a swimming pool until after an application has been
submitted, the device has been found acceptable and a new period of approval
has been established by the health officer.
Periods of approval shall be subject to review by the health officer at any
time should there be evidence of failure or inadequate performance of the
device; if after investigation and hearing it is found that the unit is
unsatisfactory to perform the function for which intended, approval may be
immediately withdrawn.
Section 562 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 562. Accredited lifeguard defined. "Accredited Lifeguard" means a person
who holds a current American Red Cross Senior Lifesaving Certificate or
equivalent and a current American Red Cross Standard First Aid Certificate or
equivalent. In addition, he shall have had satisfactory experience as a beach
lifeguard for at least one swimming season or an equivalent record of
performance.
Section 563 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 563. Lifeguard in training defined. A "lifeguard in training" is a person
who performs lifeguard duty under the direct supervision of an accredited
lifeguard during a training program, preparatory to becoming an accredited
lifeguard.
Section 564 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 564. Lifeguards - Public swimming area. One or more accredited lifeguards,
having no other duty to perform at the time than to superintend the safety of
the bathers, shall be on lifeguard duty at each public swimming area as defined
above when it is open or in use.
All lifeguards shall show their lifesaving certificates and first aid
certificates to the health officer, upon his request.
Section 565 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 565. Lifesaving equipment and first aid kit - Public swimming area.
   (a)   Every public swimming area shall be provided with a minimum of one
approved life ring, buoy or equivalent approximately fifteen inches (15") in
diameter, and where so required, one rescue pole at least twelve feet (12')
long with hook. The life rings, buoys or equivalent and rescue hook shall be
readily accessible to each lifeguard, the location and spacing thereof to be
determined by consideration of the area to be covered, configuration of water
area and related factors and approved by the health officer. The life rings,
buoys or equivalent shall have attached to them, seventy five feet (75') of
sound three-sixteenth inch (3/16") line which shall be stored, when not in use,
in such a way as to prevent kinking or fouling.
   (b)   When, in the opinion of the health officer, any public swimming area
is of such size that unaided swimming rescues by lifeguards does not, in his
opinion, offer sufficient protection to swimmers, one or more square sterned
boats equipped with oars, oarlocks, life rings, or hollow type paddle boards,
as the health officer approves, shall be provided.
   (c)   A standard twenty-four (24) unit or larger first aid kit shall be
provided and properly maintained and kept readily available at all public
areas.
Section 566 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 566. Water supply public swimming areas, wading pools and spray pools.
   (a)   All water supplied to a wading pool or spray pool shall be from a
source approved by the health officer.
   (b)   The water supply for all showers, toilets, lavatories, and drinking
facilities, provided or maintained in connection with public swimming areas,
spray pools and wading pools shall be adequate in quantity and shall meet the
health officer's requirements for drinking water.
Section 567 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 567. Toilet requirements - public swimming areas.
   (a)   Adequate toilets for each sex shall be provided and maintained not
over three hundred feet (300') distant from any portion of public swimming
areas.
   (b)   All toilet facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition,
well lighted and ventilated, and shall be kept supplied with toilet paper at
all times.
   (c)   The type and location for the existing toilets shall be acceptable to
the health officer and plans for new toilet facilities shall be approved by the
health officer prior to construction.
Section 568 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 568. Dressing room - If provided for public swimming areas. If dressing
rooms are provided at a public swimming area, they shall comply with the
following:
   (a)   Public swimming areas used simultaneously by both sexes shall be
provided with separate dressing rooms with separate entrances to and exits from
the dressing rooms.
   (b)   All dressing room walls and partitions shall have smooth surfaces
which are impervious to moisture and free from cracks or open joints. Walls of
compartments within a dressing room shall be constructed in such a manner that
there is a clear, intervening space of not less than eight inches (8") between
the bottom of the partition and the floor unless otherwise approved by the
health officer.
   (c)   Floors in the dressing rooms, toilet rooms, and shower rooms shall be
impervious and rough enough (but not abrasive to the feet) so as to be non
skid, similar to a "rough rotary, raised rubber, or wood float", finish and
shall be free from cracks or open joints. Floors shall pitch not less than one-
fourth inch (1/4") per foot to floor drains or surface water disposal areas.
All junctures of floors with walls and partitions shall be coved. Wood floors
or wooden slats over concrete floors shall not be permitted.
   (d)   When lockers are provided, they shall be kept clean and free from
vermin, properly ventilated, and shall be fastened firmly to concrete islands
or shall be installed with at least a six-inch (6") high clear space beneath to
permit flushing of the floor.
   (e)   All dressing rooms, shower rooms, toilet and lavatory rooms, and all
other rooms in a bathhouse shall be adequately ventilated and lighted. A
minimum light intensity of three (3) foot-candles shall be provided in all
parts of the rooms.
   (f)   Toilets shall be provided in close proximity to any dressing rooms in
addition to requirements specified in Section 567.
Section 569 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 569. Drinking fountains, public swimming areas and wading pools. At least
one approved drinking fountain shall be installed and maintained in each wading
pool area and each public swimming area, for the use of the persons using the
public swimming area or wading pool.
Section 570 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 570. Health requisites public swimming areas and wading pools. No person
having a communicable disease shall be employed in any capacity at any wading
pool or public swimming area.
All persons known to be, or suspected by the health officer or the management
of being afflicted with an infectious disease, or suffering from a cough, cold,
fever, sores, or wearing bands or bandages, shall be excluded from the public
swimming area or the wading pool except on presentation of a written statement,
from a physician, of current date acceptable to the health officer.
Section 1000 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1000. Registration and certification requirements. (8588, eff. 5-8-1964)
No person may engage either in the business or in the occupation of treating
swimming pool waters, or of cleaning filters used or useable in connection
therewith, or of maintaining swimming pools or facilities or appurtenances
thereof unless he is certified or registered according to the terms hereof, or
unless he is expressly excused from the requirement by Section 1010 hereof.
Persons registered or certified hereunder may lawfully engage in the business
or occupation only to the extent permitted pursuant to the registration or
certification.
Every person required to be registered or certified by the terms hereof and
before engaging in the business or activity shall make application therefor and
shall, within time limitations established by rules of the health officer,
become registered or certified.
Section 1000.1 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 1000.1. Actions. The tax collector shall, in the name of the County of Los
Angeles as plaintiff, bring suit for the recovery of registration or
certification fees against any swimming pool service company or against any
person required to have this registration or certification who carries on or
attempts to carry on such business or activity without first being certified or
registered.
Section 1003 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1003. Registration as a swimming pool service company. (8588, eff. 5-8-
1964) Every person who engages in the business of maintaining or servicing
swimming pools shall be registered hereunder as a swimming pool service
company.
Exemption: A swimming pool service technician who operates alone and who does
not employ any swimming pool service technician, apprentice or applicant for
certification shall be exempt from paying a registration fee as a swimming pool
service company.
Section 1004 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1004. Application for registration as a swimming pool service company.
Every person desiring to be registered as a swimming pool service company shall
file an application with the health officer and shall then pay an application
fee to the tax collector of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which is charged to
cover the cost of processing the application. No part of the fee is refundable.
The applicant shall pay a penalty equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the fee
if application is not made within thirty-one (31) days after commencement of
the business.
The applicant shall designate upon his application by address the principal
office of the applicant which is located within the County of Los Angeles,
State of California and if the applicant has no office within the County of Los
Angeles, then he shall designate upon his application his principal office
wherever located.
Section 1011 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1011. Application for certification as a swimming pool service technician
or as a swimming pool service technician apprentice. Every person desiring
certification as a swimming pool service technician or as a swimming pool
service technician apprentice shall file with the health officer an application
for certification, and shall then pay an application fee to the tax collector
of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a swimming pool service technician or ten
dollars ($10.00) for a swimming pool service technician apprentice to cover the
cost of giving the examination and processing the application. No portion of
the fee is refundable. The applicant shall pay a penalty equal to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the fee if application is not made within thirty-one (31) days
after commencement of the activity.
The applicant shall designate upon his application by address the principal
office of the applicant which is located within the County of Los Angeles,
State of California, and if the applicant has no office within the County of
Los Angeles, then he shall designate upon his application his principal office
wherever located.
Section 1018 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1018. Effective period of registration or certification; renewal of
registration and certification. Registration as a swimming pool service
company, certification as a swimming pool service technician and certification
as a swimming pool service technician apprentice are each effective to December
31 of the year in which the registration or certification was received. Every
person desiring to renew the registration or certification shall pay a renewal
fee to the tax collector for renewal before December 31 in the amount of ten
dollars ($10.00) for each registration or certification for the following
calendar year. A penalty equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the renewal fee
shall be submitted on or after January 1 for the renewal of the annual
registration or certification.
(Ord. 691, 6-24-1968; amd. Ord. 750, 12-14-1970)
CHAPTER 2
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Exclusive Rights Of City; City Responsibility
5-2-3: Solid Waste Collection; Collection And Processing Of Organics And
Recyclables - Residential
5-2-4: Collection Carts
5-2-5: Collection By Franchisee
5-2-6: Unlawful Collection
5-2-7: Charges For Service
5-2-8: Billing And Penalties
5-2-9: Failure To Pay
5-2-10: Self-Hauling
5-2-11: Placement In City Waste Containers Prohibited
5-2-12: Burning Vegetation
5-2-13: Recycling Of Organics
5-2-14: Solid Waste Collection; Collection And Processing Of Organics And
Recyclables - Commercial And Multi-Family
5-2-15: Commercial And Multi-Family Solid Waste Collection And Transportation
Services
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined
and shall be construed as hereinafter set out, unless it is apparent from the
context that they have a different meaning:
   BIN: A metal container commonly referred to as a dumpster that is usually
one (1) to four (4) cubic yards in size and often equipped with a lid.
   BULKY ITEM: Large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets,
mattresses, box springs, white goods, clothing, tires, and other similar solid
waste and similar large items discarded from residential properties. Bulky
items do not include hazardous waste.
   BUSINESS: A commercial or public entity, including, but not limited to, a
firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint stock company, corporation, or
association that is organized as a for profit or nonprofit entity.
   CIVIC WASTE: All types of solid waste, recyclables and organics generated by
the City, including: solid waste, recyclables, and organics placed in
receptacles located in public areas, including but not limited to City public
parks, parking lots, and right-of- ways, for collection of waste generated by
the public; solid waste, recyclables and organics generated at City-owned
facilities including but not limited to City Hall, the City Yard, fire
stations, police station, library, recreation centers, etc.; and solid waste,
recyclables and organics generated at City events.
   COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Any commercial, industrial, or office enterprise that
generates solid waste, green waste, organics, or recyclable materials.
Commercial premises does not include civic waste or any State run school
system.
   ORGANICS: Food waste, green waste, landscape and pruning waste, nonhazardous
wood waste, and food soiled paper waste that is mixed in with food waste.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: Public Works Director or his/her designee.
   RECYCLABLES: Material that can be reused or processed into a form suitable
for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture and includes paper, newsprint,
printed matter, pasteboard, paper containers, cardboard, glass, aluminum, PET
and other plastics, beverage containers, compostable materials, phone books,
used motor oil and such other materials designated by the Public Works
Director, or designated as recyclables by the California Department of
Resources Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle), or other agency with
jurisdiction.
   ROLL-OFF: An open-top metal container with a container capacity up to forty
(40) cubic yards, which is designed to be pulled onto a roll-off vehicle. Roll-
offs are also sometimes known and referred to as roll-off boxes, drop boxes, or
debris boxes.
   SOLID WASTE: All solid waste as defined in Public Resources Code section
40191 as may be amended from time to time.
   TEMPORARY ROLL-OFF/BIN SERVICE: A temporary service provided for the purpose
of collecting construction and demolition debris and other waste generated
during temporary project activities including construction, demolition, and/or
clean-up services. Temporary roll-off/bin service may be provided in connection
with other temporary project activities only with the prior permission of the
Public Works Director.
(Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 1619, 9-15-2020; Ord. 1669, 3-4-2025)
5-2-2: EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS OF CITY; CITY RESPONSIBILITY:
The City maintains exclusive authority to manage and regulate solid waste,
including but not limited to regulations regarding the storage, collection,
transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste. Such authority includes
the right to determine the methods by which such regulation occurs, for
example, through contract, permit, franchise, or another method. The City may
enter into exclusive or non-exclusive contracts or franchises for the
collection and transportation of solid waste including recyclables and
organics. No person, entity, organization or firm is authorized to collect such
solid waste, organics or recyclables without authorization or permission from
the City. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-3: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION; COLLECTION AND PROCESSING OF ORGANICS AND
RECYCLABLES - RESIDENTIAL:
   A.   Mandatory Arrangements for Collection and Removal: The owner or
occupant of each residential premises is required to contract with the City's
franchisee for the regular removal of all solid waste, organics, and
recyclables accumulated on such premises and must pay for such removal at the
rates established by the City Council. In the event the owner elects to have
the occupant of its premises take responsibility for contracting with the
franchisee for collection service and the occupant fails to make arrangements
for collection or fails to pay for collection services provided by the
franchisee, the responsibility to contract and pay for collection services
shall become the owner's responsibility. No owner or occupant of a residential
premises shall employ another, other than the franchisee, for the regular
collection of solid waste, organics or recyclables generated on the residential
premises. No owner or occupant of a residential premises shall enter into any
agreement whatsoever for the provision of temporary roll-off/bin service by a
person that is not the holder of a valid temporary roll-off/bin service permit
issued by the City. No owner or occupant of a residential premises may employ a
temporary roll-off/bin service permittee for the regular collection of solid
waste, organics, or recyclables. For purposes of this section, "residential
premises" refers to one- and two-family dwelling units. If a property contains
both commercial and residential premises, the owner or occupant of the
residential component of the premises must independently contract with the
franchisee for the collection and removal of solid waste, organics, and
recyclables in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Exceptions: An exception to the mandatory requirement of subsection A
of this section can be granted if the owner or occupant meets one of the
following criteria:
      1.   The owner or occupant of the residential premises obtains a self-
haul permit in accordance with this chapter and continually remains in
compliance with its terms and conditions.
      2.   The owner or occupant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Director or his/her designee that no solid waste of any kind is being
generated on the premises. The occupant must consent to an on-site inspection
of the premises by the Public Works Director in order to verify that no solid
waste of any kind is being generated. If the circumstances that allowed the
exception should change, the owner or occupant must immediately initiate
regular solid waste, organics, and recyclables collection in accordance with
this section. The Public Works Director may require reauthorization of the
exception periodically.
   C.   Compost And Recyclables: Nothing in this chapter limits the right of
any owner or occupant of a residential premises to compost green waste or to
donate or sell recyclables generated in or on their residential premises or to
transport those recyclables to a recycling facility. A self-haul permit is not
required for a generator to transport his or her recyclables to a recycling
facility.
   D.   Ownership Of Materials: Upon the placement of solid waste, organics or
recyclables in a container for collection by the franchisee at the collection
point, said materials become the property of franchisee.
   E.   Unlawful Disposal And Collection Of Solid Waste, Organics Or
Recyclables:
      1.   No person may deposit solid waste or containers upon any street,
alley, gutter or parkway, or upon any lot or vacant area or other public place
or way other than as provided in this chapter.
      2.   No person shall tamper with, modify, scavenge from or deposit solid
waste, organics, or recyclables in any solid waste, organics or recyclables
container which has not been provided for his or her use, without the
permission of the occupant of the premises where the container is located.
      3.   Except as otherwise authorized in this chapter, no person shall
collect solid waste, organics or recyclables from residential premises within
the City.
   F.   Obstruction Of Franchisee Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any
person, their agents or employees to hinder, threaten, impede, or obstruct the
franchisee in the performance of its duties.
(Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 1669, 3-4-2025)
5-2-4: COLLECTION CARTS:
   A.   Solid Waste Carts: Occupants of residential premises receiving
individual collection services must place solid waste in the solid waste carts
provided by the franchisee.
   B.   Recyclables Carts: Occupants of residential premises shall separate
recyclables from solid waste and organics and place recyclables in the
recyclables carts provided by the franchisee. In the case where the occupant of
the premises is not the owner, the owner is responsible to instruct the
occupant in proper separation and placement of recyclable materials from solid
waste and organics.
   C.   Organics Carts: Occupants of residential premises shall separate
organics from solid waste and recyclables and place organics in the organics
carts provided by the franchisee. In the case where the occupant of the
premises is not the owner, the owner is responsible to instruct the occupant in
proper separation and placement of organics from solid waste and recyclables.
   D.   Filling Of Carts And Containers: No occupant of either residential or
commercial premises shall fill any cart or container with solid waste, organics
or recyclables above the top of the cart or container so as to permit the
contents of any container to be blown or otherwise strewn about.
   E.   Proper Placement Of Carts For Collection: Carts used at any residential
premises for the purpose of collection of solid waste, organics or recyclables
shall be placed on the street against the curb in front of the premises
occupied by the person depositing the same as directed by the franchisee,
unless the owner or occupant has contracted with the franchisee for backyard
service or roll-out service. Where no street curb exists, the carts shall be
placed not more than two feet (2') from the outside edge of the street nearest
the property's entrance. When the premises are adjacent to a paved alley of
sufficient width to allow easy passage of the collection trucks, the containers
may be placed within two feet (2') of the property line of the premises and
must be readily accessible for collection from the alley.
   F.   Timing Of Placement And Removal Of Carts: Occupants shall not place
carts at the curb for collection by franchisee at any time other than the days
established by the franchisee for the collection of such solid waste, organics
or recyclables, or earlier than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the day preceding
the day designated by the franchisee for collection. All carts shall be removed
from the place of collection prior to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of the day the
carts have been emptied and, whenever possible, stored in a location screened
from public view.
   G.   Supervision And Cleaning Of Carts: Each occupant of a residential
premises shall maintain supervision over carts on their premises. Occupants
shall maintain carts in a reasonably clean, sanitary condition.
   H.   Unauthorized Tampering And Removal Of Contents: No person, other than
the waste generator or any waste generator employee, or an officer or employee
of the franchisee, or any person holding a City-issued permit for the
collection or disposal of solid waste, shall tamper or meddle with any cart or
container or the contents thereof, or remove the contents of the cart or
container, or remove the cart or container from the location where the same
shall have been placed by the waste generator. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-5: COLLECTION BY FRANCHISEE:
Collection and removal of solid waste, organics and recyclables from
residential premises by the franchisee shall be made in accordance with the
terms and conditions of this chapter and the agreement between the City and the
franchisee. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-6: UNLAWFUL COLLECTION:
   A.   Except as expressly provided in this section, it is unlawful for any
person to collect or transport solid waste, recyclables, or organics within the
City unless such person is a franchisee or holds a valid temporary roll-off/bin
service permit issued by the City. If recyclables are hauled by other than the
franchisee, the City may require the generator to provide an affidavit
demonstrating that no additional fees relating to the collection of recyclables
have been charged.
   B.   Unless the collection and transportation are exempted under this
section, it is unlawful for any person to permit, allow or enter into any
agreement whatsoever for the regular collection or transportation of solid
waste, organics or recyclables with any person who is not a City franchisee.
Furthermore, it is unlawful for any person to permit, allow or enter into any
agreement whatsoever for the provision of temporary roll-off/bin services by a
person that is not the holder of a valid temporary roll-off/bin service permit
issued by the City.
   C.   The collection and transportation of the following types of solid
waste, organics and recyclables are exempted from the requirements of
subsections A and B of this section:
      1.   Green waste, landscape and pruning waste, or nonhazardous wood waste
removed from a premises by a gardening, landscaping or tree trimming contractor
as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than
as a transportation service and for no additional or separate fee.
      2.   Tree trimmings, clippings and all similar materials generated at
parks and other City-maintained premises, which may be collected and
transported by the City to the disposal site or processing facility.
      3.   Hazardous or dangerous materials; liquid and dry caustics; acids;
biohazardous, flammable and explosive materials; insecticides; and similar
substances.
      4.   Infectious medical waste 1 .
      5.   Byproducts of sewage treatment, including sludge, grit and
screenings.
      6.   Recyclables which are source-separated at any premises by the waste
generator and donated to youth, civic, or charitable organizations.
      7.   Source-separated recyclable materials which are transported by a
generator who is recycling under the California Beverage Containers Recycling
Litter Reduction Act 2 .
      8.   Solid waste transported by a generator in accordance with a valid
self-haul permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
      9.   Construction and demolition debris which is removed from any
premises by the waste generator, using his/her/its own vehicles and which is
transported personally by the owner or occupant of such premises, or by his or
her employees.
      10.   Construction and demolition debris hauled by the property or
business owner using their own vehicles and their own employees.
      11.   A licensed contractor removing items for reuse or recycling which
is incidental to work performed at a project construction site and as defined
under diversion requirements if the contractor: a) uses his or her own
employees and vehicles for this purpose, and b) maintains no bins or boxes at
the site which are detachable from the vehicle.
      12.   Materials generated by public schools.
      13.   Large, bulky or heavy items that the City's franchisee does not
pick up or does not pick up on a weekly basis.
      14.   Removal of large amounts of solid waste to address health and
safety concerns such as hoarding.
(Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 1669, 3-4-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined in HSC § 25117.5.
2 2. PRC § 14500 et seq.
5-2-7: CHARGES FOR SERVICE:
From time to time, the City Council shall establish by resolution rates that
franchisees may charge owners or occupants of one- and two-family dwelling
units for the collection, processing and/or disposal of solid waste, organics
and recyclables. Prior to adopting the resolution establishing the rate, the
City Council shall hold a public hearing. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-8: BILLING AND PENALTIES:
Each owner or occupant receiving collection services from the franchisee shall
be billed by the franchisee periodically in accordance with the rates
established by the franchise agreement and approved by the City Council. If an
owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects to pay the bill, then a penalty
may be added to the bill and the sum, together with any costs incurred by the
franchisee, may be recovered by the franchisee as provided by law, including
Government Code section 54348. If an occupant fails to pay the bill, the owner
shall be responsible for the payment. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-9: FAILURE TO PAY:
If there is no payment of a bill after sixty (60) days or more, the franchisee
shall undertake collection of the bill (including penalties and expenses of
collection) for a period of one year from the invoice date. Franchisee shall
make reasonable efforts to obtain payment through issuance of late payment
notices, telephone requests for payment, and assistance from collection
agencies (who shall make at least 2 attempts at collection). If the
franchisee's collection efforts for a one-year period fail, and franchisee can
demonstrate to the City that it attempted on at least five (5) occasions to
solicit moneys due from each delinquent account, then the franchisee may assign
its rights to collection (including penalties and expenses of collection) to
the City. The City may then, at its discretion, initiate any collection
procedures authorized by law, including those special assessment procedures
authorized by Government Code sections 38790.1 and 25831. If the City collects
the delinquent amount, it shall pay the collected moneys to franchisee after
deducting City's administrative costs and costs of collection. (Ord. 1584, 6-
18-2019)
5-2-10: SELF-HAULING:
   A.   Permit Required: The person in charge of a residential premises may
apply for and obtain a permit to self-haul, and shall not self-haul without a
valid self-haul permit issued pursuant to this section unless otherwise
expressly authorized in this chapter. Every person in charge of a residential
premises who desires to self-haul in lieu of making arrangements with the solid
waste franchisee for solid waste handling services shall obtain a self-haul
permit from the Public Works Director prior to commencing self-hauling. For
purposes of this section, "residential premises" refers to one- and two-family
dwelling units.
   B.   Term: A permit to self-haul shall be good for one calendar year, or
such part of the calendar year that is remaining after the issuance of the
permit. All self-haul permits shall expire on December 31, and may be renewed
annually. Application for a renewal permit must be filed at least sixty (60)
calendar days prior to the expiration date of the permit to allow adequate time
for processing, inspection and verifications required to issue the permit.
   C.   Issuance Of Permit: An applicant for a self-haul permit shall submit a
completed application, on a form approved by the City's Public Works Director,
to the Public Works Department. The Public Works Director shall determine
whether the application is complete within five (5) business days of the
receipt of the application. If the Public Works Director finds the application
incomplete, the applicant shall be given a list of information needed to
complete the application.
Once an application for a self-haul permit is complete, the applicant shall
produce the items listed in subsections C1 through C7 of this section. The
Public Works Director shall issue a self-haul permit within five (5) working
days of the production of all of the required items.
      1.   The applicant must produce for inspection the vehicle the applicant
intends to use for self-hauling, and the vehicle must meet the following
standards:
         a.   The vehicle is capable of safely hauling a minimum of thirty two
(32) gallons (4.3 cubic feet) of solid waste, recyclables and organics in a
safe and sanitary manner so that such matter will not spill; and
         b.   If the vehicle is not fully enclosed, the applicant must produce
a tarp or other material, device or mechanism that is demonstrated to
completely secure the materials being self- hauled;
      2.   The applicant must produce evidence that he or she owns or leases
the vehicle produced for inspection or has a written agreement to use the
vehicle for self-hauling with the vehicle's owner or lessor;
      3.   The applicant must produce evidence that he or she has a valid
California driver's license to operate the vehicle produced for inspection and
that the vehicle is registered in the State of California;
      4.   The applicant must provide the City with proof of automobile
insurance for the vehicle;
      5.   The vehicle must be operational and meet all applicable Vehicle Code
standards;
      6.   The applicant must provide the City with proof that the applicant
has containers for the storage of solid waste, recyclables and organics on the
applicant's premises before the materials are hauled to a disposal facility;
      7.   The applicant must not have any outstanding charges due to the
City's solid waste franchisee for solid waste handling services previously
received at the premises for which the self-hauling permit application is being
submitted; and
      8.   The applicant must pay the fee for a self-haul permit authorized by
resolution of the City Council. The fee shall reflect the City's reasonable
costs of issuing and monitoring compliance with the permit. Permits issued
between January 1 and March 31 shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the
permit fee; permits issued between April 1 and June 30 shall pay seventy five
percent (75%) of the permit fee; permits issued between July 1 and September 30
shall pay fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee; permits issued between October
1 and December 31 shall pay twenty five percent (25%) of the permit fee.
   D.   Appeal Of Denial: An applicant whose application for a self- haul
permit has been denied may appeal that decision to the City Manager. The appeal
must be made on a form approved by the Public Works Director. An appeal must be
filed within ten (10) calendar days of the date the applicant was notified of
the denial. The City Manager shall issue a written decision within ten (10)
business days of the effective date of the appeal. The decision of the City
Manager shall be final.
   E.   Operational Standards/Permit Conditions:
      1.   The permittee must dispose of solid waste weekly at a licensed or
permitted landfill or disposal facility and shall procure and retain weekly
receipts from such landfill or other disposal facility. Receipts shall be
submitted to the City upon request. Failure to show proof of solid waste
disposal for each week that a person is permitted to self-haul shall constitute
a public health and safety nuisance sufficient to permit City to revoke the
permittee's self-haul permit.
      2.   The permittee must notify the City of any change in the vehicle
being used to haul solid waste by the permittee. The permittee must bring the
new vehicle in for an inspection and demonstrate compliance with subsections C1
through C5 of this section before the new vehicle is used to haul any solid
waste under the permit.
      3.   The permittee must keep on file with the City copies of the current
automobile insurance and registration for the vehicle used to self-haul and the
permittee's current California driver's license.
      4.   The permittee must separate and bag solid waste, recyclables and
organics. Recyclables must be disposed of at a licensed or permitted recycling
center, materials recovery facility, or transfer station. Organics must be
disposed of at a licensed or permitted composting facility, organics processing
facility, or must be composted on the premises covered by the self-haul permit.
      5.   The permittee must maintain, on a rolling basis, original records
showing, for the immediately preceding twelve (12) months, the type and weight
of all solid waste collected (categorized by solid waste, organics, and
recyclables) and the disposal site, recycling facility, organics processing
facility or other final destination of each load transported (categorized by
solid waste, recyclables, and organics). Copies of these records must be
submitted to the Public Works Director upon request.
      6.   The permittee must submit quarterly reports to the Public Works
Director showing the type and weight of solid waste collected (categorized by
solid waste, recyclables, and organics), the final destination of each type of
waste, and the receipt number (provided by the final destination) for each load
of solid waste, recyclables, and organics collected. All such reports must be
submitted on a form approved by the Public Works Director.
      7.   The permittee is liable for any damages and cleanup costs resulting
from any solid waste, recyclables or organics spills during the course of the
permittee's self-hauling activity.
   F.   Revocation Of Permit: The self-haul permit shall be subject to
revocation if the permittee violates any provision of this chapter. A notice of
revocation shall be mailed to the permittee informing him/her that the self-
haul permit is being revoked, identifying the violations of this chapter that
have occurred, and informing the permittee that he or she has the right to
dispute the revocation by an appeal to the City Manager. An appeal of a
revocation must be filed within ten (10) calendar days of the mailing of notice
of the revocation. A revocation appeal hearing will be scheduled within ten
(10) business days of the date the City receives the request for an appeal.
Revocation of the permit will be stayed upon filing of an appeal in accordance
with this section. The stay will remain in place until a final decision is
issued by the City Manager. The City Manager will issue a decision on the
appeal within five (5) business days of the hearing and provide the permittee
written notice of the decision. The decision of the City Manager on the appeal
shall be final. A person whose self-haul permit has been revoked pursuant to
this subsection may not obtain another self-haul permit for one year from the
date of the revocation. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-11: PLACEMENT IN CITY WASTE CONTAINERS PROHIBITED:
City solid waste, organics and recyclables containers are placed in City parks
and other public areas for the use by the public to control trash, litter and
garbage generated at their respective locations. Such containers are not to be
used as disposal sites for trash or rubbish which is generated off site. It is
unlawful for any person to place, dump, deposit, or throw away solid waste,
organics or recyclables, or other refuse or debris of any kind or character
whatsoever in City containers if such was generated at a location other than
where the container is located. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-12: BURNING VEGETATION:
It is unlawful for any person to set fire to, ignite or burn any standing or
uncut dry grass, weeds, brush or vegetation on any lot or premises within the
City. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-13: RECYCLING OF ORGANICS:
   A.   Mandatory Recycling Services:
      1.   On and after April 1, 2016, a business or a multi-family residential
dwelling that generates eight (8) cubic yards or more of organics per week must
arrange for recycling services specifically for organics in the manner
specified in subsection B of this section.
      2.   On and after January 1, 2017, a business or a multi-family
residential dwelling that generates four (4) cubic yards or more of organics
per week must arrange for recycling services specifically for organics in the
manner specified in subsection B of this section.
      3.   On and after January 1, 2019, a business or a multi-family
residential dwelling that generates four (4) cubic yards or more of commercial
solid waste, as defined in Public Resources Code section 42649.1, per week,
must arrange for recycling services specifically for organics in the manner
specified in subsection B of this section.
      4.   On or after January 1, 2020, if the Department of Resources
Recycling and Recovery determines that Statewide disposal of organic waste has
not been reduced to fifty percent (50%) of the level of disposal during 2014, a
business that generates two (2) cubic yards or more per week of commercial
solid waste must arrange for the organics recycling services specified in
subsection A3 of this section, unless the department determines that this
requirement will not result in significant additional reductions of organics
disposal.
      5.   For purposes of this section, "multi-family residential dwelling"
means a dwelling of five (5) units or more, including, without limitation,
condominiums, apartments, and townhomes. The term does not include dwellings of
four (4) or fewer units.
   B.   Actions Required: A business or a multi-family residential dwelling
subject to subsection A of this section must take at least one of the following
actions:
      1.   Source separate organics from other waste and subscribe to a basic
level of organics recycling service that includes collection and recycling of
organics.
      2.   Recycle its organics on site or self-haul its own organics for
recycling.
      3.   Subscribe to an organics recycling service that may include mixed
waste processing that specifically recycles organics.
      4.   Sell or donate its recyclable organics to a person or entity
authorized by law to receive such waste.
   C.   Food Waste Generated By Dwelling: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
multi-family residential dwelling is not required to arrange for the organics
recycling services specified in subsection B of this section for food waste
that is generated by the dwelling.
   D.   Recycling Services Required: Property management companies that
contract for trash service for any commercial, institutional, or multi-family
properties subject to this chapter are required to contract or otherwise make
available recycling services to comply with this section.
   E.   Reports And Policy Compliance Required: Any business or multi- family
residential dwelling subject to this chapter must:
      1.   Report to the City of El Segundo on an annual basis the action the
business or dwelling has taken pursuant to subsection B of this section; the
amount of commercial solid waste and organics that the business or dwelling
generates per week; the amount of organics recycled per week, and any other
information required by the City to comply with its State mandated reporting
requirements.
      2.   Comply with the City's mandatory commercial organics recycling
policy, adopted by the City Council and which may be amended by the City
Manager.
   F.   Exemptions:
      1.   Any business or multi-family dwelling subject to this section may
apply for an exemption from the requirements of this section. The City Manager
or designee may grant either a temporary or permanent exemption for any of the
following reasons:
         a.   Lack of sufficient space in multi-family complexes or businesses
to provide additional organic material recycling bins.
         b.   The current implementation by a business of actions that result
in the recycling of a significant portion of its organics.
         c.   The business or group of businesses does not generate at least
one-half (1/2) of a cubic yard of organics per week.
         d.   Extraordinary and unforeseen events, in which case a temporary
exemption only may be granted.
      2.   The City Manager's or designee's decision may be appealed to the
City Council within ten (10) days of the decision. The City Council's decision
shall be final.
   G.   Violation: Any violation of this section is punishable as an infraction
pursuant to section
1-2-3 of this Code. The City may enforce this section by administrative
citation or any other remedy available to the City under law and it is within
the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies.
   H.   Fees: The City Council may establish fees for its costs of enforcing
this section by resolution. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-14: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION; COLLECTION AND PROCESSING OF ORGANICS AND
RECYCLABLES - COMMERCIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY:
   A.   Mandatory Arrangements for Collection and Removal: The owner or
occupant of each commercial and multi-family premises is required to make
arrangements for the regular removal of all solid waste, organics, and
recyclables accumulated on such premises. Effective April 1, 2025, no owner or
occupant of a commercial or multi-family premises shall employ another, other
than a City franchisee, to collect solid waste, organics or recyclables
generated on the premises. No owner or occupant of a commercial or multi-family
premises may employ a temporary roll-off/bin service permittee for the regular
collection of solid waste, organics, or recyclables. For purposes of this
section, "multi-family premises" refers to a building containing three or more
dwelling units designed or arranged for occupancy by three (3) or more
households living independently in which they may or may not share common
entrances and/or other spaces. If a property contains both commercial and
multi-family residential premises, the owners or occupants of the residential
component of the premises must independently contract with a franchisee for the
regular collection and removal of solid waste, organics, and recyclables in
accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Mandatory Arrangements for Bulky Item Pickup-Multi-Family Premises: The
owner, manager, or association in charge of each multi-family premises is
required to make arrangements for the pickup, on an as-needed basis, of bulky
items that are discarded on the premises. Said arrangements must be made with a
City franchisee and within one business day of the bulky item(s) having been
discarded/abandoned on the premises.
(Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 1619, 9-15-2020; Ord. 1669, 3-4-2025)
5-2-15: COMMERCIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION
SERVICES:
   A.   Franchise Required: Effective April 1, 2025, no person shall collect
solid waste from any commercial or multi-family premises in the City and
transport it over the public streets or highways unless such person is a City
franchise, the holder of a valid temporary roll-off/bin service permit issued
by the City, or an exemption set forth in this section applies. For purposes of
this section, and unless otherwise specified, "multi-family premises" refers to
a building containing three or more dwelling units designed or arranged for
occupancy by three (3) or more households living independently in which they
may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces.
   B.   Exemptions: The requirement to obtain a franchise or temporary roll-
off/bin service permit under this section does not apply to any of the
following:
      1.   The collection and transport of solid waste by the owner or occupant
of the real property where the solid waste was generated.
      2.   The collection and transport of solid waste that is generated on
real property in the course of a service provided to the owner or tenant of
that property by a building contractor or landscape contractor, if the solid
waste is collected and transported by the contractor.
      3.   The collection and transport of solid waste under a valid Federal or
State permit if the Federal or State permit requirement preempts the franchise
or temporary roll-off/bin service permit requirement under this section.
      4.   The collection and transport of solid waste generated at a publicly
operated wastewater treatment facility.
      5.   Disposal of large, bulky or heavy items that are not a byproduct of
materials generated by a business or tenant or are not customarily part of the
property's solid waste generation.
   C.   Vehicle Inspections; Standards:
      1.   All vehicles proposed to be used for collection and transport of
solid waste pursuant to a City franchise or a City-issued temporary roll-off/
bin service permit must be made available for inspection by the Public Works
Director or his/her designee at a location within the City determined by the
Public Works Director. The vehicle must be made available for inspection within
two business days of the inspection request and at a location designated by the
Public Works Director.
      2.   All vehicles proposed to be used for collection and transport of
solid waste pursuant to the franchise or the temporary roll-off/bin service
permit must comply with the following minimum standards:
         a.   The vehicle must be designed, constructed, and configured for
safe handling and to securely contain the type of solid waste proposed to be
collected; and
         b.   The vehicle must be prominently marked with the name and
telephone number of the franchisee/permitee.
   D.   Temporary Roll-Off/Bin Service Permits-Application: A person may apply
for a temporary roll-off/bin service permit by submitting an application to the
Public Works Department and paying an application fee established by resolution
of the City Council. The application must be made using a form approved by the
Public Works Director and include all of the following:
      1.   The full legal name, address and telephone number(s) of the
applicant. If the applicant is a sole proprietor who will operate under a
fictitious business name, the applicant must provide a copy of a valid
fictitious business name statement for the business. If the applicant is a
business entity, the applicant must provide written documentation that the
entity may lawfully conduct business in the City.
      2.   Identification of all vehicles proposed to be used in the collection
and transport of solid waste under the permit, including legible copies of
valid California registration cards for each vehicle. The Public Works Director
may require inspection of any such vehicles prior to issuing a permit or at any
time during the life of the permit.
      3.   Proof of possession of a valid motor carrier identification number
in good standing issued under California Vehicle Code section 34507.5, if
applicable.
      4.   Identification of the facilities to which the collected waste will
be transported.
   E.   Issuance of Temporary Roll-Off/Bin Service Permit; Grounds for Denial:
      1.   After receipt of an application, payment of a permit fee established
by the City Council by resolution, and a valid certificate of liability
insurance issued to the applicant that conforms to the coverage requirement set
forth in this section, the Public Works Director shall issue a temporary roll-
off/bin service permit to the applicant unless any of the following grounds for
denial exists:
         a.   The application is incomplete or inaccurate.
         b.   A permit issued to the applicant under this section has been
revoked within twelve (12) months prior to the date of application.
         c.   The applicant has failed to pay an outstanding fine.
         d.   The Public Works Director determines that a vehicle proposed to
be used in the collection and transport of solid waste pursuant to the permit
does not conform to the minimum standards set forth in this section.
      2.   The Public Works Director shall provide written notice to the
applicant of any denial of a permit under this section and the reasons for the
denial.
      3.   A permit issued pursuant to this section will include, without
limitation:
         a.   The name of the permittee.
         b.   A list of all vehicles, by license plates and vehicle
identification numbers, that may be used pursuant to the permit.
         c.   The effective and expiration dates of the permit. Each permit
will be issued for a twelve (12)-month period and may be renewed annually
provided there are no grounds for denial pursuant to this section.
   F.   Permit Conditions; Responsibilities of Permittees: The following
conditions/responsibilities apply to all temporary roll-off/bin service
permittees:
      1.   The permittee must comply with all applicable laws and regulations.
      2.   A copy of the permit must be kept in each vehicle used for solid
waste collection and transportation under the permit and produced upon request
by any peace officer.
      3.   Each motorized vehicle used for solid waste collection or
transportation under the permit must be marked with the name and telephone
number of the permittee. Markings must be in sharp contrast to the background
and of such size as to be readily visible during daylight hours from a distance
of fifty feet (50'). Markings must be applied to each sidewall of the motorized
vehicle.
      4.   Each vehicle used for solid waste collection or transportation under
the permit must be regularly maintained and cleaned. Each vehicle must be made
available for inspection by the Public Works Director or his/her designee at a
location within the City. The vehicle must be made available for inspection
within two (2) business days of the inspection request.
      5.   Each vehicle used for solid waste collection and transportation
under the permit must carry proof of liability insurance coverage in the
amounts required by this section.
      6.   Each bin or roll-off that is used by the permittee in the course of
operations under the permit must be marked with the name and telephone number
of the permittee. All bins and roll-offs must be maintained in a clean and safe
condition.
      7.   The permittee must bill each customer directly for all services
provided.
      8.   A permittee may not place any portion of a roll-off or bin within
any portion of any public right-of-way unless an encroachment permit has been
issued by the City to the customer or to the permittee authorizing placement of
the roll-off or bin within the right-of-way.
      9.   Permittee must ensure that a minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) of
non-hazardous construction and demolition debris collected must be recycled,
reused, or salvaged for reuse in accordance with SB 1383 and its implementing
regulations. Any waste collected that is not construction and demolition debris
is subject to the minimum diversion requirements set forth in this Code and
state law, whichever is stricter.
      10.   A permittee may provide temporary roll-off/bin service only for the
following temporary, project-type activities: construction, demolition, and/or
clean-up. A permittee may not provide temporary roll-off/bin service to any
customer for any other purpose without the prior approval of the Public Works
Director or his/her designee.
      11.   All waste collected by the permittee must be hauled by permittee to
a state- or county-certified facility that is not on the City's list of
prohibited facilities. The most current list of prohibited facilities may be
obtained from the Public Works Director.
      12.   The permittee must maintain, on a rolling basis, original records
showing, for the immediately preceding twelve (12) months, the type and weight
of all solid waste collected (categorized by project type as represented by the
customer-i.e., construction, demolition, and/or clean-up), the location where
each load of waste was collected, the final destination of each load collected
(name of certified facility), and the quantity of collected waste (by weight
and percentage) that has been diverted from landfills. Copies of these records
must be submitted to the Public Works Director upon request.
      13.   The permittee must submit quarterly reports to the Public Works
Director stating the total number of customers serviced, categorized by project
type (construction, demolition, and/or clean-up); the customer list of
premises/businesses from which waste was collected; the level of service
provided to each customer, including type and weight of solid waste collected,
the number and size of containers used, the frequency of service (number of
times the container was serviced during the temporary project), the final
destination of each container of waste collected, and the quantity of collected
waste (by weight and percentage) that has been diverted from landfills. All
such reports must be submitted on a form approved by the Public Works Director.
   G.   Insurance Requirements: At all times while doing business in the City,
each permittee must have and maintain commercial general liability insurance
with coverage at least as broad as Insurance Services Offices form CG 00 01 and
with limits no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate. Prior to providing any
temporary roll-off/bin services in the City, Permittee must provide
certificates and required endorsements to the City as evidence of the insurance
coverage required herein. The City of El Segundo, its elected and appointed
officers, officials, agents, employees, and volunteers must be listed as
additionally insured. Permittee's insurance coverage must be primary insurance
and/or primary source of recovery with respect to City, its elected and
appointed officers, agents, officials, employees, and volunteers with respect
to all claims, losses or liability arising directly or indirectly from the
Permittee's operations or services provided in the City.
   H.   Revocation:
      1.   Grounds For Revocation: A permit issued pursuant to this section may
be revoked by the Public Works Director in accordance with the procedures set
forth herein if the Public Works Director determines that:
         a.   The permittee has failed to comply with a term or condition of
operation under the permit;
         b.   The permittee's conduct under the permit constitutes a nuisance;
or
         c.   During the permit period, the permittee collected and transported
solid waste that another person had an exclusive right or privilege to collect
and transport pursuant to a valid franchise agreement.
      2.   Notice: The Public Works Director will provide written notice of
intent to revoke a permit to the permittee at the address provided on the
permittee's application. The notice will state all applicable grounds for the
revocation and the permittee's right to a hearing under this section.
      3.   Hearing: Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the
notice of intent to revoke, the permittee may request a hearing before the
Public Works Director by completing and submitting a written hearing request
form. The hearing will be set for a date no sooner than twenty (20) days and no
later than forty-five (45) days following the date of the written request for
hearing.
      4.   Effective Date: If no hearing is timely requested, the revocation is
effective fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice of intent to revoke.
If a hearing is held, the Public Works Director shall issue a written decision
within ten days of the hearing. Notice of the written decision shall be
provided to the permittee by regular mail at the address indicated on the
permit and the notice shall be effective two (2) business days after it is
deposited in the United States mail. The decision of the Public Works Director
will become effective when the time to appeal to the City Council expires,
unless an appeal to the City Council is timely filed.
      5.   Appeal of Revocation to the City Council: Any permittee whose permit
is revoked under this section shall have the right, within ten calendar days
after notice of the Public Works Director's decision is provided, to file a
written appeal to the City Council. Any such appeal must be made on a form
provided by the Public Works Director and must set forth the specific ground or
grounds on which it is based. The City Council shall hold a hearing on the
appeal within forty-five (45) days after its receipt by the City, or at a time
thereafter agreed upon, and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten
(10) days' written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its
authorized representative will have the right to present evidence and a written
or oral argument, or both, in support of its appeal. The determination of the
City Council on the appeal shall be final.
   J.   Prohibitions:
      1.   No person shall engage the service of a person for compensation to
collect solid waste from any commercial or multi-family premises in the City
and transport it over a public street or highway in the City unless the person
whose service is engaged is a City franchisee, holds a valid temporary roll-
off/bin service permit issued by the City, or is exempt from the permit
requirement.
      2.   Unless specifically exempt from both the franchise and temporary
roll-off/bin service permit requirements pursuant to this section, no person
shall collect solid waste from any commercial or multi-family premises in the
City and transport it over a public street or highway in the City without a
City franchise or temporary roll-off/bin service permit.
      3.   No person subject to the franchise or temporary roll-off/bin service
permit requirement in this section shall transport solid waste to any location
other than:
         a.   A solid waste facility that is lawfully operated under all
required State and local permits, registrations, and enforcement agency
notifications;
         b.   A recycling facility that, as its principal function, receives
wastes that have already been separated for recycling and are not intended for
disposal, and is lawfully operated in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations; or
         c.   An organics recycling facility that is lawfully operated in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 1619, 9-15-2020; Ord. 1669, 3-4-2025)
CHAPTER 3
LITTERING PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Littering Streets
5-3-3: Containers Required For Hauling
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
   LITTERING: The wilful or negligent throwing, dropping, placing, depositing,
or sweeping, or causing any such acts, of any waste matter on land or water in
other than appropriate storage containers or areas designated for such
purposes.
   WASTE MATTER: Discarded, used, or leftover substances including, but not
limited to, a lighted or nonlighted cigarette, cigar, match, or any flaming or
glowing material, or any garbage, trash, refuse, paper, container, packaging or
construction material, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive
matter of any kind, or any object likely to injure any person or create a
traffic hazard. (2000 Code)
5-3-2: LITTERING STREETS:
   A.   Garbage Or Rubbish Deposits: No person shall place or deposit, or leave
or abandon, or cause to be placed or deposited, or left or abandoned, in any
public street, road, avenue, alley, highway or other public place within the
City, any garbage, rubbish, trash, sweepings, garden refuse, tree trimming,
ashes, tin cans, junk or any other waste or refuse material or matter, the
contents of any cuspidor or any putrid or objectionable substances of any kind.
It is provided, however, that such items or materials may be temporarily
deposited in course of lawful transport or other lawful handling thereof in
accordance with any other rules or regulations which may exist or may hereafter
be established with reference thereto.
   B.   Throwing Bottles, Paper: No person shall throw, deposit or place in or
upon any street any glass, bottles, paper, rubbish, garbage (except in proper
containers as permitted by law), or any unsightly, foul or noxious substance.
(Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
5-3-3: CONTAINERS REQUIRED FOR HAULING:
No person shall haul any dirt, rubbish, debris, garbage, oil or other petroleum
products, bricks, sand, gravel, crushed rock or other materials in, upon or
along any street, unless the same is contained in a body, box, receptacle or
carrier which effectively prevents any part of the load from leaking, sifting,
dropping or being deposited upon the street. The provisions of this Section
shall not apply to the slight leakage which is necessarily incident to the
careful and proper operation of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 429, 12-21-1955)
CHAPTER 4
STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
SECTION:
5-4-1: Purpose And Intent
5-4-2: Limits Of Chapter
5-4-3: Definitions
5-4-4: Illicit Discharges Prohibited
5-4-5: Illicit Connections Prohibited
5-4-6: Control Of Pollutants From Sites Of Commercial Or Industrial Activity
5-4-7: Spills, Dumping And Disposal Prohibited
5-4-8: Best Management Practices Required
5-4-9: Construction Activity Stormwater Measures
5-4-10: Violations
5-4-11: Notices Of Violation; Administrative Orders; Enforcement
5-4-12: Nuisance
5-4-13: Remedies Not Exclusive
5-4-14: Inspections; Searches
5-4-15: Fees
5-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers for the
purpose of complying with the Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne
Water Quality Control Act, and the Municipal National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit, including, without limitation, any
amendments or modifications, by:
      1.   Controlling non-stormwater discharges to the Municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4);
      2.   Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges, thereby
reducing the level of contamination of stormwater and urban runoff into the MS4
of the City; and
      3.   Controlling the discharge of pollutants, including those pollutants
taken up by stormwater as it flows over urban areas, to the maximum extent
practicable.
   B.   This chapter is intended to provide the City with the legal authority
necessary to implement and enforce the requirements contained in 40 CFR section
122.26(d)(2)(i)(A - F) and in the Municipal NPDES permit to the extent that
they are applicable in the City, to control discharges to and from those
portions of the MS4 over which the City has jurisdiction as required by the
Municipal NPDES permit, and to hold dischargers to the MS4 accountable for
their contributions of pollutants and flows.
   C.   This chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to define
and adopt applicable Best Management Practices (BMPs) and other stormwater
pollution control measures, to cite infractions, to impose fines pursuant to
this chapter, and to grant emergency self-waivers from Municipal NPDES permit
requirements in order to conduct repairs of essential public service systems
and infrastructure in emergency situations. Except as otherwise provided
herein, the authorized enforcement officer shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   This chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to carry out
inspections, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine
compliance and noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Municipal NPDES permit, including the prohibition of non-stormwater discharges
into the MS4. This includes the authority to enter, monitor, inspect, take
measurements, review and copy records, and require regular reports from
entities discharging into the City's MS4. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-2: LIMITS OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted to:
   A.   Infringe any right or power guaranteed by the United States or
California Constitution, including any vested property right;
   B.   Require any action inconsistent with the General Plan, any applicable
specific plan, vesting tentative map, or other provision of this Code;
   C.   Restrict otherwise lawful land use except as authorized by the laws of
California, subject to the limitations of this chapter. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meanings
stated in the Municipal NPDES permit and if not described therein, the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.); regulations
implementing NPDES; California Water Code section 13050; and any successor
statutes or regulations.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The City Manager or his or her designee and
any City official authorized to issue citations under this Code.
   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE FACILITY: A facility that is categorized in any one of
the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes: 5013, 5014, 5511,
5541, 7532 - 7534 and 7536 - 7539.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Practices or physical devices or systems
designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-
stormwater discharges to receiving waters or designed to reduce the volume of
stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
   CONSTRUCTION: Constructing, clearing, grading, grubbing, demolishing, or
excavating that results in land disturbance. Construction does not include
emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health
and safety; routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity
of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work; or routine
maintenance required to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, or original purpose of a facility. Construction does not include
interior remodeling with no outside exposure of construction material or
construction waste to stormwater; mechanical permit work; or sign permit work.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or
reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-
family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail
and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass
grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to
maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to
protect public health and safety immediately.
   DISCHARGE: Any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping or
disposal, of any pollutant, from any point source, into the waters of the
United States or any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to
the waters of the "contiguous zone" or the ocean from any point source other
than a vessel or other floating craft used for transportation. The term
discharge includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States
from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through
pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other
person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes,
sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any materials, wastes or mixture of wastes defined as a
"hazardous substance" or "hazardous waste" pursuant to the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 USC section 6901 et seq., the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA),
42 USC section 9601 et seq., or the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous
Substance Account Act, (HSAA), California Health and Safety Code section 25300
et seq., and all future amendments to any of them, or as defined by the
California Integrated Waste Management Board. Where there is a conflict in the
definitions employed by two (2) or more agencies having jurisdiction over
hazardous or solid waste, the term "hazardous waste" will be construed to have
the broader, more encompassing definition.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any human-made device or artifice, excluding roof drains
and other similar connections, connected to the MS4, without a permit, through
or by which an illicit discharge may be discharged. Examples include channels,
pipelines, pipes, conduits, inlets and outlets connected directly to the MS4.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge into the MS4 or from the MS4 into a
receiving water that is prohibited under local, State, or Federal statutes,
ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge includes any non-
stormwater discharge, except authorized non-stormwater discharges;
conditionally exempt non- stormwater discharges; and non-stormwater discharges
resulting from natural flows specifically identified in part III.A.1.d of the
MS4 permit.
   INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL FACILITY: Any facility which is the site of the
production, manufacture, storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or
sale of goods or commodities, and any facility involved or used in providing
professional and nonprofessional services. This category of facilities
includes, without limitation, any facility defined by the SIC or the North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Facility ownership (Federal,
State, Municipal, private) and profit motive of the owner or operator of the
facility are not factors in this definition.
   INSPECTION:
   A.   The entry and conducting of an on-site review of structures and devices
on a property, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with specific
Municipal or other legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an
inspection include but are not limited to:
      1.   Pre-inspection documentation research;
      2.   Request for entry;
      3.   Interview of property owner, resident and/or occupant(s);
      4.   Property walk-through;
      5.   Visual observation of the condition of property;
      6.   Examination and copying of records as required;
      7.   Sample collection (if necessary or required);
      8.   Exit discussion (to discuss preliminary evaluation) as appropriate;
and
      9.   Report preparation, and if appropriate, recommendations for coming
into compliance.
   MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT: The "Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharges Within the Coastal Watersheds of
Los Angeles County, Except Those Discharges Originating from the City of Long
Beach MS4" (Order No. R4-2012-0175), NPDES Permit No. CAS004001, effective
December 28, 2012, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control
Board - Los Angeles Region, and any successor permit to that permit.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4):
   A.   A conveyance or system of conveyances (consisting of roads with
drainage systems, Municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
manmade channels, or storm drains):
      1.   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish,
district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State
law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under State law such
as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a
designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that
discharges to waters of the United States;
      2.   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      3.   Which is not a combined sewer; and
      4.   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined in 40 CFR 122.2.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The national
program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring
and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements,
under CWA section 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an "approved
program".
   NEW DEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activities; structural development,
including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of
impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the MS4 not composed entirely of
stormwater.
   PARKING LOT: Land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor
vehicles used for business, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot
size of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with
twenty five (25) or more parking spaces.
   POLLUTANT: Those "pollutants" defined in CWA section 502(6) (33 USC section
1362(6)), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code section
13373.
   REDEVELOPMENT: Land-disturbing activity that results in the creation,
addition, or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of
impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes,
but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or
replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not
part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related
to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance
to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to
immediately protect public health and safety.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The owner, occupant, or other person in charge of day to
day operations of premises located within the City.
   RESTAURANT: A facility where prepared food and beverages are sold for
consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling
prepared food and beverages for immediate consumption (see SIC Code 5812).
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Routine maintenance projects include, but are not limited to projects
conducted to:
      1.   Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of the facility.
      2.   Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design
grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities.
      3.   Includes road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and
shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts.
      4.   Update existing lines and facilities to comply with applicable
codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in
increased capacity. This includes replacing existing lines with new materials
or pipes.
      5.   Repair leaks.
      6.   Conduct landscaping activities without changing existing or natural
grades.
   B.   Routine maintenance does not include construction of new lines or
facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and
regulations. New lines are those that are not associated with existing
facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines.
   SIC: Standard Industrial Classification.
   SOLID WASTE: Has the same meaning as in Public Resources Code section 40191
and any successor statute or regulation.
   STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 CFR section 122.26(b)
(13); 55 Fed. Reg. 47990, 47995 (Nov. 16, 1990)).
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN OR SWPPP: A plan, as required by a
State general permit issued by the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB),
identifying potential pollutant sources and describing the design, placement
and implementation of BMPs, to effectively prevent non-stormwater discharges
and to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges during activities covered by
the general permit.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF: That part of precipitation (rainfall or snowmelt) which
travels via flow across a surface to the MS4 or receiving waters from
impervious, semi-pervious, or pervious surfaces. When all other factors are
equal, runoff increases as the perviousness of a surface decreases.
   STRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (STRUCTURAL BMP): Any structural
facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of stormwater
and urban runoff pollution (e.g., a canopy, structural enclosure). This
category may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs.
   TREATMENT CONTROL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (TREATMENT CONTROL BMP): Any
engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity setting of
particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any
other physical, biological, or chemical process. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-4: ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED:
All non-stormwater discharges into the MS4 are prohibited unless those flows
are: in compliance with a separate NPDES permit; pursuant to a discharge
exemption by the Regional Board, the Regional Board's executive officer, or the
State Water Resources Control Board; associated with emergency firefighting
activities (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property);
natural flows as defined in the Municipal NPDES permit; conditionally exempt
non-stormwater discharges as defined in accordance with the Municipal NPDES
permit; or authorized as a temporary non-stormwater discharge by the USEPA
pursuant to sections 104(a) or 104(b) of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA). (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-5: ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to use or allow the use of any illicit connection
to convey an illicit discharge or any pollutant to the MS4 from premises of
which that person is an owner or is the person in charge of day to day
activities. Illicit connections are prohibited by the Clean Water Act,
Municipal NPDES permit, and this chapter. The responsible person for premises
at which an illicit connection is located must obtain a permit for, or remove,
the illicit connection within one hundred eighty (180) days of confirmation of
discovery of the illicit connection. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-6: CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM SITES OF COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   All dischargers operating under any general stormwater permit as may be
issued by the USEPA, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional
Board, must comply with all requirements of such permit. Each discharger
identified in an individual NPDES permit must comply with and undertake all
activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any such permit
may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement officer
prior to the issuance of any grading, building, or occupancy permits, or any
other type of permit or license issued by the City.
   B.   Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from industrial or commercial
activities are prohibited, unless approved by a separate permit.
   C.   Any person or entity required to have a general industrial activities
stormwater permit (GIASP) for a facility or activity in the City which
discharges to the City's MS4 must retain at such facility or activity the
following documents which evidence compliance with GIASP requirements:
      1.   A copy of the notice of intent to comply with the general industrial
activities stormwater permit;
      2.   A waste discharge identification number (WDID) issued by the
California Water Resources Control Board;
      3.   A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), which includes all
necessary BMPs from the Municipal NPDES permit; and
      4.   Any required stormwater quality data.
Alternatively, if a facility has been granted a no-exposure certification,
proof of this certification must be retained on site.
   D.   Any person or entity in the City required to have a GIASP for a
facility or activity in the City which discharges to the City's MS4, upon
request from a duly authorized officer of the City, must make available to the
City for review, copying, and inspection all of the documents described in this
section during any City stormwater related educational program or inspection
and demonstrate compliance with the GIASP, including, without limitation,
demonstration of the adequacy of, and compliance with, any required SWPPP and
all applicable BMPs. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-7: SPILLS, DUMPING AND DISPOSAL PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, release, spill, leak,
pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or dispose into the
environment any solid waste or liquid waste, including any pollutant, in or
upon any part of the MS4, or upon any public or private premises in the City,
or to cause, suffer, or permit any solid waste or liquid waste or other
pollutant to come to be located upon, in, on or under any premises in the City,
except in an authorized or permitted solid waste container or at an authorized
or permitted solid waste facility or publicly owned or privately owned
treatment works.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to dispose of leaves, grass or other
clippings, dirt or any other landscape debris into any part of the MS4.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to dispose of any pesticide, fungicide,
or herbicide banned by, or not registered with, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation, or its
successor, into any part of the MS4.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to dispose any hazardous materials into
any trash receptacle accessible to the public.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person to pour oil or grease, or the residue of
oil or grease onto any parking lot, or any part of the MS4.
   F.   It is unlawful for any person to place any washout water or other
liquid in any container for the disposal of solid waste.
   G.   It is unlawful for any person to wash restaurant or automotive service
facility floor mats in any place where the wash or rinse water may flow into
any part of the MS4. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-8: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIRED:
The responsible person must implement Best Management Practices as follows:
   A.   New development and redevelopment projects identified in part VI.D.7.b
of the MS4 permit and chapter 7 of this title must control pollutants,
pollutant loads, and runoff volume by: 1) minimizing the impervious surface
area and 2) controlling runoff through infiltration, bioretention, and/or
rainfall harvest and use.
   B.   Responsible persons for parking lots with more than twenty five (25)
parking spaces exposed to stormwater which parking lots are associated with
industrial or commercial activities, according to the United States Office of
Management and SIC must use BMPs to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the
maximum extent practicable. Such measures may include regular sweeping or other
measures, if effective.
   C.   Responsible persons of premises where machinery or other equipment is
repaired or maintained, at facilities or activities associated with industrial
or commercial activities, according to the United States Office of Management
and SIC must use BMPs or other steps to prevent discharge of maintenance
related or repair related pollutants to the MS4.
   D.   For other premises exposed to stormwater, the responsible person must
use BMPs or other steps to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum
extent practicable, including the removal and lawful disposal of any solid
waste or any other substance which, if it were to be discharged to the MS4,
would be a pollutant, including fuels, waste fuels, chemicals, chemical wastes
and animal wastes, from all parts of the premises exposed to stormwater. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-9: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY STORMWATER MEASURES:
   A.   Each discharger associated with construction activity, or other
discharger described in any general stormwater permit addressing such
discharges, as may be issued by the USEPA, the State Water Resources Control
Board, or the Regional Board, must comply with all requirements of such permit.
Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit must comply with and
undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any
such permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement
officer prior to the issuance of any grading, building, or occupancy permits,
or any other type of permit or license issued by the City.
   B.   Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from construction activities are
prohibited.
   C.   Dischargers associated with construction activities must implement
effective BMPs, including source control BMPs, in accordance with the Municipal
NPDES permit and construction general permit, to reduce pollutants in
stormwater from such sites to the maximum extent practicable.
   D.   Each person applying to the City for a grading or building permit for
projects disturbing one acre or more of soil for which compliance with the
construction general permit is required, must submit satisfactory proof to
City: 1) that a notice of intent (NOI) to comply with the construction general
permit was filed, and 2) that a stormwater pollution prevention plan has been
prepared, before the City can issue any grading or building permit on the
construction project. A copy of the NOI and the SWPPP must be maintained on
site during grading and construction and be made available for inspection,
review and copying upon the request of any City inspector.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person or entity required under Federal or State
law to comply with the construction general permit in the City to conduct,
authorize, or permit construction activities in the City at any facility which
discharges to the City's MS4 without complying with all applicable requirements
of the construction general permit.
   F.   Each person applying for a grading or building permit for any project
for which compliance with the construction general permit is not required, must
submit to the City for information and implement a grading and construction
activity runoff control program adequate to comply with the Municipal NPDES
permit and accomplish all of the following:
      1.   Retain on site the sediments generated on or brought to the project
site, using treatment control or structural BMPs in accordance with the minimum
BMPs required by the Municipal NPDES permit;
      2.   Retain construction related materials and wastes, spills and
residues at the project site and prevent discharges to streets, drainage
facilities, the MS4, receiving waters or adjacent properties;
      3.   Contain non-stormwater runoff from equipment and vehicle washing at
the project site; and
      4.   Control erosion from slopes and channels through use of effective
BMPs, such as limitation of grading during the wet season, inspection of graded
areas during rain events; planting and maintenance of vegetation on slopes, if
any, and covering any slopes susceptible to erosion.
   G.   Persons generating or producing pavement saw cutting wastes in any
street, curb or sidewalk in the City must recover and properly dispose of such
saw cutting wastes, and in no case may such wastes be permitted or suffered to
enter any part of the MS4, including, without limitation, any storm drain.
   H.   Persons performing street and road maintenance in any street in the
City must manage street and road maintenance materials in a manner that
prevents such materials from being discharged to the MS4.
   I.   It is unlawful for any person to wash any concrete truck or any part of
any concrete truck, including, without limitation, any chute, pump or tools, in
any place in the City except an area designated for that purpose by the City,
if the City has designated such a place. It is unlawful for any person to
permit or allow any concrete rinseate or wash water from any truck, pump, tool
or equipment to enter any drain, open ditch, street or road or any catch basin
or any other part of the MS4. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-10: VIOLATIONS:
Each violation of any provision of this chapter, any stormwater pollution
prevention plan, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter,
or any administrative compliance order issued pursuant to this chapter is a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-11: NOTICES OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The authorized enforcement officer, or designee, is authorized to
enforce this chapter through any lawful means including, without limitation,
conducting routine or complaint-driven inspections, and issuing notices of
violation and administrative compliance orders. Such actions may be used to
achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter, any approved stormwater
pollution prevention plan or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of such a notice of violation
or an administrative order is a violation of this chapter.
   B.   The City Attorney is authorized to enforce this chapter through all
administrative, civil, and criminal means available. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-12: NUISANCE:
Each violation of any provision of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be
abated by the City in accordance with this Code. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-13: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are in addition to any other remedies
available to the City under any applicable Federal, State or local law and it
is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 1560,
10-3-2017)
5-4-14: INSPECTIONS; SEARCHES:
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provisions of this
chapter, the enforcement officer for the City may enter any property in the
City regulated by this chapter in a manner authorized by State law and take
samples; inspect, review, and copy records relevant to any illicit connection,
illegal discharge, or the discharge of any pollutant. The owner or other person
in charge of day to day activities at the premises, upon request of any City
inspector, must make available for inspection, review, and copying any required
permit, NOI, BMPs, SWPPP, and any permit relevant to the reduction of the
discharge of any pollutant to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-
2017)
5-4-15: FEES:
The City Council may establish fees for the services provided under this
chapter by resolution. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
CHAPTER 5
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, WASTES
ARTICLE A. INVENTORY AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN
SECTION:
5-5A-1: Definitions
5-5A-2: Administering Agency
5-5A-3: Accidental Release Prevention Program
5-5A-4: Permit Required; Fees
5-5A-5: Regulated Substance Registration
5-5A-6: RMP Submission
5-5A-7: Violations
5-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
   ACCIDENTAL RELEASE: An unanticipated emission of a regulated substance or
other extremely hazardous substance into the ambient air from a stationary
source.
   EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any chemical listed in Appendix A of part 355
of subchapter J of chapter I of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   OWNER OR OPERATOR: Any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, or
supervises a stationary source.
   RMP: The risk management plan required under part 68 (commencing with
section 68.1) of subchapter C of chapter I of title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations and by California Health and Safety Code, division 20, chapter 6.95
article 2 (commencing with section 25531).
   REGULATED SUBSTANCE: Any substance, unless otherwise indicated, listed in
title 19, California Code of Regulations, section 2770.5, as amended.
   STATIONARY SOURCE: Any stationary source, as defined in section 68.3 of
title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations and title 19, California Code of
Regulations, section 2735.3.
   THRESHOLD QUANTITY: The quantity specified for a regulated substance
pursuant to title 19, California Code of Regulations, section 2770.5 and
determined to be present at a stationary source. (Ord. 1285, 2-17-1998; amd.
2000 Code)
5-5A-2: ADMINISTERING AGENCY:
   A.   Designation: Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and
Safety Code sections 25500 through 25520, or as they may be amended, the City
Manager or his designee is designated as the administering agency for the
implementation of the hazardous material inventory and emergency response
program within the City. (Ord. 1088, 8-19-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
   B.   Responsibilities: In order to effect such implementation, the City
Manager shall:
      1.   Enforce the provisions of the California Hazardous Materials Release
Response Plans and Inventory Law; and
      2.   Prepare supplemental regulations from time to time to facilitate
such enforcement. (Ord. 1088, 8-19-1986)
5-5A-3: ACCIDENTAL RELEASE PREVENTION PROGRAM:
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, chapter
6.11, division 20, and chapter 6.95, commencing with section 25500,
supplemented by division 2, title 19 of the California Code of Regulations, the
City assumes administrative and enforcement responsibility for the
implementation of title 19, division 2 of the California Code of Regulations
and chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1285, 2-17-
1998)
5-5A-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit from the Fire Department is required to
perform any or all of the activities as identified in chapter 6.11 of division
20 of the California Health and Safety Code. The permittee shall operate all
activities in accordance with established permit conditions to the extent such
conditions are identified in regulation, ordinance, or policy and as they apply
to the permittee's operation.
   B.   Permit Fees: Any person required by this Article to have a permit shall
pay the established permit fee as it related to the implementation of any and
all CUPA elements. The CUPA elements shall include, but not be limited to,
those programs identified in chapter 6.11, division 20 of the California Health
and Safety Code. The State-mandated surcharges shall be separate from the City
permit fee. The permittee shall pay the amount as designated in the fee
resolution, as may be amended by the Council from time to time. In addition to
the remedies set forth in the California Health and Safety Code, further
remedies, fees or restitution authorized by this Code, not inconsistent with
State law, shall apply to any violation of the State laws. (Ord. 1285, 2-17-
1998)
5-5A-5: REGULATED SUBSTANCE REGISTRATION:
Effective March 1, 1998, stationary sources handling extremely hazardous
substances or regulated substances shall complete and submit the California
Accidental Release Prevention Program registration form [OES 2735.6 (6/97)] to
the Fire Department. New or modified stationary sources shall register prior to
the date on which a regulated substance is first present in a process. (Ord.
1285, 2-17-1998)
5-5A-6: RMP SUBMISSION:
Effective June 21, 1999, each owner or operator of a stationary source, which
handles more than a threshold quantity of a regulated substance or extremely
hazardous substance, shall submit a single RMP that addresses all elements
required in 40 CFR part 68 and title 19, California Code of Regulations,
division 2, chapter 4.5. (Ord. 1285, 2-17-1998)
5-5A-7: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who violates section 25507 of the State Health and Safety Code shall
be subject to the penalties specified in section 25515 of the State Health and
Safety Code. This Section is supplemental to and in addition to any other civil
or criminal liability or penalty provided by law. (Ord. 1088, 8-19-1986)
ARTICLE B. UNDERGROUND STORAGE
SECTION:
5-5B-1: Enforcement Responsibility
5-5B-2: Permit Fees
5-5B-1: ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY:
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, chapter
6.11, section 25404, and chapter 6.7, section 25283, the City assumes
enforcement responsibility for the implementation of title 23, division 3,
chapters 16 and 18 of the California Code of Regulations and division 20,
chapters 6.7 and 6.75 of the California Health and Safety Code. Chapter 16 and
chapter 6.7 relate to underground storage of hazardous materials. Chapter 18
and 6.75 relate to petroleum underground storage tank cleanup. (Ord. 1264, 2-4-
1997; amd. 2000 Code)
5-5B-2: PERMIT FEES:
Any person required by this Chapter to have a permit or to pay fees related to
the underground storage of hazardous substances shall pay that amount as
designated in the City Fee Resolution, as may be amended by the Council from
time to time. In addition to the remedies set forth in the Health and Safety
Code, further remedies, fees or restitution authorized by this Code, not
inconsistent with the State law, shall apply to any violation of the State
laws. (Ord. 1264, 2-4-1997)
ARTICLE C. SOURCE REDUCTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
5-5C-1: Title
5-5C-2: Purpose And Intent
5-5C-3: Definitions
5-5C-4: Hazardous Waste Generator And On-Site Treatment Program
5-5C-5: Permit Required; Fees
5-5C-6: Hazardous Waste Source Reduction
5-5C-1: TITLE:
This Article shall be entitled HAZARDOUS WASTE SOURCE REDUCTION PROGRAM and
shall be known as such throughout the Code. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-1997)
5-5C-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Article is to protect public health and
the environment and to promote the reduction of hazardous waste generation by:
      1.   Effectively regulating hazardous waste generators that generate
waste for treatment or disposal off-site; and
      2.   Educating businesses on source reduction opportunities; and
      3.   Establishing incentives and disincentives to encourage hazardous
waste source reduction.
   B.   Intent: The intent of this Article is to enhance and protect the
environmental quality of Los Angeles County in a matter that is consistent with
the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-1997)
5-5C-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the followings words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
   BUSINESS: Refers to any employer, self-employed individual, trust, firm,
joint stock company, corporation, partnership, or association which routinely
generates any amount of hazardous waste at a nonresidential site located within
the City. "Business" includes both a nonprofit and profit-making business.
   CERTIFIED OR CUPA: The City of El Segundo.
   EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any hazardous waste or mixture of hazardous
wastes which, if human exposure should occur, may likely result in death,
disabling personal injury or serious illness caused by the hazardous waste or
mixture of hazardous wastes because of its quantity, concentration or chemical
characteristics.
   GENERATOR: Any person, by site, whose act or process produces a hazardous
waste or whose act first causes a hazardous waste to become subject to
regulation.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE: A hazardous waste as defined in California Code of
Regulations, title 22, section 66261.3, as amended.
   SOURCE REDUCTION:
   A.   "Source reduction" shall mean one of the following:
      1.   Any action which causes a net reduction in the generation of
hazardous waste.
      2.   Any action taken before the hazardous waste is generated that
results in a lessening of the properties which cause it to be classified as a
hazardous waste.
   B.   "Source reduction" includes, but is not limited to, all of the
following:
      1.   "Input change" which means a change in raw materials or feedstocks
used in a production process or operation so as to reduce, avoid, or eliminate
the generation of hazardous waste.
      2.   "Operational improvement" which means improved site management so as
to reduce, avoid, or eliminate the generation of hazardous waste.
      3.   "Production process change" which means a change in a process,
method, or technique which is used to produce a product or a desired result,
including the return of materials or their components, for reuse within the
existing processes or operations, so as to reduce, avoid, or eliminate the
generation of hazardous waste.
      4.   "Production reformulation" which means changes in design,
composition, or specifications of end products, including product substitution,
so as to reduce, avoid, or eliminate the generation of hazardous waste.
   SOURCE REDUCTION ASSESSMENT: A review conducted by the generator of the
processes, operations, and procedures in use at a generator's site, according
to the format established in California Health and Safety Code, section
25244.16(a) and does both of the following:
   A.   Determines any alternatives to, or modifications of, the generator's
processes, operations, and procedures that may be implemented to reduce the
amount of hazardous waste generated.
   B.   Includes a plan to document and implement source reduction measures for
hazardous wastes that are technically feasible and economically practicable for
the generator, including a reasonable implementation schedule. (Ord. 1280, 10-
7-1997)
5-5C-4: HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATOR AND ON-SITE TREATMENT PROGRAM:
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, chapter
6.11, division 20, and chapter 6.5, commencing with section 25100, supplemented
by division 4.5, title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, the City
assumes administrative and enforcement responsibility for the implementation of
title 22, division 4.5 of the California Code of Regulations and chapter 6.5 of
the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-1997)
5-5C-5: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit from the Fire Department is required to
perform any or all of the activities as identified in chapter 6.11 of division
20 of the California Health and Safety Code. The permittee shall operate all
activities in accordance with established permit conditions to the extent such
conditions are identified in regulation, ordinance, or policy and as they apply
to the permittee's operation.
   B.   Permit Fees: Any person required by this Section to have a permit shall
pay the established permit fee as it relates to the implementation of any and
all CUPA elements. The CUPA elements shall include, but not be limited to,
those programs identified in chapter 6.11, division 20 of the California Health
and Safety Code. The State-mandated surcharges shall be separate from the City
permit fee. The permittee shall pay the amount as designated in the Fee
Resolution, as may be amended by the Council from time to time. In addition to
the remedies set forth in the California Health and Safety Code, further
remedies, fees or restitution authorized by this Code, not inconsistent with
State law, shall apply to any violation of the State laws. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-
1997)
5-5C-6: HAZARDOUS WASTE SOURCE REDUCTION:
   A.   Assessment: Effective January 1, 1998, any business which routinely
generates between nine hundred (900) and twelve thousand (12,000) kilograms of
hazardous waste per year or any amount of extremely hazardous waste shall
develop a source reduction assessment, similar to requirements in California
Health and Safety Code, chapter 6.5, article 11.9. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-1997)
   B.   Incentives: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter 5, the
amount of a hazardous waste permit fee imposed on any business by this Chapter
5, commencing on the effective date hereof, shall be reduced by five percent
(5%) for any business maintaining a source reduction assessment and an annual
reduction of hazardous waste generation of more than five percent (5%) from
1997 levels, or prior year, based on a calendar year. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-1997)
CHAPTER 6
SMOKING REGULATED OR PROHIBITED
SECTION:
5-6-1: Purpose And Findings
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Smoking Prohibited
5-6-4: Smoking Regulated In Certain Places
5-6-5: Exemptions
5-6-6: Nonretaliation
5-6-7: Posting Of Signs
5-6-8: Violations
5-6-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The City Council hereby finds that the smoking of tobacco, or any other weed or
plant, is a danger to health and a material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort and a health hazard to those who are present in confined spaces, and
in order to serve public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of
this Chapter is to prohibit the smoking of tobacco, or any weed or plant, in
public places and places of employment as stated and required in this Chapter.
(Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall when
used in this Chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
Section:
   BAR: An establishment which is devoted to serving of alcoholic beverages and
which does not serve meals.
   EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
monetary compensation or profit.
   EMPLOYER: Any person, partnership, corporation, including municipal
corporation, who employs the services of more than five (5) persons.
   ENCLOSED: Closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for
ingress and egress and is not intended to mean areas commonly described as
public lobbies.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT OR WORK PLACE: Any enclosed area of a structure or
portion thereof under the control of a public or private employer which
employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not
limited to, work areas, employee lounges, conference rooms, and employee
cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which
the public is permitted, including, but not limited to: banks, educational
facilities, health facilities, public transportation facilities, reception
areas, lobbies, restaurants, retail food production and marketing
establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters, waiting
rooms, offices, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms. A
private residence is not a public place.
   SMOKE OR SMOKING: Includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar
or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or the
lighting or emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any
kind. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-3: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to smoke in the following places:
   A.   Any City-owned or City-operated vehicle;
   B.   Any public place, or in any similar enclosed area in City- owned or
private buildings generally used by and open to the public, including, but not
limited to, elevators and public restrooms. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-4: SMOKING REGULATED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
   A.   Places Of Employment:
      1.   Smoke-Free Areas: It shall be the responsibility of employers to
provide smoke-free areas for nonsmoking employees within existing facilities to
the maximum extent possible, but employers are not required to incur any
expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these
areas.
      2.   Implement Smoking Policy: Within ninety (90) days of the effective
date hereof, each employer shall adopt, implement and maintain a written and
posted smoking policy which shall contain at a minimum, provisions related to
the following:
         a.   Provision and maintenance of a contiguous no smoking area of not
less than one-half (1/2) of the seating capacity and floor space in employee
lounges, cafeterias, and lunchrooms with a seating capacity of ten (10) or
more. Employee lounges, cafeterias and lunchrooms with a seating capacity of
less than ten (10) would be designated as nonsmoking.
         b.   Any employee in an office or similar workplace of more than five
(5) employees shall be given the right to designate his or her individual and
immediate work area as a nonsmoking area and to post it with appropriate sign
(s).
         c.   Smoking shall be prohibited in all common workplaces in a place
of employment, unless every person who works in that workplace is a smoker.
      3.   Precedence Of Nonsmoker: In any dispute arising under the smoking
policy, the rights of the nonsmoker shall be given precedence.
      4.   Exceptions: This subsection is not intended to regulate smoking in
the following places and under the following conditions:
         a.   A private home which may serve as an office workplace.
         b.   Any property owned or operated by other governmental agencies.
      5.   Compliance Of Employer: An employer who makes reasonable efforts to
develop and promulgate a policy regarding smoking and nonsmoking in the
workplace shall be deemed to be in compliance with subsection A2 of this
Section; provided, that a policy which designates an entire workplace as a
smoking area shall not be deemed in compliance with this subsection.
      6.   Nonsmoking Area Designation: Notwithstanding the above, every
employer shall have the authority to designate any work area as a nonsmoking
area.
      7.   Time Limit: The smoking policy shall be communicated to all
employees within three (3) weeks of its adoption.
      8.   Supply Copy Of Policy To Employees: All employers shall supply a
written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective
employee.
   B.   Eating Establishments: Every publicly or privately owned coffee shop,
cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich shop, soda fountain, restaurant, or other
eating establishment serving food and/or any alcoholic beverage to the general
public whose occupied capacity is more than forty (40) persons shall provide
and maintain a nonsmoking area of at least fifty percent (50%) of the seating
capacity. Every publicly or privately owned coffee shop, cafeteria,
luncheonette, sandwich shop, soda fountain, restaurant, or other eating
establishment serving food and/or any alcoholic beverage to the general public
whose occupied capacity is less than forty (40) persons shall post a sign in a
prominent place near the entrance of such establishment stating either that the
establishment allows smoking or prohibits smoking. Excluded from the
calculation of occupied capacity herein shall be those portions of such
establishments which are located outdoors. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The following establishments are hereby exempted from smoking restrictions
under this Chapter:
   A.   Bars;
   B.   Banquet rooms used for private functions;
   C.   Buildings owned or leased by County, State, and Federal Government
agencies;
   D.   Private homes which serve as offices. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-6: NONRETALIATION:
No person or employer shall discharge, or in any manner retaliate against any
employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant
exercises any rights afforded by this Chapter. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-7: POSTING OF SIGNS:
Whenever in this Code smoking is prohibited, conspicuous signs shall be posted
so stating with letters of not less than one inch (1") in height on a
contrasting background, or an international "no smoking" symbol, a red circle
with a diagonal bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted. It
shall be the duty of the owner, operator, manager, or other persons having
control of such room, building, or other place where smoking is prohibited, to
post such signs or to cause such signs to be posted. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-8: VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be an infraction, punishable
as provided in this Code by: a) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for
a first violation; b) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a
second violation of the same Section of this Chapter within one year; c) a fine
not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation
of the same Section of this Chapter or ordinance within one year. (Ord. 1140,
5-16-1989)
ARTICLE A. REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCT SALES
SECTION:
5-6A-1: Purpose
5-6A-2: Definitions
5-6A-3: Prohibitions
5-6A-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California
Business and Professions Code section 22960(c), including any successor
statute, for the purpose of further restricting access to and reducing the
availability of cigarette and tobacco products from vending machines or
devices. (Ord. 1339, 10-16-2001)
5-6A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this article:
   BUSINESS: Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation, or other
business entity formed for profit, including retail establishments where goods
or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities
where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional
services are delivered.
   EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
monetary compensation or profit.
   EMPLOYER: Any person, partnership, corporation, including municipal
corporation, who employs the services of more than four (4) persons.
   MINOR: Any individual who is less than eighteen (18) years old.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other
legal entity.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open display of tobacco products and point-of-
sale tobacco-related promotional products to which the public has access
without the intervention of any employee.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, snuff, or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking,
chewing, inhaling, or other manner of ingestion.
   TOBACCO RETAILER: Any person or governmental entity that operates a store,
stand, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made
to purchasers for consumption or use.
   TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE: Any electronic or mechanical device or appliance
the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether coin or
paper bill, or other thing representative of value, which dispenses or releases
a tobacco product or tobacco accessories.
   VENDOR-ASSISTED: Only an employee has access to the tobacco product and
assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take
possession of the product until it is purchased. (Ord. 1339, 10-16-2001)
5-6A-3: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for a person or business to offer tobacco products for
sale without prominently displaying a sign at the point of purchase for tobacco
products stating: "SELLING TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS YOUNGER THAN EIGHTEEN
YEARS OF AGE IS ILLEGAL. PHOTO ID IS REQUIRED TO PURCHASE ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT."
The letters of the sign will be at least one-quarter inch (1/4") high.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner,
manager, or operator of any establishment to sell, offer to sell, or permit to
be sold any tobacco product to an individual without first examining
identification that establishes the purchaser's age as at least eighteen (18)
years unless the seller has some reasonable basis for determining the buyer's
age.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person, business, tobacco retailer, or other
establishment to sell or offer for sale any tobacco product that is not in the
manufacturer's original packaging containing all required health warnings.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer to sell,
permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale any tobacco product by
means of self-service merchandising, tobacco vending machine, or by means other
than vendor-assisted sales. (Ord. 1339, 10-16-2001)
ARTICLE B. TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSE
SECTION:
5-6B-1: General Provisions
5-6B-1-1: Purpose
5-6B-1-2: Definitions
5-6B-1-3: Prohibitions
5-6B-1-4: Administration By Department
5-6B-1-5: Notices
5-6B-2: License Application And Issuance
5-6B-2-1: Form And Content Of Application
5-6B-2-2: License Issuance
5-6B-2-3: License Denial
5-6B-3: Conditions
5-6B-3-1: General Conditions
5-6B-3-2: Display Of License
5-6B-3-3: License Renewal
5-6B-3-4: No Additional Privileges Granted
5-6B-3-5: Licenses Nontransferable
5-6B-4: Violation And Enforcement
5-6B-4-1: Enforcement
5-6B-4-2: City Attorney Enforcement Authority
5-6B-4-3: Notice Of Violation
5-6B-4-4: Violations Deemed Conclusive
5-6B-4-5: Administrative Fine
5-6B-4-6: Payment Of Administrative Fines
5-6B-4-7: Delinquent Administrative Fines; Penalties And Interest
5-6B-4-8: Liability For Fines
5-6B-4-9: License Suspension And Revocation
5-6B-4-10: Suspension Time Periods
5-6B-4-11: No New License After Revocation
5-6B-5: Appeals
5-6B-5-1: Administrative Appeals
5-6B-5-2: Content Of Notices
5-6B-5-3: Right To Judicial Review
5-6B-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
5-6B-1-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers for the purpose of
promoting compliance with federal, state, and local laws that regulate the sale
and use of tobacco products and paraphernalia. Nothing in this article is
intended to, nor does it, duplicate or conflict with applicable local, state,
or federal laws. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this article:
   CHIEF: The police chief or designee.
   DEPARTMENT: The El Segundo police department.
   PERSON: Any natural person or legal entity.
   PROPRIETOR: A person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business.
An ownership interest is deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent (10%)
or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than
the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest is deemed to
exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share, ultimate control
over the day to day operations of a business.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: Cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of
smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item
designed for smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, without
limitation, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping
tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco.
   TOBACCO RETAILER: Any person that operates a store, stand, concession, or
other place at which sales, or other exchanges for value, of tobacco products
are made to purchasers for consumption or use. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-1-3: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without a
valid license issued pursuant to this article for each location at which
activity is proposed to occur.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer from other
than a fixed location within the city's jurisdiction.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit, aid, abet, or conceal a
violation of any provision of this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-1-4: ADMINISTRATION BY DEPARTMENT:
The chief and department are authorized to administer and enforce this article.
(Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-1-5: NOTICES:
   A.   Where the provisions of this article require that an applicant/licensee
be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when personally delivered
to such applicant/licensee or when deposited in the first class U.S. mail,
addressed to such applicant/licensee at the applicant/licensee's last known
address.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided, written notification to an applicant/
licensee of a license decision will state with particularity the basis for such
decision. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-2: LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
5-6B-2-1: FORM AND CONTENT OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit applications must be filed by a natural person in the name of
each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales.
   B.   Every application must be signed by the proprietor, or the proprietor's
authorized representative, under penalty of perjury.
   C.   Permit applications will be in a form prescribed by the chief and
contain all of the following information:
      1.   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers
of the person filing the application;
      2.   The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed
location for which a license is sought;
      3.   The name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to
receive all notices. If such an address is not supplied, notices will be sent
to the business address;
      4.   Whether or not the proprietor was previously issued a license under
this article that was suspended or revoked and, if so, the dates of the
suspension period or revocation date; and
      5.   Such other information as the department deems reasonably necessary
for administering or enforcing this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-2-2: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
   A.   The chief must issue a license if:
      1.   The application was complete in accordance with this article;
      2.   The applicant pays all applicable license fees;
      3.   There are no grounds for denying the license; and
      4.   The applicant accepts the license approval or conditional approval
in writing.
   B.   Use of any license issued pursuant to this article must conform to this
article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-2-3: LICENSE DENIAL:
A license can be denied for the following reasons:
   A.   The application is incomplete;
   B.   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application
information requested by the chief;
   C.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
   D.   The application is submitted by a proprietor with a suspended license
or whose license was revoked; or
   E.   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is
prohibited by this chapter or unlawful under any other local, state, or federal
law. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-3: CONDITIONS:
5-6B-3-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Tobacco retailer licensees must:
   A.   Comply with all local, state, and federal laws regulating tobacco
products and tobacco paraphernalia including, without limitation, this code;
   B.   Maintain a valid business license issued pursuant to this code;
   C.   Allow authorized enforcement officers to enter onto licensed premises
to ensure compliance with this article during business hours. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-
2003)
5-6B-3-2: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Each license issued by this article must be prominently displayed in a publicly
visible location at the licensed tobacco retailer's location. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-
2003)
5-6B-3-3: LICENSE RENEWAL:
Unless suspended or revoked, licenses issued pursuant to this article have a
term of one year. Licenses must be renewed not later than thirty (30) days
before they expire in order to be maintained. Should a license expire, the
proprietor must comply with this article to obtain a new license. (Ord. 1358,
4-1-2003)
5-6B-3-4: NO ADDITIONAL PRIVILEGES GRANTED:
Nothing in this article is intended to, nor does it, grant to a properly
licensed tobacco retailer privileges other than permission to operate as a
tobacco retailer at the location identified in the license. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-
2003)
5-6B-3-5: LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE:
A license issued to a tobacco retailer pursuant to this article is
nontransferable. Any change in business name or location requires a new license
issued in accord with this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4: VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
5-6B-4-1: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   In addition to the remedies set forth in this article, violations of a
tobacco retailer's license may be enforced as follows:
      1.   Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the city attorney's
discretion.
      2.   Abated as a public nuisance.
      3.   Enjoined as unfair business practices that are presumed to nominally
damage each and every resident of the community in which the tobacco retailer
operates.
   B.   Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the
general public may bring an action for injunctive relief to prevent future
violations or to recover actual damages.
   C.   The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in addition to
any other criminal or civil remedies. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-2: CITY ATTORNEY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to the
city attorney by this code or California law, the city attorney is authorized
to:
   A.   Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for
violations of this article including, without limitation, administrative or
judicial nuisance abatement and suits for injunctive relief;
   B.   Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties,
forfeitures, and other money accruing to the city under this article. (Ord.
1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Upon determining that a person is violating this article, the chief must serve
a notice of violation on the apparent violator. The notice must state the basis
of such violations and provide information regarding appeals rights. (Ord.
1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-4: VIOLATIONS DEEMED CONCLUSIVE:
The judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, or the admission of a
tobacco retailer licensee in any civil or criminal action against a tobacco
retailer licensee, whether the city is a party or not, that the tobacco
retailer has violated any tobacco related local, state, or federal law is
conclusive of that fact for purposes of enforcing this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-
1-2003)
5-6B-4-5: ADMINISTRATIVE FINE:
   A.   In addition to any other enforcement remedy, the chief may fine a
tobacco retailer for violating this article as follows:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation in any twelve (12) month period;
      2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation in any twelve (12) month period; or
      3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or
subsequent violation in any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-6: PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
An administrative fine must be paid to the city within thirty (30) days from
the date of the notice of violation or, if an appeal is made, within fifteen
(15) days after the date of the city manager's notice of the decision to uphold
the imposition of administrative fines, whichever is later. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-
2003)
5-6B-4-7: DELINQUENT ADMINISTRATIVE FINES; PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   A penalty of ten percent (10%) is added on any delinquent fines on the
last day of each month after the due date. The penalty will not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the fine.
   B.   In addition to penalties provided by this section, delinquent fines
accrue interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, exclusive of
penalties, from the due date. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-8: LIABILITY FOR FINES:
All fines, fees, penalties, and interest imposed pursuant to this article are
civil debts owed to the city by the person fined. In the event that judicial
action is necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the city, the person
or persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs of suit and
attorney fees incurred by the city to collect the fine. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-9: LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the chief may suspend or
revoke a tobacco retailer's license for the following reasons:
   A.   Upon learning or discovering facts that require license denial under
this article that were not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable; or
   B.   If the licensee violates the tobacco retailer license conditions. (Ord.
1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-10: SUSPENSION TIME PERIODS:
   A.   After serving a notice of violation, the chief may suspend a tobacco
retailer's license as follows:
      1.   Upon finding a first license violation within any sixty (60) month
period, a thirty (30) day suspension;
      2.   Upon finding a second license violation within any sixty (60) month
period, a ninety (90) day suspension;
      3.   Upon finding a third license violation within any sixty (60) month
period, a one year suspension;
      4.   Upon finding a fourth license violation within any sixty (60) month
period, revocation.
   B.   Nothing in this section is intended to limit the chief's ability to
impose a different suspension period or to revoke a license as the
circumstances of a violation may require. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-11: NO NEW LICENSE AFTER REVOCATION:
Should a tobacco retailer's license be revoked, the proprietor is presumptively
disqualified to apply for a new license in accordance with this article. This
presumption may be overcome upon a showing of good cause as to why a license
should be issued following a revocation. Any such showing must be made to the
chief's satisfaction or, if the chief denies a license, to the city manager as
prescribed by this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-5: APPEALS:
5-6B-5-1: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
An applicant is entitled to appeal the chief's decisions to the city manager
provided:
   A.   A request for review must be commenced within ten (10) days from the
date on which written notice of the chief's decision is served on the
applicant/licensee. If request is untimely, the city manager may, nevertheless,
extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.
   B.   A request for appeal must be on a form provided by the department and
contain the following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the person making the
request;
      2.   A description of the decision, determination or order which is the
subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was
made or issued;
      3.   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and
      4.   Such other information as may be required by the department.
   C.   Upon receiving an appeal, the city manager will review the request and,
within ten (10) days of receiving the appeal, provide the appellant with a
written notification that:
      1.   The chief's decision is affirmed;
      2.   The chief's decision is modified;
      3.   The chief's decision is reversed and a license is issued.
   D.   The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a
time, place, and manner determined in the city manager's sole discretion.
Should a hearing occur, the city manager may issue a decision orally at the
conclusion of the hearing, but also notify the applicant and the chief in
writing of the city manager's decision.
   E.   The city manager's decision is a final determination. There is no right
of city council appeal. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-5-2: CONTENT OF NOTICES:
Any notification of action, whether oral or written, must describe with
particularity the facts and the reasons for the decision. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-5-3: RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW:
   A.   An applicant/licensee may appeal the city manager's decision by filing
an appeal with the superior court pursuant to Government Code section 53069.4,
or any successor statute, within twenty (20) days from service of the city
manager's decision.
   B.   Should a licensee file a timely appeal with the superior court, any
requirement to pay an administrative fine is suspended and the payment of the
fine, if any, will be in accordance with the superior court decision. (Ord.
1358, 4-1-2003)
CHAPTER 7
PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION:
5-7-1: Purpose And Intent
5-7-2: Limits Of Chapter
5-7-3: Severability
5-7-4: Scope Of Chapter
5-7-5: Definitions
5-7-6: Rate Of Discharge
5-7-7: Subdivision Design
5-7-8: Best Management Practices (BMPs)
5-7-9: Control Of Erosion Of Slopes And Channels
5-7-10: Signage At Storm Drains
5-7-11: Outdoor Storage Of Materials
5-7-12: Outdoor Trash Storage Areas
5-7-13: Maintenance Of Best Management Practices
5-7-14: Design Standards For Best Management Practices
5-7-15: Loading Docks
5-7-16: Repair And Maintenance Bays
5-7-17: Wash Areas
5-7-18: Restaurants
5-7-19: Retail Gasoline Outlets
5-7-20: Parking Lots
5-7-21: Site Specific Mitigation Requirements For New Development And
Redevelopment With Potential Adverse Impacts On Post- Development Stormwater
Quality
5-7-22: Enforcement
5-7-23: Inspections
5-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers for the purpose of
complying with the Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality
Control Act, and the Municipal National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit, including, without limitation, any amendments or modifications,
by:
   A.   Controlling non-stormwater discharges to the Municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4).
   B.   Controlling the discharge of pollutants, including those pollutants
taken up by stormwater as it flows over urban areas, to the maximum extent
practicable. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-2: LIMITS OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted to:
   A.   Infringe any right or power guaranteed by the United States or
California Constitutions, including any vested property right;
   B.   Require any action inconsistent with the General Plan, any applicable
specific plan, vesting tentative map, or other provision of this Code;
   C.   Restrict otherwise lawful land use, except as authorized by the laws of
California, subject to the limitations of this chapter;
   D.   Convey any property rights of any sort, or any exclusive privileges;
   E.   Authorize any injury to persons or property, or invasion of other
private rights, or any infringement of State or local law or regulations. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any provisions of this chapter or the application of any provision of this
chapter to any circumstance is held invalid, the application of such provision
to other circumstances and the remainder of this chapter will not be affected.
(Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-4: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
   A.   This chapter applies to ministerial and discretionary approvals of the
new development or redevelopment projects defined in the County of Los Angeles
LID ordinance (ordinance no. 2013-0044).
   B.   Each of the projects must meet the requirements of this chapter; the
Municipal NPDES permit; and the County of Los Angeles LID ordinance. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meanings
stated in the Municipal NPDES permit and if not described therein, the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.); regulations
implementing the NPDES, Clean Water Act section 402; California Water Code
section 13050; and any successor statutes or regulations.
   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE FACILITY: A facility that is categorized in any one of
the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes: 5013, 5014, 5511,
5541, 7532 - 7534, or 7536 - 7539.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Practices or physical devices or systems
designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-
stormwater discharges to receiving waters or designed to reduce the volume of
stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
   CONSTRUCTION: Constructing, clearing, grading, grubbing, demolishing, or
excavating that results in land disturbance. Construction does not include
emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health
and safety; routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity
of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work; or routine
maintenance required to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, or original purpose of a facility. Construction does not include
interior remodeling with no outside exposure of construction material or
construction waste to stormwater; mechanical permit work; or sign permit work.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or
reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-
family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail
and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass
grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to
maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to
protect public health and safety immediately.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any materials, wastes or mixture of wastes defined as a
"hazardous substance" or "hazardous waste" pursuant to the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 USC section 6901 et seq., the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA),
42 USC section 9601 et seq., or the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous
Substance Account Act (HSAA), California Health and Safety Code section 25300
et seq., and all future amendments to any of them, or as defined by the
California Integrated Waste Management Board. Where there is a conflict in the
definitions employed by two (2) or more agencies having jurisdiction over
hazardous or solid waste, the term "hazardous waste" will be construed to have
the broader, more encompassing definition.
   HILLSIDE: Property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions,
where the development will require grading on any natural slope which is twenty
five percent (25%) or greater and where grading will result in cut or filled
slopes.
   INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL FACILITY: Any facility which is the site of the
production, manufacture, storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or
sale of goods or commodities, and any facility involved or used in providing
professional and nonprofessional services. This category of facilities
includes, without limitation, any facility defined by the SIC or the North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Facility ownership (Federal,
State, Municipal, private) and profit motive of the owner or operator of the
facility are not factors in this definition.
   INSPECTION:
   A.   Entry and the conduct of an on-site review of a facility and its
operation, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with specific Municipal
or other legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an inspection,
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Pre-inspection documentation research;
      2.   Request for entry;
      3.   Interview of facility personnel;
      4.   Facility walk-through;
      5.   Visual observation of the condition of facility premises;
      6.   Examination and copying of records as required;
      7.   Sample collection (if necessary or required);
      8.   Exit conference;
      9.   Report preparation, and if appropriate, recommendations for coming
into compliance.
   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): Building or landscape features designed to
retain or filter stormwater runoff.
   MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT: The "Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharges Within the Coastal Watersheds of
Los Angeles County, Except Those Discharges Originating from the City of Long
Beach MS4" (Order No. R4-2012-0175), NPDES Permit No. CAS004001, effective
December 28, 2012, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control
Board - Los Angeles Region, and any successor permit to that permit.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of
conveyances (consisting of roads with drainage systems, Municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):
   A.   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish,
district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State
law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under State law such
as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a
designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that
discharges to waters of the United States;
   B.   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
   C.   Which is not a combined sewer; and
   D.   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined
in 40 CFR 122.2.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The national
program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring
and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements,
under CWA section 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an "approved
program".
   NEW DEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activities; structural development,
including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of
impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge into the MS4 that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
   PARKING LOT: Land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor
vehicles used for business, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot
size of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with
twenty five (25) or more parking spaces.
   POLLUTANTS: Those "pollutants" defined in CWA section 502(6) (33 USC section
1362(6)), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code section
13373.
   REDEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activity that results in the creation,
addition, or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of
impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes,
without limitation: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or
replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not
part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related
to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance
to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to
immediately protect public health and safety.
   RESTAURANT: A facility where prepared food and beverages are sold for
consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling
prepared food and beverages for immediate consumption (see SIC Code 5812).
   RETAIL GASOLINE OUTLET: Any facility where gasoline and lubricating oils are
sold.
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE: Routine maintenance projects include, but are not
limited to projects conducted to:
   A.   Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original
purpose of the facility.
   B.   Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design
grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities.
   C.   Includes road shoulder work, re-grading dirt or gravel roadways and
shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts.
   D.   Update existing lines and facilities to comply with applicable codes,
standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased
capacity. This includes replacing existing lines with new materials or pipes.
   E.   Repair leaks.
   F.   Conduct landscaping activities without changing existing or natural
grades.
Routine maintenance does not include construction of new lines or facilities
resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and regulations. New
lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not
part of a project to update or replace existing lines.
   SIC: Standard Industrial Classification.
   SIMPLE LID BMP: A BMP constructed above ground on a single-family
residential home that can be readily inspected by a homeowner or inspector.
Simple LID BMPs do not require an operation and maintenance plan per the
Municipal NPDES permit. Examples of such BMPs include but are not limited to
vegetated swales, rain barrels and above ground cisterns, rain gardens, and
pervious pavement.
   SOURCE CONTROL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (SOURCE CONTROL BMP): Any schedules
of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial
practices or operational practices that aim to prevent stormwater pollution by
reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution.
   STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 CFR section 122.26(b)
(13); 55 Fed. Reg. 47990, 47995 (Nov. 16 1990)).
   STORMWATER DISCHARGES: Any discharge into the MS4 that is composed entirely
of stormwater.
   STRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (STRUCTURAL BMP): Any structural
facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of stormwater
and urban runoff pollution (e.g., a canopy, structural enclosure). This
category may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs.
   TREATMENT: The use of engineered systems that use physical, chemical, or
biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include, but are not
limited to, filtration, gravity settling, media absorption, biodegradation,
biological uptake, chemical oxidation, and UV radiation.
   TREATMENT CONTROL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (TREATMENT CONTROL BMP): Any
engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity setting of
particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any
other physical, biological, or chemical process. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-6: RATE OF DISCHARGE:
No new development or redevelopment project may increase the pre- project's
stormwater runoff flow rates, volumes, and durations from the developed site if
this increase would make downstream erosion more probable. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-
2017)
5-7-7: SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
Unless inconsistent with vested rights, the site design for all new development
and redevelopment subject to this chapter, to the maximum extent practicable,
must:
   A.   Concentrate or cluster new development on portions of the site while
leaving the remaining land in a natural undisturbed condition;
   B.   Limit clearing and grading of native vegetation to the minimum extent
practicable, consistent with the construction of lots, and to allow access and
provide fire protection;
   C.   Preserve riparian areas and wetlands. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-8: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs):
   A.   On the date this chapter takes effect, those Best Management Practices
required by the Municipal NPDES permit or the County of Los Angeles LID
ordinance (ordinance no. 2013-0044) are deemed incorporated herein by reference
and adopted by the City.
   B.   No Best Management Practice may be used in new development or
redevelopment regulated under this chapter unless listed in the Municipal NPDES
permit, County of Los Angeles LID ordinance (ordinance no. 2013-0044), or the
County of Los Angeles LID Standards Manual, unless otherwise approved by the
City. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-9: CONTROL OF EROSION OF SLOPES AND CHANNELS:
   A.   Single family hillside homes are required to implement mitigation
measures in accordance with the County of Los Angeles LID ordinance (ordinance
no. 2013-0044) to:
      1.   Conserve natural areas;
      2.   Protect slopes and channels;
      3.   Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;
      4.   Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the
diversion would result in slope instability; and
      5.   Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge unless the
diversion would result in slope instability.
   B.   Best Management Practices used on slopes or channels in new development
or redevelopment subject to this chapter must:
      1.   Convey runoff from tops of slopes;
      2.   Eliminate or reduce flow to natural drainage systems, and for flows
which cannot be eliminated, utilize natural drainage systems, rather than
artificial drainage systems, to the maximum extent practicable;
      3.   Stabilize soil at permanent channel crossings;
      4.   Vegetate slopes with native or drought tolerant species known to
control erosion; and
      5.   Dissipate concentrated flows before they enter unlined channels.
(Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-10: SIGNAGE AT STORM DRAINS:
Within the project area of new development and redevelopment projects, a notice
that dumping in storm drains and catch basins is illegal must be:
   A.   Stenciled in paint or other permanent means at all storm drain inlets
and catch basins;
   B.   Posted at all known public accesses to natural or artificial drainage
channels, creeks, lakes, or other relevant waterbodies; and
   C.   Maintained to preserve the sign. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-11: OUTDOOR STORAGE OF MATERIALS:
   A.   All materials stored outdoors in new development or redevelopment
projects subject to this chapter which, if exposed to stormwater, reasonably
may be expected to add pollutants to stormwater, must be isolated from contact
with stormwater by:
      1.   Enclosure in a structure; or
      2.   By a surrounding curb or other containment structure.
   B.   The storage area for materials referred to in subsection A of this
section must be covered completely:
      1.   By impermeable paving, or
      2.   An overhead covering that adequately diverts precipitation away from
the ground between the material and the surrounding containment structure.
(Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-12: OUTDOOR TRASH STORAGE AREAS:
Except where they serve only single-family residences, solid waste containers
in new development or redevelopment projects subject to this chapter must be
placed between collections in areas that:
   A.   Are isolated from contact with stormwater flows originating outside the
storage area, and
   B.   Are surrounded with a barrier sufficient to prevent all trash from
being transported out of the storage area, except during collection. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-13: MAINTENANCE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
   A.   Prior to receiving approval for final occupancy, every person applying
to the City for approval of any new development or redevelopment project
subject to this chapter, with the exception of simple LID BMPs implemented on
single family residences, must agree in writing to maintain any structural or
treatment control Best Management Practice to be implemented in that
development by means of a covenant running with the land. A maintenance and
operation plan must be made part of said covenant and records of maintenance
must be kept on site.
   B.   The agreement described in this section will remain in force until
ownership of the developed property is transferred, and upon transfer, will be
binding on the new owner(s). (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-14: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
All new development and redevelopment projects must install BMPs in accordance
with the County of Los Angeles LID ordinance.
Compliance with the LID standards set forth in the County of Los Angeles LID
ordinance will be demonstrated through the City's LID plan review process. The
applicant for any development project must submit a LID plan to the City for
review and approval that provides a comprehensive, technical discussion of how
the development project will comply with the County of Los Angeles LID
ordinance and the applicable provisions specified in the County of Los Angeles
LID Standards Manual. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-15: LOADING DOCKS:
In any ten thousand (10,000) square foot industrial/commercial facility or in
any automotive service facility, in new development or redevelopment subject to
this chapter, the design of any outdoor loading dock area must:
   A.   Use an overhead covering that prevents the entry of stormwater; or
   B.   Prevent the entry of stormwater by diverting it away; and
   C.   Not direct stormwater from any truck well directly into a storm drain
system. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-16: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE BAYS:
In any ten thousand (10,000) square foot industrial/commercial facility or in
any automotive service facility, in new development or redevelopment subject to
this chapter, repair or maintenance bays must:
   A.   Prevent the entry of stormwater by diverting it away or by locating
such bays indoors; and
   B.   Use a drainage system that collects all water from washing and from
leaks or spills and stores the water in a sump for disposal; and
   C.   Not direct stormwater from the bay directly to a storm drain system.
(Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-17: WASH AREAS:
Each wash area for motor vehicles or equipment in any new development or
redevelopment subject to this chapter must incorporate:
   A.   An adequate overhead covering; and
   B.   A device that clarifies or otherwise pretreats all wash water; and
   C.   A drain conducting all treated wash water to a sanitary sewer. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-18: RESTAURANTS:
Each restaurant in any new development or redevelopment subject to this chapter
must include an area for the washing or cleaning of equipment, which:
   A.   If indoors, will:
      1.   Be self-contained;
      2.   Use a grease trap; and
      3.   Use a drain conducting all wastewater to a sanitary sewer.
   B.   If outdoors, will:
      1.   Use an overhead covering adequate to prevent contact with
stormwater;
      2.   Be covered with impermeable paving;
      3.   Be surrounded by a curb or other containment; and
      4.   Use a drain conducting all wastewater to a sanitary sewer. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-19: RETAIL GASOLINE OUTLETS:
All fuel dispensing areas in any retail gasoline outlet subject to this chapter
must:
   A.   Be covered by a structure that:
      1.   Extends outward at least as far as the grade break at all points;
and
      2.   Diverts all stormwater away from the fueling area;
   B.   Be paved with a material, other than asphaltic concrete, that is
impermeable to water and has a smooth surface with a slope of not less than two
percent (2%) but not more than four percent (4%);
   C.   Be separated from the rest of the site by a grade break that, to the
maximum extent practical, prevents stormwater from entering the fueling area;
   D.   Extend outward at least six and one-half feet (6.5') from the outermost
corner of any fuel dispenser, or a distance one foot (1') greater than the
combined length of the dispensing hose and nozzle, whichever distance is less.
(Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-20: PARKING LOTS:
Owners and operators of parking lots in any new development or redevelopment
subject to this chapter must minimize off site transport of pollutants to the
maximum extent practical by using the following BMPs:
   A.   Minimize impervious land coverage;
   B.   Provide effective treatment or infiltration of stormwater before it is
discharged into storm drains; and
   C.   Use operational and maintenance measures to remove heavy metals, oil
and grease and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-21: SITE SPECIFIC MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND
REDEVELOPMENT WITH POTENTIAL ADVERSE IMPACTS ON POST- DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER
QUALITY:
On and after the effective date of this chapter, all projects for new
development or redevelopment not meeting the thresholds of subsection
5-7-4A of this chapter, but which have the potential to have adverse impacts on
post-development stormwater flows from the site, must submit for approval a
site-specific plan adequate to mitigate post-development stormwater quality if
the project has any one or more of the following characteristics:
   A.   A vehicle or equipment fueling area;
   B.   A vehicle or equipment maintenance area, including washing and repair;
   C.   Any commercial or industrial waste handling or storage area;
   D.   An area for outdoor handling or storage of "hazardous materials", as
defined in this chapter;
   E.   An outdoor manufacturing area;
   F.   An area where outdoor food handling or processing occurs;
   G.   An area where outdoor animal care, confinement or slaughter occurs; or
   H.   An area of outdoor horticultural activity. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-22: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Each violation of any provision of this chapter is both a misdemeanor
and a public nuisance.
   B.   The remedies specified in this chapter are in addition to any other
legal remedy that may be available to the City. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-23: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The Director of Public Works, and his/her designated officers, may
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   As necessary, these officers may, at a reasonable time and in a manner
authorized by the laws of California, enter and make inspections on any
property regulated under this chapter. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
CHAPTER 8
SINGLE-USE FOODWARE ACCESSORIES AND STANDARD CONDIMENTS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Findings And Purpose
5-8-2: Compliance With State Law
5-8-3: Enforcement
5-8-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted in accordance with Article XI, § 7 to protect public
health, safety, and well-being by reducing the detrimental environmental and
public health impacts associated with single-use foodware and standard
condiments which contribute to litter in storm drains and the ocean and impose
unseen costs on consumers, taxpayers, and public entities. This chapter is
adopted to implement Assembly Bill ("AB") 1276's legal requirements restricting
the use of single-use foodware accessories and standard condiments. (Ord. 1638,
9-6-2022)
5-8-2: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
It is unlawful to fail to comply with the provisions of California Public
Resources Code Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 5.2 (Single Use Foodware
Accessories and Condiments), i.e., § 42270, et seq., as may subsequently be
amended. (Ord. 1638, 9-6-2022)
5-8-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The City Council authorizes the City Manager, or designee, to utilize
one or more City departments enforce this chapter's provisions. The City
Manager, or designee, may establish regulations or administrative procedures or
take other reasonable actions to further this chapter's purposes.
   B.   The City Council may, by resolution, designate additional enforcement
agencies to enforce this chapter's provisions.
   C.   The first and second violations of this chapter will result in a notice
of violation without a fine. Any subsequent violation will constitute an
infraction punishable by a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine for each day in
violation, not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) annually.
   D.   Subject to Subsection C, and unless limited by law, the City may
enforce this chapter in accordance with this code's provisions and state law.
(Ord. 1638, 9-6-2022)
CHAPTER 9
MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REDUCTION
SECTION:
5-9-1: Purpose
5-9-2: Definitions
5-9-3: Requirements For Single-Family Generators
5-9-4: Requirements For Commercial Businesses And Multi-Family Residential
Dwellings
5-9-5: De Minimis Waivers For Generators
5-9-6: Physical Space Waivers
5-9-7: Requirements For Commercial Edible Food Generators
5-9-8: Requirements For Food Recovery Organizations And Services
5-9-9: Requirements For Haulers And Facility Operators
5-9-10: Requirements For Self-Haulers Of Organic Waste
5-9-11: Procurement Requirements For City Departments, Direct Service
Providers, And Vendors
5-9-12: Inspections And Investigations By City
5-9-13: Enforcement
5-9-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted in accordance with Article XI, § 7 of the California
Constitution and Public Resources Code § 40059 to protect public health, safety
and well-being, to control the spread of vectors, and to limit sources of air
pollution, noise and traffic within the City. This chapter is adopted to
supplement and implement the legal requirements of AB 939 and, in particular,
the SB 1383 Regulations. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not given a meaning by this Chapter have the
meaning set forth in the Act and the regulations promulgated to implement the
Act, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions found in RCRA and the
regulations promulgated to implement RCRA, as amended, or in this code (see
Chapter 5-2). References to an undesignated regulation are to Title 14 of the
California Code of Regulations.
AB 939 or ACT: The California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 codified
in part at Public Resources Code, §§ 40000 et seq., as amended.
CITY ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: The city manager, or designee.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL: A firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-
stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-profit or nonprofit,
strip mall, industrial facility, or a multifamily residential dwelling, or as
otherwise defined in § 18982(a)(6). A Multi-Family Residential Dwelling that
consists of fewer than five units is not a Commercial Business for purposes of
implementing this chapter.
COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR: Includes a Tier One or a Tier Two Commercial
Edible Food Generator as defined in this chapter or as otherwise defined in
18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). For the purposes of this definition, Food Recovery
Organizations and Food Recovery Services are not Commercial Edible Food
Generators pursuant to § 18982(a)(7).
COMPLIANCE REVIEW: A review of records by the city to determine compliance with
this chapter.
COMMUNITY COMPOSTING: Any activity that composts green material, agricultural
material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in combination,
and the total amount of feedstock and Compost on-site at any one time does not
exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet, as specified in § 17855(a)(4) or as
otherwise defined by § 18982.
COMPOST: The same meaning as in § 17896.2(a)(4), which stated, as of the
effective date of this chapter, that "Compost" means the product resulting from
the controlled biological decomposition of organic Solid Wastes that are Source
Separated from the municipal Solid Waste stream, or which are separated at a
centralized facility.
COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS or COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC: Plastic materials that meet the
ASTM D6400 standard for compostability, or as otherwise described in § 18984.1
or § 18984.2.
EDIBLE FOOD: Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in §
18982(a)(18). For purposes of this chapter or as otherwise defined in § 18982
(a)(18), "Edible Food" is not Solid Waste if it is recovered and not discarded.
Nothing in this chapter requires or authorizes the Recovery of Edible Food that
does not meet the food safety requirements of the California Retail Food Code.
DESIGNEE: The person designated by the city manager pursuant to § 18981.2(b).
FOOD RECOVERY: Actions to collect and distribute food for human consumption
that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in § 18982(a)(24).
FOOD WASTE: Food Scraps, Food-Soiled Paper, and Compostable Plastics.
GRAY CONTAINER: The same meaning as in § 18982(28).
GRAY CONTAINER WASTE: Solid Waste that is collected in a Gray Container that is
part of a three-container Organic Waste collection service that prohibits the
placement of Organic Waste in the Gray Container as specified in § 18984.1(a)
and (b), or as otherwise defined in § 17402(a)(6.5).
GREEN CONTAINER: The same meaning as in § 18982(a)(29) and will be used for the
purpose of storage and collection of Source Separated Green Container Organic
Waste.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING or MULTI-FAMILY: Means of, from, or
pertaining to residential premises with five or more dwelling units. Multi-
Family premises do not include hotels, motels, or other transient occupancy
facilities, which are considered Commercial Businesses.
RCRA: The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act as set forth at 42 U.S.C. §§
6901, et seq., as amended.
SB 1383: Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on September 19,
2016, which added Health and Safety Code §§ 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7, and
39730.8 and added Public Resources Code Chapter 13.1 (commencing with § 42652),
establishing methane emissions reduction targets in a Statewide effort to
reduce emissions of short-lived climate pollutants as amended, supplemented,
superseded, and replaced from time to time.
SB 1383 REGULATIONS or SB 1383 REGULATORY: Means or refers to, for the purposes
of this chapter, the Short-Lived Climate Pollutants: Organic Waste Reduction
regulations found at Titles 14 (Chapter 12) and 27 of the California Code of
Regulations.
SINGLE-FAMILY: Means of, from, or pertaining to any residential premises with
fewer than five units.
SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE: Source Separated Organic Waste
that can be placed in a Green Container that is specifically intended for the
separate collection of Organic Waste by the generator, excluding Source
Separated Blue Container Organic Waste, carpets, Non-Compostable Paper, and
textiles.
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Source Separated Non-Organic Recyclables
and Source Separated Blue Container Organic Waste. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY GENERATORS:
Except as otherwise provided for Self-Haulers, Single-Family Organic Waste
Generators must:
   A.   Subscribe to Organic Waste collection services for all generated
Organic Waste. City may review the number and size of a generator's containers
to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service
for proper separation of materials and containment of materials. Single-Family
generators must adjust their collection service level as directed by the City
to maintain a level of service that is consistent with the purpose of this
chapter. Generators must manage their Organic Waste by preventing or reducing
their Organic Waste, managing Organic Waste on site, and/or using a Community
Composting site pursuant to § 18984.9(c).
   B.   Participate in the Organic Waste collection service by placing
designated materials in designated containers as described below. It is
unlawful to place Prohibited Container Contaminants in collection containers.
   C.   Generators must
      1.   Place Source Separated Green Container Organic Waste, including Food
Waste, in the Green Container;
      2.   Place Source Separated Recyclable Materials in the Blue Container;
and
      3.   Place Gray Container Waste in the Gray Container.
   D.   It is unlawful for Generators to place materials designated for the
Gray Container into the Green Container or Blue Container. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-
2021)
5-9-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES AND MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DWELLINGS:
   A.   Except as provided for Self-Haulers, all generators that are Commercial
Businesses or Multi-Family Residential Dwellings must subscribe to City's three
container collection services and comply with requirements of those services as
described below.
   B.   City may review the number and size of a generator's containers and
frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type
of collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials.
   C.   Commercial Businesses and Multi-Family Residential Dwellings must
adjust their collection service level as directed by the City to maintain a
level of service that is consistent with the purpose of this chapter and to
avoid adverse impacts to public health, safety or welfare.
   D.   Commercial Businesses and Multi-Family Residential Dwellings must
participate in the City's Organic Waste collection service by placing
designated materials in designated containers as follows:
      1.   Place Source Separated Green Container Organic Waste, including Food
Waste, in the Green Container;
      2.   Place Source Separated Recyclable Materials in the Blue Container;
and
      3.   Place Gray Container Waste in the Gray Container. Generator must not
place materials designated for the Gray Container into the Green Container or
Blue Container.
   E.   Commercial Businesses and Multi-Family Residential Dwellings must
supply, and allow, employees, contractors, tenants, and customers unfettered
access to collection containers of adequate number and size, consistent with
City's Blue Container, Green Container, and Gray Container collection service
or, if self-hauling, per the Commercial Businesses' instructions to support its
compliance with its self-haul program. All collection containers must be
labeled or colored as set forth below.
   F.   Commercial Businesses and Multi-Family Residential Dwellings must
provide containers for the collection of Source Separated Green Container
Organic Waste and Source Separated Recyclable Materials in all indoor and
outdoor areas where disposal containers are provided for customers to deposit
materials generated by that business. Such containers do not need to be
provided in restrooms. If a Commercial Business does not generate any of the
materials that would be collected in one type of container, then the business
does not have to provide that particular container in all areas where disposal
containers are provided for customers.
   G.   Pursuant to § 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the business must
have either:
      1.   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by City, with either lids conforming to
the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color requirements or both
lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A Commercial Business is not
required to replace functional containers, including containers purchased
before January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the requirements of this
subsection before the end of the useful life of those containers, or before
January 1, 2036, whichever comes first.
      2.   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant § 18984.8, the container labeling requirements are required
on new containers commencing January 1, 2022.
   H.   Multi-Family Residential Dwellings are not required to comply with
container placement requirements or labeling requirements pursuant to § 18984.9
(b).
   I.   Commercial Businesses must, to the extent practicable, prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials per the City's Blue Container, Green Container, and Gray Container
collection service or, if self-hauling, per the Commercial Businesses'
instructions to support its compliance with its self-haul program.
   J.   Commercial Businesses must periodically inspect Blue Containers, Green
Containers, and Gray Containers for contamination and inform employees if
containers are contaminated and of the requirements to keep contaminants out of
those containers pursuant to § 18984.9(b)(3).
   K.   Commercial Businesses must annually provide information to employees,
contractors, tenants, and customers about Organic Waste Recovery requirements
and about proper sorting of Source Separated Green Container Organic Waste and
Source Separated Recyclable Materials.
   L.   Commercial Businesses must provide education information before or
within 14 days of occupation of the premises to new tenants that describes
requirements to keep Source Separated Green Container Organic Waste and Source
Separated Recyclable Materials separate from Gray Container Waste (when
applicable) and the location of containers and the rules governing their use at
each property.
   M.   Commercial Businesses must provide or arrange access for City or
Designee to their properties during all Inspections conducted in accordance
with this chapter to confirm compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   N.   If a Commercial Business wants to self-haul, it must meet the Self-
Hauler requirements in this chapter.
   O.   Nothing in this Section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing Organic Waste on site, or using a Community
Composting site pursuant to § 18984.9(c).
   P.   Commercial Businesses that are Tier One or Tier Two Commercial Edible
Food Generators must comply with Food Recovery requirements. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-
2021)
5-9-5: DE MINIMIS WAIVERS FOR GENERATORS:
   A.   The City may waive a Commercial Business's obligation (including Multi-
Family Residential Dwellings) to comply with some or all of the Organic Waste
requirements of this chapter if the Commercial Business provides documentation
that the business generates below a certain amount of Organic Waste material as
described below.
   B.   Commercial Businesses requesting a de minimis waiver must submit an
application specifying the services that they are requesting a de minimis
waiver for and provide the following documentation:
      1.   The Commercial Business's total Solid Waste collection service is
two cubic yards or more per week and Organic Waste subject to collection in a
Blue Container or Green Container comprises less than 20 gallons per week per
applicable container of the business' total waste; or
      2.   The Commercial Business' total Solid Waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and Organic Waste subject to collection in a
Blue Container or Green Container comprises less than 10 gallons per week per
applicable container of the business's total waste.
   C.   Notify City if circumstances change such that Commercial Business's
Organic Waste exceeds the threshold required for de minimis waiver, in which
case the waiver will be rescinded.
   D.   Acknowledge that if the City obtains information at any time that the
Commercial Business is exceeding the organic waste thresholds for the de
minimis waiver, that the City will rescind waiver.
   E.   At least every five years after receiving a de minimis waiver, allow
the City to conduct an inspection for the purpose of verifying continued
eligibility for the de minimis waiver. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-6: PHYSICAL SPACE WAIVERS:
   A.   City may waive a Commercial Business's or property owner's obligations
(including Multi-Family Residential Dwellings) to comply with some or all of
the Organic Waste collection service requirements of this code if the
Commercial Business or property owner provides documentation, or the City
obtains evidence, from a hauler, California licensed architect, or California
licensed engineer demonstrating that the premises lacks adequate space for the
collection containers required for compliance with this chapter.
   B.   A Commercial Business or property owner must request a physical space
waiver through the following process:
      1.   Submit an application form specifying the type(s) of collection
services for which a waiver is requested.
      2.   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space.
      3.   If City grants a waiver, allow access by a Designee to verify the
ongoing need for a waiver. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-7: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS:
   A.   Tier One Commercial Edible Food Generators must comply with the
requirements of this section commencing January 1, 2022, and Tier Two
Commercial Edible Food Generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024.
   B.   Large Venue or Large Event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, must require Food Facilities
operating at the Large Venue or Large Event to comply with the requirements of
this section commencing January 1, 2024.
   C.   Commercial Edible Food Generators must:
      1.   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of Edible Food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      2.   Contract with, or enter into a written agreement with, Food Recovery
Organizations or Food Recovery Services for:
         a.   The collection of Edible Food for Food Recovery; or
         b.   Acceptance of the Edible Food that the Commercial Edible Food
Generator self-hauls to the Food Recovery Organization for Food Recovery.
      3.   Allow City Enforcement Officials, upon reasonable notice, to access
the premises and review records pursuant to § 18991.4.
   D.   Additionally, Commercial Edible Food Generators must keep, for a
minimum period of five years, records that includes the documentation,
contacts, and such additional information needed to comply with § 18991.3(b) on
forms provided by the City or Designee.
   E.   Not later than March 31 of each year commencing no later than February
1, 2023 for Tier One Commercial Edible Food Generators and February 1, 2025 for
Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generator, provide an annual Food Recovery
report to the City that includes the following information:
      1.   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under §
18991.3(b).
      2.   The quantity of food, measured in annual pounds recovered, collected
or self-hauled to a Food Recovery Service or Food Recovery Organization for
Food Recovery.
      3.   The name, address and contact information of the Food Recovery
Service or Food Recovery Organization.
   F.   Nothing in this chapter will be construed to limit or conflict with the
protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-8: REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS AND SERVICES:
   A.   A Food Recovery Service that has established a contract or written
agreement to collect or receive Edible Food directly from Commercial Edible
Food Generators must keep, for a minimum period of five years, records that
includes the documentation, contacts, and such additional information needed to
comply with § 18991.5 on forms provided by the City or Designee.
   B.   No later than March 31 of each year, commencing March 31, 2023 Food
Recovery Organizations and Food Recovery Services that have their primary
address physically located in the City and contract with or have written
agreements with one or more Commercial Edible Food Generators pursuant to §
18991.3(b) must report to the City the total pounds of Edible Food recovered in
the previous calendar year from the Tier One and Tier Two Commercial Edible
Food Generators they have established a contract or written agreement with
pursuant to § 18991.3(b).
   C.   In order to support Edible Food Recovery capacity planning assessments
or other studies conducted by the City Food Recovery Services and Food Recovery
Organizations operating in the City must provide information and consultation
to the City, upon request, regarding existing, or proposed new or expanded,
Food Recovery capacity that could be accessed by the City and its Commercial
Edible Food Generators. A Food Recovery Service or Food Recovery Organization
contacted by the City must respond to such request for information within 60
days unless a shorter timeframe is otherwise specified by the City. (Ord. 1630,
12-7-2021)
5-9-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR HAULERS AND FACILITY OPERATORS:
   A.   An exclusive franchised hauler or permitted hauler providing
residential, Commercial, or industrial Organic Waste collection services to
generators within the City's boundaries must meet the following requirements
and standards as a condition of approval of a contract, agreement, or other
authorization with the City to collect Organic Waste:
      1.   Through written notice to the City annually on or before March 15,
identify the facilities to which they will transport Organic Waste including
facilities for Source Separated Recyclable Materials and Source Separated Green
Container Organic Waste.
      2.   Transport Source Separated Recyclable Materials, Source Separated
Green Container Organic Waste to a facility, operation, activity, or property
that recovers Organic Waste.
      3.   Obtain approval from the City to haul Organic Waste, unless it is
transporting Source Separated Organic Waste to a Community Composting site or
lawfully transporting C&D in a manner that complies with § 18989.1 or other
applicable law including this code.
   B.   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover Organic
Waste, including, without limitation, Compost facilities, in-vessel digestion
facilities, and publicly-owned treatment works must, upon City request, provide
information regarding available and potential new or expanded capacity at their
facilities, operations, and activities, including information about throughput
and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes. Entities contacted by
the City must respond within 60 days after a request is sent by the City.
   C.   Community Composting operators, upon City request, will provide
information to the City to support Organic Waste capacity planning, including,
without limitation, an estimate of the amount of Organic Waste anticipated to
be handled at the Community Composting operation. Entities contacted by the
City must respond within 60 days after a request is sent by the City. (Ord.
1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-10: REQUIREMENTS FOR SELF-HAULERS OF ORGANIC WASTE:
   A.   Self-Haulers must source separate all recyclable materials and Organic
Waste (materials that City otherwise requires generators to separate for
collection in the City's organics and recycling collection program) generated
on site from Solid Waste in a manner consistent with §§ 18984.1 and 18984.2, or
must haul Organic Waste to a High Diversion Organic Waste Processing Facility
as required by § 18984.3.
   B.   Self-Haulers must haul their Source Separated Organic Waste to a Solid
Waste facility, operation, activity, or property that processes or recovers
Source Separated Organic Waste.
   C.   Self-Haulers must keep a record of the amount of Organic Waste
delivered to each Solid Waste facility, operation, activity, or property that
processes or recovers Organic Waste; these records must be kept for a minimum
of five years and are subject to Inspection by the City upon request. The
records must include the following information:
      1.   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
      2.   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
      3.   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have
scales on-site or employs scales incapable of weighing the Self-Hauler's
vehicle in a manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials
received, the Self-Hauler is not required to record the weight of material but
must keep a record of the entities that received the Organic Waste.
   D.   Except for a residential Organic Waste Generator that self-hauls
Organic Waste, Self-Haulers that are Commercial Businesses (including Multi-
Family Self-Haulers) must provide any information required by City within 60
days after City sends the request. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-11: PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY DEPARTMENTS, DIRECT SERVICE
PROVIDERS, AND VENDORS:
   A.   City's direct service providers must comply with the City's Recovered
Organic Waste Product and Recycled-Content Paper procurement policy.
   B.   All vendors providing Paper Products and Printing and Writing Paper
must:
      1.   If fitness and quality are equal, provide Recycled-Content Paper
Products and Recycled-Content Printing and Writing Paper that consists of at
least 30 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber instead of non-recycled
products whenever recycled Paper Products and Printing and Writing Paper are
available at the same or lesser total cost than non-recycled items or at a
total cost of no more than 10% of the total cost for non-recycled items.
      2.   Provide Paper Products and Printing and Writing Paper that meet
Federal Trade Commission recyclability standard as defined in 16 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) § 260.12 (January 1, 2013).
      3.   Certify in writing, under penalty of perjury, the minimum percentage
of postconsumer material in the Paper Products and Printing and Writing Paper
offered or sold to the City. This certification requirement may be waived if
the percentage of postconsumer material in the Paper Products, Printing and
Writing Paper, or both can be verified by a product label, catalog, invoice, or
a manufacturer or vendor internet website.
      4.   Certify in writing, on invoices or receipts provided, that the Paper
Products and Printing and Writing Paper offered or sold to the City is eligible
to be labeled with an unqualified recyclable label as defined in 16 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) § 260.12 (January 1, 2013).
      5.   Provide records to the City's Recovered Organic Waste Product
procurement recordkeeping Designee, in accordance with the City's Recycled-
Content Paper procurement policy(ies) of all Paper Products and Printing and
Writing Paper purchases within 30 days of the purchase (both recycled-content
and non-recycled content, if any is purchased) made by any division or
department or employee of the City. Records must include a copy (electronic or
paper) of the invoice or other documentation of purchase, written
certifications as required by this chapter for recycled-content purchases,
purchaser name, quantity purchased, date purchased, and recycled content
(including products that contain none), and if non-recycled content Paper
Products or Printing and Writing Papers are provided, include a description of
why Recycled-Content Paper Products or Printing and Writing Papers were not
provided. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-12: INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS BY CITY:
Designees are authorized to conduct inspections and investigations, at random
or otherwise, of any collection container, collection vehicle loads, or
transfer, processing, or disposal facility for materials collected from
generators, or Source Separated materials to confirm compliance with this
chapter by Organic Waste Generators, Commercial Businesses (including Multi-
Family Residential Dwellings), property owners, Commercial Edible Food
Generators, haulers, Self-Haulers, Food Recovery Services, and Food Recovery
Organizations, subject to applicable laws. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
5-9-13: ENFORCEMENT:
Subject to the requirements of § 18995.4 including, without limitation, the
need for a 60-day compliance period after issuing a Notice of Violation, the
City may enforce this chapter in accordance with applicable law including,
without limitation, ESMC Chapters 1-2, 1-2A, and 5-2. (Ord. 1630, 12-7-2021)
TITLE 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
County Regulations   1
Animal Control   2
Dogs   3
Licenses For Kennels And Animal Breeding Businesses   4
Impounding Animals   5
Beekeeping   6
CHAPTER 1
COUNTY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Incorporation Of Title 10, Los Angeles County Code
6-1-2: Deletions From Los Angeles County Code
6-1-3: Amendments To Los Angeles County Code
6-1-4: Additions To Los Angeles County Code
6-1-5: General Penalty
6-1-1: INCORPORATION OF TITLE 10, LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE:
Pursuant to Government Code section 50022.9, the city council incorporates
title 10 of the Los Angeles County code entitled "Animals", subject to the
amendments, additions and deletions set forth below, into this code. The
provisions of this code will take precedence over any conflicting provisions in
title 10 of the Los Angeles County code. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-1-2: DELETIONS FROM LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE:
The following provisions of title 10 of the Los Angeles County code are
deleted:
Chapter 10.04 entitled "General Provisions";
Sections 10.08.210 and 10.08.220 in chapter 10.08 entitled "Definitions";
Sections 10.20.011, 10.20.212, 10.20.213, 10.20.214, 10.20.215, and 10.20.262
in chapter 10.20 entitled "Dogs And Cats".
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-1-3: AMENDMENTS TO LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE:
The following provisions of title 10 of the Los Angeles County code are amended
to read as follows:
Section 10.08.100. "Department" means the El Segundo police department.
Section 10.08.110. "Director" means the police chief, or designee.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-1-4: ADDITIONS TO LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE:
The following sections are added to title 10 of the Los Angeles County code:
Section 10.08.260. "Director of health services" means the police chief or
designee.
Section 10.08.270. "Sheriff", "sheriff deputy", and "sheriff officer" means
police officer.
Section 10.08.280. "Tax collector" means the finance director, or designee.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-1-5: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this title is guilty of an infraction,
punishable as provided in
title 1, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 1482, 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-2-1: Purpose
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-3: Animals Permitted
6-2-4: Circus, Carnival, Wild West Show, Parade
6-2-5: Laboratory
6-2-6: School
6-2-7: Animals Prohibited
6-2-8: Animals At Large
6-2-9: Animal Care
6-2-10: Public Nuisance
6-2-11: Permits Required
6-2-12: Application For Permit
6-2-13: Criteria For Approval
6-2-14: Expiration Of Permits
6-2-15: Appeal Decision Of Director; Fee
6-2-16: Planning Commission Hearing; Notice; Decision
6-2-17: Grounds For Revocation
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
This title is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers, and applicable
provisions of the California code, for the purpose of protecting public health
and safety; the health and safety of animals kept within the city's
jurisdiction; and ensuring that the requirements of this title are enforced.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions, in addition to those set forth in chapter 1 of this
title, govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this title:
AT LARGE: Whenever a dog is elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or
other person having the custody or control of such dog and is not restrained by
a leash less than ten feet (10') in length, under the control of a person
capable of controlling such dog.
BEE: Any state of the common domestic honey bee, Apis Mellifera species.
BEE HIVE: An enclosure or structure used for the housing of a bee colony.
DOG: Both male and female dogs.
KENNEL: A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats or any combination
thereof, are kept, whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by persons
providing activities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog or
cat is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of
four (4) months.
OWN: Includes the terms keep, maintain, control, harbor, or possess.
OWNER: Any natural or artificial person who owns an animal for more than
fifteen (15) days.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any of the following:
   A.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two (2) separate occasions within
the prior thirty six (36) month period, engages in any behavior that requires a
defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the
dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog.
   B.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe
injury than as defined in Food and Agricultural Code section 31604.
   C.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two (2) separate occasions within
the prior thirty six (36) month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted
injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property
of the owner or keeper of the dog.
VICIOUS DOG: Any of the following:
   A.   Any dog seized under Penal Code section 599aa and upon the sustaining
of a conviction of the owner or keeper under Penal Code section 597.5(a).
   B.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts
severe injury on or kills a human being.
   C.   Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a
potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of
this determination, continues the behavior described in the definition of
"potentially dangerous dog" in this section, or is maintained in violation of
Food and Agricultural Code section 31641, 31642, or 31643. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-
2001; amd. Ord. 1624, 5-18-2021)
6-2-3: ANIMALS PERMITTED:
It is lawful for a person to own the following animals within the city:
   A.   Canaries, pigeons, doves or birds of the psittacine family kept as
household pets or as a hobby only, not exceeding ten (10) in number, when kept
in facilities that are humane and adequate as to noise, sanitation and
security;
   B.   Fish and turtles kept as household pets or as a hobby only;
   C.   Hamsters, white rats or guinea pigs as household pets or as a hobby
only, not exceeding ten (10) in the aggregate and the young thereof not
exceeding three (3) months in age;
   D.   Hen chickens, kept as household pets or as a hobby, not to exceed five
(5) in number when kept in facilities that are humane and adequate as to noise,
sanitation and security;
   E.   Rabbits as household pets or as a hobby only, not exceeding four (4) in
number and the young thereof not exceeding four (4) months in age;
   F.   In any residential dwelling, dogs and cats not to exceed three (3) for
each residential living unit in any combination thereof and the young thereof
not exceeding four (4) months in age;
   G.   Except in residential districts, dogs used for guard or sentry
purposes. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-4: CIRCUS, CARNIVAL, WILD WEST SHOW, PARADE:
The animals allowed to be owned in this chapter may be used in association with
any circus, carnival, wild west show, or parade for which a permit has been
issued.
   A.   Unless otherwise provided by a permit issued pursuant to this code,
animals used in conjunction with the type of event listed herein may not be
used for such an event more than twenty four (24) hours before the first
performance of the event nor may such animals remain within the city more than
twenty four (24) hours after the conclusion of the last performance of an
event. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-5: LABORATORY:
All animals enumerated in this chapter may be kept within the city in
connection with a laboratory that holds a valid clinical laboratory permit
issued by the state department of health. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-6: SCHOOL:
All animals enumerated in this chapter may be kept within the city in a public
or private school licensed by the state. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-7: ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to
keep, maintain, possess, or control any poisonous or venomous snake or any
wild, carnivorous animal. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-8: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
It is unlawful for any animal owner to allow that animal to be at large. (Ord.
1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-9: ANIMAL CARE:
Every person, within the city, who owns any animal or who owns, conducts,
manages or operates any kennel or animal breeding operation for which a permit
is required by this title, will comply with each of the following conditions:
   A.   Housing facilities for animals will be structurally sound and will be
maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from injury, to contain the
animals, and to restrict the entrance of other animals.
   B.   All animals will be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food
and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require.
   C.   All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures will be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   D.   All animals will be so maintained as to eliminate excessive and
nighttime noise.
   E.   No animals will be without attention more than twelve (12) consecutive
hours. Whenever an animal is left unattended at a kennel, the telephone number
of the police department, or the name, address and telephone number of the
responsible person, will be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the
property.
   F.   Every reasonable precaution will be used to ensure that animals are not
teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer
by any person or means.
   G.   No condition will be maintained or permitted that is or could be
injurious to the animals.
   H.   Animal buildings and enclosures will be so constructed and maintained
as to prevent escape of animals. All reasonable precautions will be taken to
protect the public from the animals and the animals from the public.
   I.   Every animal establishment will isolate sick animals sufficiently so as
not to endanger the health of other animals. Sick animals will at all times be
isolated from the other animals.
   J.   Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained will be
constructed of material easily cleaned and will be kept in a sanitary
condition. The building will be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to
remove odors. Heating and cooling will be provided as required, according to
the physical needs of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation
of animals and sanitation.
   K.   Such person will take any animal to a veterinarian for examination or
treatment, if the director finds this is necessary in order to maintain the
health of the animal and orders the owner or custodian to do so.
   L.   All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs will be of sufficient size to
provide adequate and proper accommodations for the animals kept therein.
   M.   Every violation of an applicable regulation will be corrected within a
reasonable time to be specified by the chief of police.
   N.   Such person will provide proper shelter and protection from the weather
at all times.
   O.   Such person will not give an animal any alcoholic beverage, unless
prescribed by a veterinarian.
   P.   Such person will not allow animals that are natural enemies,
temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible, to be quartered together,
or so near each other as to cause injury, fear or torment. If two (2) or more
animals are so trained that they can be placed together and do not attack each
other or perform or attempt any hostile act to the others, such animals will be
deemed not to be natural enemies.
   Q.   Such person will not allow the use of any tack, equipment, device,
substance or material that is, or could be, injurious or cause unnecessary
cruelty to any animal.
   R.   Such person will not allow any animal to cause a hazard, or be a menace
to the health, peace or safety of the community. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-10: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any animal (or animals) which molests passersby or passing vehicles, attacks
other animals, trespasses on school grounds, is repeatedly at large, damages or
trespasses on private or public property, barks, whines or howls in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, is a public nuisance. (Ord. 1340,
11-7-2001)
6-2-11: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Compliance; Permit: It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain,
or have in possession or under control in the city any animal except as
permitted by this chapter.
   B.   Permit For Keeping Animals: The director may issue a permit to persons
wishing to keep types of animals not identified in this chapter or a greater
number of animals than allowed by this chapter. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-12: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
An application for a permit will be initiated by filing a verified application
on a form furnished by the director. At a minimum, the application will
include:
   A.   The applicant's name, address, and telephone number;
   B.   The number and kind of animals for which a permit is requested;
   C.   The number and kind of other animals kept on the premises;
   D.   The type and location of caging, if applicable; and
   E.   Other information reasonably required by the director. The director
will make or cause to be made such investigation as may be appropriate. (Ord.
1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-13: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
The director may issue or renew the permit if:
   A.   Issuing a permit will not adversely affect the public peace, health or
safety;
   B.   Keeping of the animal will not violate any applicable laws; and
   C.   The facilities for keeping such animals are humane and adequate under
the circumstances as to noise, security and sanitation. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-2-14: EXPIRATION OF PERMITS:
All permits issued on or before October 31 of any year will expire on December
31 of that year. Any permit issued on or after November 1 of any year will
expire on December 31 of the next succeeding year. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-15: APPEAL DECISION OF DIRECTOR; FEE:
Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the director may file an appeal of
such decision with the planning commission by filing a written notice of appeal
in letter form accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of
the city council, said fee to cover the cost of posting, postage, advertising
and other costs incident to the proceedings. Said notice of appeal must be
filed within ten (10) days after the director renders a decision. Failure to
appeal a decision within this time period will waive an applicant's appeal
rights. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-16: PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING; NOTICE; DECISION:
   A.   Hearing Notice: When an appeal is filed, the director will give notice
of a public hearing by mailing a letter notice, first class mail with postage
prepaid, to the applicant and to the owners of property abutting the boundary
of the property that is the subject of the application for an animal permit,
using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as shown
upon the last equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County. Such notice will
contain the address, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and
the time and place at which the public hearing on the matter will be held.
   B.   Decision By Resolution: The planning commission will announce its
decision by resolution.
   C.   Decision Final: Any action by the planning commission on such matters
will be a final decision. There is no right for city council appeal.
   D.   Notice Of Decision: Not later than fifteen (15) days following the
adoption of a resolution ordering that an appeal be granted or denied, a copy
of the resolution will be mailed to the applicant and to any other person
requesting notice of the action. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-17: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the director if the director finds:
   A.   That the permit, or a prior permit of which the permit is an extension
was obtained by fraud; or
   B.   That the permittee violated the law in keeping such animal; or
   C.   That the animal or animals endanger the public peace, health or safety.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
CHAPTER 3
DOGS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Licensing Requirements
6-3-2: License Tags
6-3-3: License Application/Renewal
6-3-4: Suspension Or Revocation Of Dog License
6-3-5: Running At Large Prohibited
6-3-6: Rabies Control
6-3-7: Dog Park Rules
6-3-8: Interfering With Animal Control Officers Prohibited
6-3-9: Interference With Police Dogs
6-3-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required; Exceptions:
      1.   Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to
own any dog without obtaining an annual city license.
      2.   It is not necessary to purchase a license or to pay a license fee
for any dog under the age of four (4) months.
      3.   The license fee will not apply to any dogs kept or maintained
exclusively in any dog kennel in the city.
   B.   Annual License Fees: The annual license fee for keeping and maintaining
an unaltered dog in the city will be set from time to time by city council
resolution. The annual license fee for a spayed or neutered dog will be set at
an amount that is one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee for an unaltered
dog; if a certificate is presented from a licensed veterinarian verifying that
the dog has been spayed or neutered.
   C.   Discount For Senior Citizens: A fifty percent (50%) discount on the dog
license fee will be made available to any resident sixty two (62) years of age
or older who makes application for the discount.
   D.   Seeing Eye Or Guide Dogs: Seeing eye or guide dogs are those dogs that
have been especially trained to lead and aid the blind or deaf. Any blind or
deaf person having custody of such a dog may keep and harbor the dog within the
city by obtaining a license to keep a dog as provided herein, and may lawfully
take the dog into any food establishment within the city. There will be no fee
charged for such dogs upon proof of antirabies vaccination.
   E.   Date Payable; Proration; Penalty:
      1.   Any license fee required to be paid by this chapter will be payable
annually in advance on March 1 of each year, and the license will expire at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the last day of February of the following
year. The full amount of the license fee will be payable for any license
falling due during the period from January 1 of the year to June 30 of the
year.
      2.   Fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the license fee will be payable
for any license falling due subsequent to September 30 of the year for the
remaining fraction of the year.
      3.   Any license fee payable under the provisions of this chapter
remaining unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after the same will become
payable hereunder, will be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the
fee due, which penalty will be collected by the license collector at the time
of the collection of the license fee, and will be in addition to the principal
sum thereof. In determining whether or not a penalty has accrued under the
provisions of this chapter, the license collector may require an affidavit from
any person claiming exemption from the payment of any penalty hereunder, which
affidavit will set forth the facts upon which the claim for the exemption is
based.
   F.   Failure To Pay License Fee: Whenever any person owning, harboring or
having the care or custody of any dog fails to pay the license fee provided and
specified in this chapter for the dog, the director may cause the dog to be
seized and kept in the public pound for the period and in the manner and upon
the terms, conditions and requirements as specified in this chapter.
   G.   Exception: Animals, other than dogs, are not required to be licensed
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-2: LICENSE TAGS:
   A.   Contents: Each year the city will procure a sufficient number of
suitable metallic license tags to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Duplicate: The city council will by resolution establish a fee for
issuing a license and metallic tag to replace a lost license or tag.
   C.   Affixing To Dog Collar: The owner of any dog upon which the license fee
has been paid will securely fasten the metallic license tag upon a suitable
collar and securely fasten the collar with the tag attached thereto upon the
dog. A dog harness or other device may be substituted in lieu of the collar, if
so desired. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-3-3: LICENSE APPLICATION/RENEWAL:
The city will print a sufficient number of applications to meet the
requirements of this chapter. The applications will provide for the description
of the dog for which the license fee is paid and the name and address of the
owner of the dog. The applications will also designate the rabies vaccination
date and the sex of the dog for which the license fee has been paid. (Ord.
1457, 12-21-2010)
6-3-4: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DOG LICENSE:
The director may suspend or revoke any dog license issued under the provisions
of this chapter, if at any time the director finds that any dog described or
referred to in any dog license, or for which any dog license has or may be
issued under this chapter is vicious, dangerous or apt to bite or injure any
person. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-5: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person owning or having charge, custody,
possession or control of any dog to cause, permit or allow the dog to run at
large in or upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court or other public place,
or in or upon any private property or premises, other than those of the person
owning or having charge, custody, possession or control of the dog within the
city, unless the dog is restrained by a substantial leash not to exceed six
feet (6') in length and is in charge, custody, possession or control of a
competent person.
   B.   This provision will not apply to public areas of the city officially
designated as a "dog park" or to police service dogs while such dogs are under
the control of a peace officer. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-6: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Vaccination Required; Exception: Every dog in the city over the age of
four (4) months must be vaccinated against rabies.
   B.   Revaccination:
      1.   Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog in the city that has
been vaccinated with chick embryo vaccine will cause the dog to be revaccinated
within a period of not more than two (2) years after the prior vaccination.
      2.   Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog in the city which
has been vaccinated with tissue phenolized vaccine will cause the dog to be
revaccinated with rabies vaccine within a period of not more than one year
after the prior vaccination.
   C.   Vaccination Certificate Issuance: Every person practicing veterinary
medicine in the city who vaccinates a dog with rabies vaccine will issue to the
person keeping, harboring or having the dog a certificate, which is signed by
the veterinarian and which states thereon the name and description of the dog,
the date of the vaccination and the type of vaccine used.
   D.   Certificate: Every person applying for a dog license will exhibit a
rabies vaccination certificate issued by a person licensed by the state or any
other state or nation to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate will
show that the dog for which the license will be issued either:
      1.   Was vaccinated in accordance with this chapter; or
      2.   Should not be vaccinated with rabies vaccine by reason of age,
infirmity or other disability, which disability is shown on the face of the
certificate and to the satisfaction of the person issuing the license to be in
effect at the time. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-3-7: DOG PARK RULES:
The city council may, by resolution, designate particular parks within the city
as dog parks. Persons having custody of dogs at dog parks will comply with the
following:
   A.   Owner Present: Dogs will not be present at a dog park without an owner
or custodian;
   B.   Hours: The dog park will be open from dawn to dusk, seven (7) days a
week;
   C.   Aggressive Dogs: Aggressive dogs are not allowed in the park;
   D.   Food: No food in the park/do not feed dogs in the park;
   E.   Clean Up And Supervision: Owners must supervise and clean up after
dogs;
   F.   Children: Children under twelve (12) years of age must be supervised by
an adult;
   G.   Age And Vaccination: Dogs must be at least four (4) months old and
vaccinated;
   H.   Dogs In Heat: Dogs in heat are not permitted;
   I.   Spiked Collars: No spiked collars;
   J.   Bikes Or Similar Items: No bikes, rollerblades, roller skates,
strollers or similar items allowed in the park;
   K.   Leash: Owners must have a leash available at all times;
   L.   Parking: Parking regulations must be obeyed;
   M.   Liability: Dog owners are liable for any injuries or damage caused by
their dog(s);
   N.   License: All dogs must be currently licensed;
   O.   Trainers: Professional dog trainers are not allowed to conduct training
on site;
   P.   Number Of Dogs: No person may bring more than three (3) dogs to the
park at one time.
   Q.   Prohibited Behavior: The following behaviors must be stopped
immediately:
      1.   Prolonged growling;
      2.   Mounting or pinning of other dogs. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-8: INTERFERING WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS PROHIBITED:
A person will not interfere with, oppose or resist the director or any employee
of the city, while such person is engaged in the performance of any act
authorized by this title. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-9: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOGS:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully tease, torment, agitate, provoke,
beat, kick, strike, injure, maim, disable, kill, or in any way interfere with
any dog being used in a police function by law enforcement officers. (Ord.
1340, 11-7-2001)
CHAPTER 4
LICENSES FOR KENNELS AND ANIMAL BREEDING BUSINESSES
SECTION:
6-4-1: License Required
6-4-2: Applications For All Licenses
6-4-3: Supplemental Information
6-4-4: License Issuance
6-4-5: License Denial
6-4-6: Kennel Licenses; General Requirements
6-4-7: Duration Of License Or Permit
6-4-8: Renewal
6-4-9: Revocation Or Suspension Of License Or Permit
6-4-10: Display Of License Or Permit
6-4-11: Breeder's License; Requirements
6-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to operate or maintain a kennel or animal breeding business in
the city without a valid kennel or breeder's license issued pursuant to this
title. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-2: APPLICATIONS FOR ALL LICENSES:
Persons wishing to obtain either a kennel or a breeder's license must file an
application as follows:
   A.   License applications will be filed by a natural person.
   B.   License applications will be in a form prescribed by the director and
will, at a minimum, contain all of the following information:
      1.   Whether the applicant is seeking a kennel or breeder's license;
      2.   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers
of the person filing the application;
      3.   If filing on behalf of a business, the name, mailing address, and
daytime telephone number of the organization; and if requested by the director,
written documentation of the authority under which the applicant is applying
for the permit on behalf of the organization;
      4.   For a kennel license, the proposed location of the kennel. (Ord.
1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-3: SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION:
In addition to the information required by this chapter, applications for all
licenses will include such supplemental information which the director may find
reasonably necessary in order to determine whether to approve or deny a license
under this chapter. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The director will issue a kennel or breeder's license if:
   A.   The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
   B.   There are no grounds for denying a license;
   C.   For a kennel license, operating the proposed kennel will not violate
any state or local regulation;
   D.   Operating the proposed breeding business will not endanger the health,
peace or safety of the community;
   E.   The proposed site for the proposed breeding business is clean and
sanitary;
   F.   The applicant has not had a similar license revoked within one year
before the application; and
   G.   Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional approval in
writing. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-5: LICENSE DENIAL:
A permit may be denied for the following reasons:
   A.   The application is incomplete;
   B.   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application
information requested by the director;
   C.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
   D.   The proposed location for a kennel does not conform with the zoning
regulations of this code. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-6: KENNEL LICENSES; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any person conducting, managing or maintaining a kennel must pay the
city an annual fee for the privilege of conducting or maintaining a dog kennel.
The amount of the annual fee will be set by city council resolution and
entitles the kennel operator to maintain ten (10) or fewer dogs. An additional
fee, set by city council resolution, must be paid by persons managing or
maintaining kennels housing more than ten (10) dogs. (Ord. 1379, 1-18-2005)
   B.   Every person owning or operating any kennel will keep all animals
therein under proper confinement on the premises and will not cause, permit or
allow such animals to be or to run at large.
   C.   The holder of a kennel license will keep available for inspection, on
the premises, a record that will show:
      1.   The name, current address and telephone number of the owner of each
animal kept at the kennel;
      2.   The date such animal entered the kennel;
      3.   The reason for such animal being at the kennel, such as for
boarding, sale, breeding or grooming;
      4.   The description of the animal, including its age, breed, sex and
color;
      5.   That there exists a current, valid rabies certificate for every dog
over four (4) months of age so long as such dog is kept at the kennel.
   D.   The provisions of this section do not apply to breeder's licenses.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-7: DURATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter will expire one year from the date of
issuance. The license may be revoked or suspended for cause in accordance with
this chapter before the expiration date. The license is void if the licensee
changes the location of the breeding business or sells, assigns, transfers or
otherwise disposes of such business or his or her interest therein for a period
of thirty (30) days or more. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-8: RENEWAL:
Each license or permit issued under this chapter will be renewed within thirty
(30) days after the expiration thereof. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-9: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   A.   Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked or suspended if the director finds:
      1.   That the licensee, his or her agent or employee, has been convicted
of any offense involving the violation of Penal Code sections 596, 596.6, 597,
597.1, 597.5, 598 and 599, or of any provision of this chapter;
      2.   That the licensee, his or her agent or employee, has, at the place
for which the license was issued, failed to provide any animal in his or her
possession care or control with proper and sufficient food, drink, shelter or
protection, or subjected any such animal to suffering, cruelty or abuse;
      3.   That the licensee, his or her agent or employee, failed to maintain
the premises in a clean and sanitary condition;
      4.   That the licensee, his or her agent or employee, has violated any
rule or regulation made pursuant to the provisions of this title;
      5.   That the licensee has falsified facts on the license application.
   B.   If a license is denied or revoked for cause, the director will not
accept a new application by the same person for a breeding license less than
six months after such denial or revocation, unless the applicant affirmatively
shows and the officer finds, by inspection or investigation, that the grounds
upon which the first application was denied or the license was revoked no
longer existed.
   C.   On revocation of a license, no part of the fee is refundable. (Ord.
1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter will be displayed in a conspicuous
place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-11: BREEDER'S LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The director may issue a breeder's license in the same manner as kennel
licenses. Persons who possess a valid kennel license issued pursuant to this
title need not obtain a breeder's license.
   B.   In addition to every other applicable requirement of this title, every
licensee will comply with each of the following conditions:
      1.   Every puppy or kitten offered for sale must be examined by a
veterinarian and be certified free of congenital defects, distemper, worms,
skin disease, skin and ear mites, and other diseases or conditions which would
be injurious to the animal or a potential owner.
      2.   Every puppy or kitten offered for sale will have been vaccinated
against distemper by a veterinarian. A certificate providing the name of the
veterinarian and the date and treatment must be provided to the purchaser at
the time of sale.
      3.   No animal will be transported by a licensee unless housed in a
container designed for that purpose including provisions for adequate
ventilation and food and water.
      4.   No licensee will allow the whelping of more than one litter per
female dog or cat during the license term. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
CHAPTER 5
IMPOUNDING ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Director; Duties; Impoundment Fees
6-5-2: Fees For Impounding And Keeping Animals
6-5-3: Vaccination Fee; Redemption Of Stray Dogs And Cats
6-5-4: Impounding Dogs
6-5-5: Impoundment Of Dog Without Tag
6-5-6: Dangerous Dogs; Impoundment; Hearing
6-5-7: Animal Impoundment
6-5-8: Reclamation Of Impounded Animals
6-5-9: Release From Impoundment
6-5-10: Rabies Suspect, Impoundment Procedure
6-5-11: Trespassing Animal Or Fowl !2R!
6-5-1: DIRECTOR; DUTIES; IMPOUNDMENT FEES:
   A.   Duties: In addition to any other duties under this code, the director
is responsible for all duties relating to operation of an animal pound
including, without limitation, capturing, holding, and releasing animals
violating any provision of this code.
   B.   Record Kept: The director will keep a full, true and correct record of
all animals impounded, the date of the impoundment, and the date of release,
discharge or disposal. This documentation will be available for public
inspection. The director may promulgate appropriate regulations for public
viewing of impounded animals.
   C.   Care Of Animals And Fowl: The director will provide the necessary
subsistence and will properly care for all impounded animals.
   D.   Removal From Public Property: The director will remove and dispose of
all dead animals found in or upon any of the public highways, streets, avenues,
ways, lanes, alleys, parks, squares, sidewalks or other public places within
the city.
   E.   Removal From Private Property: The director will remove and dispose of
any abandoned dead animal found on private property in accordance with the
nuisance abatement proceedings of this code. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-2: FEES FOR IMPOUNDING AND KEEPING ANIMALS:
The director will collect a fee set by city council resolution from the owners
of impounded animals. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-3: VACCINATION FEE; REDEMPTION OF STRAY DOGS AND CATS:
The director will collect a fee from persons redeeming impounded dogs and cats
for administering distemper vaccinations to stray dogs and for vaccinating
stray cats for feline diseases. This vaccination fee will be set by city
council resolution. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-4: IMPOUNDING DOGS:
At any time within five (5) days from the date of impoundment, the owner or
persons entitled to the possession of the dog may reclaim the dog upon payment
to the director of the impounding fee:
   A.   For the second impoundment of a dog, owned by the same person, the
pound fee will be an amount that is double the standard impoundment fee;
   B.   For the third impoundment of a dog, owned by the same person, the pound
fee will be an amount triple the standard impoundment fee;
   C.   In addition to the foregoing impounding fee, the daily maintenance fee
will be paid for each day or portion thereof for which the dog was impounded.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-5: IMPOUNDMENT OF DOG WITHOUT TAG:
   A.   The director may capture and impound any dog found within the city
limits that is not wearing a valid license tag conforming to the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   The director may enter private property in accordance with applicable
law to examine or capture any dog suspected of being in violation of the
provisions of this code or is suspected of being rabid or infected with rabies.
(Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-5-6: DANGEROUS DOGS; IMPOUNDMENT; HEARING:
   A.   Impoundment: Whenever any dog is, in the written opinion of the
director, vicious, dangerous, potentially dangerous or apt to bite or injure
any person, and is kept in such manner as to constitute an apparent menace to
any person, the dog may be immediately impounded by the director.
   B.   Notice Of Impoundment:
      1.   The director must provide written notice to the owner/guardian of
the specific behavior of the animal alleged in the petition and the date upon
which a hearing will be held to consider the petition. The hearing must be held
promptly within no less than five (5) working days nor more than ten (10)
working days after service of notice upon the owner/guardian of the animal as
set forth by the Food And Agricultural Code section 31621. The notice must
advise the owner/guardian of the consequences of a finding of potentially
dangerous or vicious.
      2.   Where the owner/guardian's address of any animal is unknown, notice
of the hearing must be given by posting the same in the police department and
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice must then be
deemed given on publication of the notice.
   C.   Hearing; Procedures: A hearing on whether a dog is declared potentially
dangerous or vicious must be conducted in the following manner:
      1.   If the director has investigated and determined that probable cause
exists to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, a hearing
must be conducted. The director must prepare a petition specifying the basis as
to why the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious.
      2.   Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the
public which serves as the evidentiary basis for the director to find probable
cause must be sworn to and verified by the complainant and must be attached to
the petition.
      3.   The city manager, or designee, must designate a hearing officer. The
hearing officer must conduct a hearing on whether a dog must be declared
potentially dangerous or vicious.
      4.   The hearing must be open to the public and the hearing officer may
admit into evidence all relevant evidence, and exercise the full scope of
authority set forth in Food And Agricultural Code section 31621.
      5.   A hearing may be continued if the hearing officer deems it necessary
and proper or upon a showing of good cause.
      6.   If the owner/guardian fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
will nevertheless proceed and an appropriate order must be issued.
      7.   The hearing officer must consider all relevant responsible evidence
without regard to the formal rules of evidence, including circumstances of
mitigation, and the record of any prior violations by the owner/guardian.
      8.   The hearing officer must issue a written determination based upon a
preponderance of the evidence, which must be mailed to the owner/guardian
within seven (7) days after the hearing is completed.
      9.   The hearing officer's decision is final. There is no right to a city
council appeal.
   D.   Designation Of Animal: If an animal is found to be potentially
dangerous or vicious by a preponderance of the evidence, the animal must be so
designated on the records of the animal services agency. Such a designation
must be considered in future determinations involving the animal and/or owner/
guardian.
   E.   Surrender Of Dangerous Dog: Any dog declared after a hearing to be
dangerous, if not already impounded by the department, will be immediately
surrendered to the department.
   F.   Microchipping Before Release: If at the conclusion of the hearing the
hearing officer determines that the dog will be released, the dog must have a
microchip embedded subcutaneously in accordance with industry standards before
being released to the owner. The microchipping will be at the owner's expense.
   G.   Waiver: The owner of a dog for which a potentially dangerous petition
has been issued may irrevocably waive rights to a hearing and any further
appeal under Food And Agricultural Code section 31622 and accept all
conditions, sanctions and penalties set forth in Food And Agricultural Code
sections 31641, 31642 and 31643. The director will mail a waiver form to the
dog owner/guardian. The waiver must be signed by the dog owner/guardian and
received by the director within thirty (30) days from the date of agreement to
waive or a hearing will be scheduled within thirty (30) days of the agreement
to waive.
   H.   Additional Fees:
      1.   In accordance with Food And Agricultural Code section 31641, the
owner/guardian of a potentially dangerous dog must in addition to the regular
licensing fee, pay to the city an annual fee as may be established by city
council resolution for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the
dog.
      2.   The owner/guardian of a dog determined to be vicious must, in
addition to the regular licensing fee, pay to the city an annual fee as may be
established by separate city council resolution to provide for the increased
costs of maintaining the records of the dog.
   I.   Registration Of Animal: The owner/guardian of a vicious dog must,
within ten (10) days of such determination, upon request by the city present
said animal at the animal services agency and allow photographs and
measurements of the animal to be taken for purposes of identification.
   J.   Undesignation Of Animal:
      1.   The owner/guardian of a dog found potentially dangerous, who has no
additional violations of any of the provisions of this title, within a thirty
six (36) month period from the date of designation as potentially dangerous,
must be removed from the list of potentially dangerous dogs by the director.
The dog may be, but is not required to be, removed from the list of potentially
dangerous dogs before the expiration of the thirty six (36) month period if the
owner/guardian of the dog demonstrates to the director that changes in
circumstances or measures taken by the owner/guardian, such as training of the
dog, mitigated the risk to public safety.
      2.   The owner/guardian of a dog found vicious, who has no additional
violations of any of the provisions of this title, after a thirty six (36)
month period from the date of designation as vicious, may apply to the director
to remove the animal from the list of vicious animals. The director has the
discretion to remove the animal from the list of vicious animals upon proof of
the successful completion of at least eight (8) weeks of formal obedience
training, other similar evidence of training, or other rehabilitative efforts
designed to mitigate the risk to public safety. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-5-7: ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Costs Of Subsistence And Care: The costs of subsistence or care for
impounded animals and fowl will be a charge against and paid by the city,
unless otherwise specified in any contract which may be awarded for the pound
service as contemplated by this chapter, in which case the costs thereof will
be paid and discharged as contemplated in the contract.
   B.   Minimum Period Of Impoundment: Every animal and fowl impounded in the
public pound will be kept therein for a full period of at least five (5) days,
exclusive of the day of impoundment, unless sooner redeemed by the lawful owner
thereof or unless in the opinion of the director the physical condition of the
animal or fowl is such as to justify prior disposition in order to serve humane
considerations. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-8: RECLAMATION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
   A.   Right To Reclaim Upon Payment Of Charges: The owner or any person
entitled to the control of any animal or fowl impounded in the public pound has
the right to reclaim the same at any time before the sale or other actual
disposal thereof, upon payment to the director of the costs and charges
provided for in this chapter.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: When any redemption is made under this chapter, in
addition to paying any impounding and maintenance fee or costs incurred by
reason of impounding any animal impounded under this chapter, there will also
be paid the amount of any license fee which may then be due or payable on such
animal under this title or any other section of this code or ordinance of the
city, in case a current license for the animal is not in existence at the time.
   C.   Damage Payment: When any redemption is made under this chapter, in
addition to paying any impounding fee or costs incurred by reason of impounding
any animal or fowl, there will also be paid reasonable demands for actual
damage done by any animal or fowl running at large. The damages required to be
paid by this subsection will be paid to the person whose property was damaged.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-9: RELEASE FROM IMPOUNDMENT:
No impounded dog will be released to any person except where the following
occurs:
   A.   A current license and rabies tag is presented to the director for the
dog.
   B.   The director is given proof that a license fee was paid to the city
pursuant to this title.
   C.   Impound, collection, and other fees related to the impoundment required
by this title are paid to the city.
   D.   The director is given proof that the dog is vaccinated for rabies, if
required, or a fee is paid for vaccination.
   E.   The director determines that the dog does not have and is not
reasonably suspected of having rabies. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-10: RABIES SUSPECT, IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE:
If the director suspects that an impounded dog has rabies, the dog will be
inspected by a county health officer. Should the dog be found to have rabies,
it will be disposed of or confined for such time as the health officer directs.
In the event that the health officer suspects that the dog may develop rabies,
it will be confined for such time as the health officer directs. Whenever the
health officer determines that the dog does not have rabies, it will be
released in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-
2001)
6-5-11: TRESPASSING ANIMAL OR FOWL:
Any animal or fowl found trespassing upon private property may be captured by
the party owning, controlling or having possession of the ground or premises,
or by the agent or representative of the person, and committed to the director
to be dealt with as provided in this chapter. Any person taking up the stray
animal or fowl found running at large or trespassing upon any property, ground
or premises owned, controlled or in possession of the person will promptly
notify the director of such capture and it is unlawful for any such person to
fail or refuse to surrender the animal to the director upon demand. (Ord. 1340,
11-7-2001)
CHAPTER 6
BEEKEEPING
SECTION:
6-6-1: General Requirements
6-6-2: Hive Management Requirements
6-6-3: Nuisance
6-6-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Bee hives may only be maintained in the rear yard on a single-family
residential property. For purposes of this Chapter, the term “rear yard” has
the same meaning as defined in Section
15-1-6 of this Code.
   B.   A maximum of three bee hives may be maintained on any single-family
zoned property, in the rear yards only, for noncommercial purposes.
   C.   All bee colonies shall be kept in inspectable hives consisting of
moveable frames and combs.
   D.   Hives must be kept in sound and usable condition at all times.
   E.   Any person intending to place and maintain any bee hive on a single-
family residential zoned property within the City must first register with
County Agricultural Commissioner.
   F.   Hives shall be located at least five feet from all property lines.
   G.   Hive entrances shall face away from or parallel to the nearest property
line(s).
   H.   Hives must either be screened so that the bees must fly over a six-foot
barrier, which may be vegetative, before leaving the property, or be placed at
least eight feet above the adjacent ground level. (Ord. 1624, 5-18-2021)
6-6-2: HIVE MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Hives shall be continually managed to provide adequate living space for
their resident bees to prevent swarming.
   B.   Hives shall be requeened at least once every two years to prevent
swarming.
   C.   A water source for bees shall be provided at all times on the property
where the bees are kept to discourage bee visitation at swimming pools, hose
bibs and other water sources on adjacent public or private property.
   D.   Hive maintenance materials or equipment must be stored in a sealed
container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure. (Ord. 1624,
5-18-2021)
6-6-3: NUISANCE:
Notwithstanding the requirements contained in Section
6-6-1 and Section
6-6-2, bees or hives shall be considered a public nuisance when any of the
following occurs:
   A.   Colonies of bees exhibit defensive or objectionable behavior, or
interfere with the normal use of neighboring properties.
   B.   Colonies of bees swarm.
   C.   Bees or hives do not conform to this Code.
   D.   Hives become abandoned by resident bees or by the owner. (Ord. 1624, 5-
18-2021)
TITLE 7
NUISANCES AND OFFENSES
Nuisances   1
Noise And Vibration   2
Dust And Particulate Matter   3
Property Maintenance Standards   4
Daytime Curfew   5
Nighttime Curfew   5A
General Offenses   6
Handbills   7
Prohibited Camping   8
Privately Owned Parking Lots   9
Motor Vehicle Alarms   10
Marijuana   11
Loud Or Unruly Gatherings   12
Social Host Regulations   13
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-1-1: Purpose
7-1-2: Definitions
7-1-3: Nuisance; Generally
7-1-4: Nuisances; Designated
7-1-5: Abatement Authority
7-1-6: Graffiti
7-1-6-1: Findings
7-1-6-2: Possession Prohibited
7-1-6-3: Possession By Minors
7-1-6-4: Possession In Designated Public Places
7-1-6-5: Possession With Intent To Deface, Mark Or Damage Property
7-1-6-6: Parental Liability
7-1-6-7: Accessibility To Graffiti Implements
7-1-6-8: Authorization To Remove
7-1-6-9: Notice To Abate Graffiti
7-1-6-10: Recovery Of Costs From Landowner
7-1-6-11: Failure To Remove Graffiti Upon Notice
7-1-6-12: Recovery Of Costs From Minor Or Parent Or Guardian
7-1-6-13: Community Service
7-1-6-14: Suspension Or Delay Of Driving Privileges
7-1-6-15: Penalty
7-1-7: Nuisance Abatement Procedures
7-1-7-1: Abatement Of Nuisance
7-1-7-2: Responsibility For Abatement
7-1-7-3: Notice Of Hearings For Nuisance Abatement
7-1-7-4: Hearing Procedure
7-1-7-5: Compliance With Abatement Order
7-1-7-6: City Expenses; Record Of Costs
7-1-7-7: Hearing On The Cost Of Abatement
7-1-7-8: Nuisance Abatement Lien And Special Assessment Procedures
7-1-7-9: Order For Treble Costs Of Abatement
7-1-7-10: Judicial Remedies
7-1-7-11: Emergency Abatement
7-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers; Government Code
sections 38771-38773.7, 53069.3, including any successor statutes; and Civil
Procedure Code section 731, including any successor statutes, for the purposes
of identifying public nuisances; authorizing abatement of such nuisances; and
imposing criminal and civil penalties upon persons for causing or permitting
such public nuisances. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to, nor
will it, preclude the city from pursuing any other available civil or criminal
remedies concurrently or in addition to the proceedings established by this
chapter to enforce this code. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER: Any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the
purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of defacing property.
FELT TIP MARKER: Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which at
its broadest width is one-eighth inch (1/8") or greater, containing an ink that
is not water soluble.
GLASS CUTTERS: Any tools or instruments designed, or intended, to cut or etch
glass surfaces.
GRAFFITI: Any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched,
pasted, or otherwise placed on property without the prior approval of the
property owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property,
except as otherwise provided in section
7-1-6 of this chapter.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: Any implement capable of marking a surface to create
graffiti including, without limitation, any aerosol paint container, paint
stick, felt tip marker, marking pen, gum label, marking instrument, drill bit,
grinding stone, scribe, glass cutter, or etching tool, or other implements
capable of marking or scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood.
GRAFFITI REMOVAL COSTS: All costs that would be considered abatement costs in
the context of a nuisance abatement proceeding pursuant to this chapter. In
addition, such costs expressly include, without limitation, costs of removal of
graffiti or other material, costs of repair and replacement of the defaced
property, all city staff time, costs of the police investigation, attorney time
and fees, and any court costs incurred.
GUM LABEL: Any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance with an
adhesive backing which, when placed on a surface, is not easily removed.
HEARING OFFICER: City manager or designee.
INCIDENTAL EXPENSES: Include, without limitation, actual expenses, city
administrative costs and other costs of the city of all previous code
enforcement efforts, the preparation of the abatement work specifications,
contracts, and staff time in inspecting the work, as well as the costs of
printing, posting and mailings required by this chapter.
MINOR: Except as otherwise provided, a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
PAINT OR GRAFFITI STICK: A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax,
epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by
pressure and, upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth (1/8) of an
inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty feet (20'), and not water
soluble.
PARKWAY: That portion of property between the sidewalk or property line and the
curb or roadway, that is available for landscaping.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any person or persons creating, causing, committing or
maintaining any public nuisance as defined by this code including, without
limitation, any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or
possession of real property and any parent or legal guardian of a minor
creating graffiti.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open display of graffiti implements to which the
public has access without the intervention of any employee.
SPRAY ACTUATOR: An object, such as a spray tip, nozzle, or button, which is
capable of being attached to an aerosol paint container for the purpose of
spraying the substance contained therein.
VENDOR ASSISTED: Only an employee has access to the graffiti implement and
assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take
possession of the product until it is purchased. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007; amd.
Ord. 1627, passed 6-1-2021)
7-1-3: NUISANCE; GENERALLY:
Anything that is injurious to health; is indecent; offensive to the senses;
obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property; or obstructs the free passage or use in the
customary manner of any public park, square, street or highway, is a public
nuisance. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-4: NUISANCES; DESIGNATED:
It is unlawful and it is declared to be a public nuisance for any person
owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property
within the city to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the
conditions listed below are found to exist. This section is not the exclusive
definition or designation of what constitutes a nuisance within this city. It
supplements and is in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes, and
ordinances enacted by the city, state, or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction. Designated public nuisances include the following:
   A.   A violation of any provision of applicable law including, without
limitation, the El Segundo municipal code;
   B.   Any land, the topography, geology, or configuration of which, whether
in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavations, fill, or
other alteration, interferes with the established drainage pattern over the
property or from adjoining or other properties which does or may result in
erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to
be injurious to public health, safety and welfare or to neighboring properties;
   C.   Any building or structure which is partially destroyed, damaged,
abandoned, boarded up, dilapidated, or permitted to remain in a state of
partial construction;
   D.   The failure to secure and maintain against public access all doorways,
windows, and other openings into vacant or abandoned buildings or structures;
   E.   Painted buildings and walls, retaining walls, fences or structures that
require repainting, or buildings, walls, fences, or structures upon which the
condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive
checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation;
   F.   Any premises, building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, or walkway
which is painted in a garish manner or is out of harmony or conformity with the
standards of adjacent properties;
   G.   Any building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, or walkway upon which
any graffiti, including paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar marking
substances, is allowed to remain for more than twenty four (24) consecutive
hours;
   H.   Any wall, fence, gate, or hedge that is damaged, broken, or a hazard or
is maintained in violation of this code;
   I.   Broken windows;
   J.   Any overgrown, dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous tree, weeds,
vegetation, or debris within areas such as planters, landscaped areas,
parkways, adjoining sidewalks, and driveways, that is visible from neighboring
properties or the public right of way, which:
      1.   May harbor rats, vermin, or other disease carriers;
      2.   Is maintained so as to cause an obstruction to the vision of
motorists or a hazardous condition to pedestrians or vehicle traffic;
      3.   Creates a danger or attractive nuisance to the public;
      4.   Detrimentally affects neighboring properties or property values; or
      5.   Constitutes a fire hazard;
   K.   Building exteriors, roofs, landscaping, grounds, walls, retaining and
crib walls, fences, driveways, parking lots, planters, sidewalks, or walkways
which are maintained in such condition so as to become defective, unsightly,
cracked or no longer viable;
   L.   The accumulation of dirt, litter, trash, junk, abandoned personal
property, feces, or debris in or on areas such as adjoining sidewalks,
adjoining parkways, walkways, courtyards, patios, parking lots, planters,
landscaped or other areas and that is visible from neighboring properties or
the public right of way;
   M.   Any premises upon which there is or is permitted to be,
      1.   Lumber, building materials, rubble, broken asphalt or concrete,
containers, or other similar materials, except where construction is occurring
under a valid permit;
      2.   Junk, solid waste, abandoned personal property, vegetation, salvage
materials, scrap metals, hazardous waste, broken or neglected machinery, dirt
or fill material deposited or stored contrary to any law, automobile parts,
except within a commercial business lawfully engaged in retail sales;
      3.   Sinks, fixtures or equipment, appliances or furniture, except lawn
furniture in residential yards and new or used furniture lawfully stored or
displayed in connection with a valid business engaged in the sale or purchase
of the same;
      4.   Inoperative vehicles, except where permitted by the zoning code;
      5.   Deteriorated driveways and parking lots, including those containing
potholes, or cracks;
      6.   Abandoned, broken, unused, neglected or unprotected equipment and
machinery, ponds, reservoirs and pools, whether or not the same contains any
water or liquid, excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, foundations,
or other holes, abandoned refrigerators or other appliances, abandoned motor
vehicles, any unsound structure, skateboard ramps, or accumulated lumber, solid
waste, junk, or vegetation which may reasonably attract children to such
abandoned or neglected conditions;
      7.   Temporary service bins or construction debris storage bins stored on
a public street or on private property, except where permitted by this code;
      8.   Any garbage can, solid waste container, solid waste, packing box or
junk placed or maintained so as to be visible from neighboring properties or
the public right of way, except for those times scheduled for collection, in
accordance with this code;
      9.   Any garbage can, solid waste container, or cart for collection of
solid waste, organics or recyclables that is not placed on the street against
the curb in front of the premises occupied by the person depositing the same in
compliance with Chapter 5-2 (Solid Waste Management) of this Code;
      10.   Any property with accumulations of grease, oil, or other hazardous
material on paved or unpaved surfaces, driveways, buildings, walls, or fences,
or from which any such material flows or seeps onto any public street or other
public or private property, or which is likely to seep or migrate into the
underground water table;
      11.   Any front yard, parkway, or landscaped setback area which lacks
turf, other planted material, decorative rock, bark, or planted ground cover or
covering, so as to cause excessive dust or allow the accumulation of debris;
      12.   Any condition of vegetation overgrowth which encroaches into, over,
or upon any public right of way including, without limitation, streets, alleys,
or sidewalks, so as to constitute either a danger to the public safety or
property or any impediment to public travel;
      13.   Animals, livestock, poultry kept, bred, or maintained for any
purpose and in violation of this code;
      14.   The keeping of bees in violation of State or local rules and
regulations ; or colonies of bees exhibiting defensive or objectionable
behavior or interfering with the normal use of neighboring property;
      15.   Any property, or any building or structure thereon, maintained in
such condition so that it is defective, unsightly or in such condition of
deterioration or disrepair that it causes or will cause an ascertainable
diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or be otherwise
materially detrimental to adjacent and nearby properties and improvements;
      16.   Any building or portion thereof maintained in a manner which
constitutes a substandard building pursuant to Health and Safety Code section
17920.3. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007; amd. Ord. 1624, 5-18-2021; Ord. 1627, 6-1-2021)
7-1-5: ABATEMENT AUTHORITY:
The city manager, or designee, is authorized to abate public nuisances
summarily or otherwise in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-
2007)
7-1-6: GRAFFITI:
7-1-6-1: FINDINGS:
The city council finds as follows:
   A.   Graffiti on either public or private property, results in blight,
decreases property values and deprives surrounding residents and owners of the
right to comfortable enjoyment of life and property.
   B.   Graffiti is obnoxious, constitutes a public nuisance, and is a threat
to public safety which must be abated to prevent its proliferation.
   C.   Graffiti must be removed as quickly as possible to minimize harm to
persons and property in the community.
   D.   This section is intended to be complementary to, and not in conflict
with, Penal Code section 594, which provides that any person who maliciously
defaces property is guilty of vandalism, and Penal Code section 594.1, which
provides that certain activities involving the possession, sale and use of
aerosol paint containers are misdemeanors. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-2: POSSESSION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to mark, apply, or etch graffiti on any structure
located on public or private real property within the city. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-
2007)
7-1-6-3: POSSESSION BY MINORS:
It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implement while on public
or private property without the consent of the property owner, or the person in
lawful possession or control of the property. Any law enforcement officer who
observes a violation of this section may take immediate possession of the
graffiti implements. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-4: POSSESSION IN DESIGNATED PUBLIC PLACES:
Except as may be authorized by the city manager, or designee, no person may
possess any graffiti implement while on any property owned or operated by the
city. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-5: POSSESSION WITH INTENT TO DEFACE, MARK OR DAMAGE PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement for the purpose
of defacing, marking, or damaging any public or private property without the
express consent of the property owner or the person in lawful possession or
control of the property. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-6: PARENTAL LIABILITY:
Any parent or other legal guardian of a minor is personally liable for any and
all graffiti removal costs associated with graffiti caused by the minor. This
section does not limit the amount of recovery against the parent or other legal
guardian for their own common law negligence. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-7: ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or otherwise furnish any
graffiti implement to any minor without the consent of the minor's parent or
legal guardian. Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent, demanded
and was shown bona fide evidence of majority and acted upon such evidence of
majority in a transaction or sale is a defense to any criminal prosecution.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, permit to be sold, offer for
sale, or display for sale any graffiti implement by means of self-service
merchandising or by means other than vendor assisted sales. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-
2007)
7-1-6-8: AUTHORIZATION TO REMOVE:
Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods:
   A.   Wherever the city manager, or designee, determines that graffiti, as
defined in this chapter, is located on public or privately owned property
within the city so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any
public right of way in the city, the city manager is authorized to provide for
the removal of the graffiti upon the following conditions:
      1.   If the graffiti is located on property owned by the city, the city
manager, or designee, may immediately remove the graffiti by any practicable
means.
      2.   Except as provided below, where a structure is privately owned, the
removal of graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of the
owner and the owner having executed a release and waiver approved as to form by
the city attorney.
   B.   Graffiti located on privately owned structures or privately owned real
property in the city and which can be viewed by a person utilizing any public
right of way within the city may be removed by the city at the owner's expense
as a public nuisance. This section applies under the following circumstances:
      1.   The private property owner persuaded, allowed or encouraged the
graffiti problem;
      2.   The private property owner's consent cannot be obtained; or
      3.   The city manager determines that the removal of graffiti or other
inscribed material from a privately owned property exceeded three (3)
occurrences per privately owned real property during one calendar year. (Ord.
1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-9: NOTICE TO ABATE GRAFFITI:
Whenever the city manager, or designee, determines that graffiti is located on
privately owned structures or privately owned real property in the city in
violation of this chapter, the city manager, or designee, may abate such public
nuisance in the manner set forth in section
7-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-10: RECOVERY OF COSTS FROM LANDOWNER:
The costs of graffiti abatement may be recovered as set forth in section
7-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-11: FAILURE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI UPON NOTICE:
In addition to any graffiti removal costs incurred by the city for the
abatement of graffiti from private property, failure to voluntarily abate
graffiti after notification will result in the penalties set out in this
chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-12: RECOVERY OF COSTS FROM MINOR OR PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
   A.   If the city manager, or designee, abates graffiti in accord with this
chapter, the city may recover the graffiti removal costs by making such costs a
lien against the property of the minor creating, causing, or committing the
nuisance. Further, such costs may be recovered against the property of the
parent or guardian having custody or control of the minor up to and including
the sum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
   B.   For the purposes of this section, the terms "expense of abatement",
"graffiti" and "minor" have the same meaning set forth in Government Code
section 38772.
   C.   The cost recovery procedures against the property of a minor or a
parent or guardian of the minor are the same as set forth in section
7-1-7 of this chapter.
   D.   The graffiti removal costs are also a personal obligation of the minor
and his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-13: COMMUNITY SERVICE:
   A.   After the conviction of any person for violation of this section, or
any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement,
the city may petition the sentencing court to impose community service time,
pursuant to Penal Code section 640.6. The sentencing court may require the
performance of community service within the city in addition to any monetary
penalties imposed. In the event the sentencing court approves community
service, the city will request any adult or emancipated minor convicted of
vandalism, as defined by Penal Code section 594(a)(1), to:
      1.   Complete a minimum of twenty four (24) hours, but not more than
forty eight (48) hours, of community services cleaning up, removing and
repairing property damaged by graffiti for the first conviction; and
      2.   Complete forty eight (48) hours, but not more than ninety six (96)
hours of community services cleaning up, removing, and repairing property
damaged by graffiti for each subsequent conviction.
   B.   Any minor violating any provision of this chapter or any state law
pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement who is found to
be a person described in Welfare and Institutions Code section 602 by reason of
the commission of vandalism, may be required to perform community service time
pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 742.16. For any minor
adjudicated guilty of vandalism, the city will petition the juvenile court and
the court may, in addition to any other penalties imposed by the city, require
the unemancipated minor to provide the necessary labor to clean up, repair, or
replace defaced, damaged or destroyed property, or otherwise make restitution
to the property owner.
   C.   If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine levied for violating
any provision of this section or is otherwise unable to make restitution for
damages, the minor's parent or legal guardian is liable for payment of the fine
or restitution. If the parent or legal guardian cannot make restitution, the
sentencing court may waive payment of the fine or community service time by the
parent or legal guardian upon finding good cause. If the sentencing court
waives payment of the fine by the parent or legal guardian, the city will
petition the sentencing court, and the court, at the court's option, may order
the parent or legal guardian to provide the necessary labor, equal to the
number of hours assigned to the minor adjudicated guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter, to clean up, repair, or replace property damaged by
the unemancipated minor. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-14: SUSPENSION OR DELAY OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES:
For each conviction of a person aged thirteen (13) to twenty one (21) for
violating this chapter, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property
with a graffiti implement, the city may petition the sentencing court to
suspend driving privileges or delay the issuance of driving privileges in
accordance with Vehicle Code section 13202.6. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-15: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is otherwise provided is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person failing to remove graffiti within the prescribed time period
is guilty of an infraction and may be punished with a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a first conviction, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
the second conviction, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent
violation. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7: NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
7-1-7-1: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
All or any part of a use or the condition of any property, including, without
limitation, any use, or improvement, found to constitute a public nuisance,
will be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, cessation of use or a
combination thereof, or in such other manner as designated in a nuisance
abatement order, which is reasonably required to abate the public nuisance,
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ABATEMENT:
Whenever the city manager, or designee, reasonably believes a public nuisance
exists, the city manager, or designee, may commence abatement proceedings under
this section. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-3: NOTICE OF HEARINGS FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
   A.   Notices: To initiate abatement proceedings, the city manager, or
designee, will cause written notice to be mailed and conspicuously posted on
the property containing a nuisance. Notice will be titled in letters at least
one inch (1") in height and read substantially as follows:
   Notice of Public Nuisance Hearing
On                  , 20      , the City of El Segundo will determine whether
this property known and designated as                 , constitutes a public
nuisance. If this property is found to constitute a public nuisance as defined
by the El Segundo Municipal Code ("ESMC"), and if the public nuisance is not
promptly abated by the responsible person as ordered by the hearing officer,
then the City will abate the nuisance. If the City abates the nuisance, the
cost of these proceedings, all previous code enforcement efforts concerning
this condition of the property, and the cleaning, clearing, rehabilitation,
repair, or demolition by the City will constitute a special assessment and a
Nuisance Abatement Lien upon such land until paid. The City may foreclose on
any such lien in order to reimburse the City for these costs.
The alleged violations consist of the following:
The methods of abatement available are:
All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters should attend
a hearing to be conducted by the City Manager or designee, to be held at
                      on                     ,                      at the hour
of          .m., when their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due
consideration.
   Dated:
                                
Department Officer
   B.   Mailing/Posting: Notice of the hearing will be served by posting the
subject property and by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid)
addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last
equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current
before the hearing notice is mailed. The notice will be posted on the property
and mailed at least ten (10) days before the hearing date. Proof of posting and
mailing will be by declaration. Failure of any person to receive the notice
will not affect the validity of any provision set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-4: HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   The hearing must be conducted by a hearing officer selected by the city
manager. At the time set for such hearing, the hearing officer will conduct a
hearing to determine, based upon the evidence presented, whether a public
nuisance exists on the subject property. At the hearing, the hearing officer
will accept reliable evidence from any person if such evidence bears on the
issue of whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. The hearing
officer is authorized to take testimony and is authorized to administer oaths
or affirmations under the Code of Civil Procedure section 2093(a). Based upon
the evidence submitted including, without limitation, any written staff reports
regarding the alleged nuisance, the hearing officer will determine whether or
not a public nuisance exists on the subject property.
   B.   As soon as is practicable following the close of such hearing, the
hearing officer will render a decision on the matter. If a public nuisance is
found to exist, the hearing officer will issue an order requiring the abatement
of the public nuisance in a reasonable time and manner as set forth in the
order. The hearing officer will promptly give written notice to the responsible
person and any other interested person who requests, in writing, notice of such
decision, including, a copy of the order. The order issued by the hearing
officer will be deemed a final order and may be judicially reviewed pursuant to
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. There is no right to a city council
appeal. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-5: COMPLIANCE WITH ABATEMENT ORDER:
At no cost to the city, the responsible person will comply with all of the
provisions of an abatement order. If the responsible person fails, for any
reason, to comply with an abatement order within the time required in the
order, the city manager, or designee, will cause the nuisance described in the
abatement order to be abated by city forces or by private contractor. The city
attorney is authorized to take such action as needed to gain entry upon the
property where the public nuisance exists for purposes of abating a public
nuisance. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-6: CITY EXPENSES; RECORD OF COSTS:
The department director or designee will keep an account of the costs,
including incidental expenses, of abating nuisance on each separate lot or
parcel of land where the work is done. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-7: HEARING ON THE COST OF ABATEMENT:
   A.   The department director or designee will give notice of the cost of
abatement by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to
the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized
assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before
mailing of the cost notice. The cost notice will include a statement of the
hearing rights of the property owner concerning the cost of abatement. Upon
written request for a hearing by the property owner received by the city
manager within ten (10) days after mailing the cost notice, a hearing will be
held by the city manager, or designee, on the question of the cost of the
abatement.
   B.   Notice of the hearing will be mailed at least ten (10) days before the
hearing by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land. The city
manager or designee will either confirm the cost of abatement or modify such
amount. The decision of the city manager or designee is final. The city manager
or designee will give notice of the decision on the cost of abatement by
registered or certified mail to the property owner. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-8: NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Lien: Pursuant to Government Code sections 38773, 38773.1, and 38773.5,
and any successor statutes, persons failing to abate a public nuisance as
ordered pursuant to this chapter, will be obligated to pay all city expenses of
abating the nuisance and all administrative costs associated therewith. A
nuisance abatement lien in favor of the city for such expenses of the city will
be created and recorded, pursuant to this section, against the property on
which the nuisance is maintained. The lien will specify the amount of the lien,
the name of the city, the date of the abatement order, the street address,
legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien
is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.
   B.   Notice Of Proposed Recordings: Notice will be sent by certified mail at
least ten (10) days before recording the lien, an itemized notice of the lien
amount and proposed recording will be sent by certified mail to the property
owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance was abated by the
city, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll,
whichever is more current before recordation of the lien. The notice will be
served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with
Code of Civil Procedure section 415.10, et seq. If the owner of record, after
diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days,
and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the
county in which the property is located.
   C.   Recording: The city's nuisance abatement lien will then be recorded in
the Los Angeles County recorder's office, and from the date of recording, will
have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.
   D.   Special Assessment: The city's total costs described in this section
may also be collected as a special assessment against the lot or parcel on
which the nuisance existed. After recordation of the nuisance abatement lien
the city may provide a copy of the notice of proposed recordation, proof of
service, and the recorded lien to the tax collector and the tax collector will
add the described special assessment payments to the next regular tax bill
levied against the respective lots or parcels and the amounts will be collected
and subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and
sale as in the case of tax delinquencies. However, if any real property to
which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona
fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has
been created and attached thereon, before the date on which the first
installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement
will not result in a lien against the real property but instead will be
transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   E.   Satisfaction: In the event that the lien or special assessment is
discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, a
notice of the discharge containing the information specified in the lien will
be recorded by the city.
   F.   Fees: Any fees incurred by the city for processing, recording of the
lien and providing notice to the property owner may be recovered by the city as
part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-9: ORDER FOR TREBLE COSTS OF ABATEMENT:
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two
(2) year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a
condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except conditions
abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code section 17980, the court may order
the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-10: JUDICIAL REMEDIES:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter will be deemed to prevent the city attorney
from:
      1.   Commencing a civil action in the superior court to enforce all or
any of the provisions of any abatement order;
      2.   Commencing a civil action to abate a public nuisance as an
alternative to or in conjunction with an administrative proceeding pursuant to
this chapter;
      3.   Filing a civil action to recover the amount of a confirmed
accounting from an owner or occupant of the lot to which it relates; or
      4.   Filing a criminal action to enforce this code.
   B.   Where a civil action is filed, if the court issues an order or a
judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist, and orders or approves the
abatement of the public nuisance, or where the court validates an accounting,
the court will also award the city its actual costs of abatement, including,
without limitation, reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city in such
judicial proceeding. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-11: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever the city manager, or
designee, determines that a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, or in
any other applicable law, exists upon a lot, and that such public nuisance
constitutes an immediate threat or hazard or danger to persons or property, the
city manager, without observing procedures set forth in this chapter with
reference to public nuisance abatement, will forthwith immediately cause the
abatement of such public nuisance in such manner as the city manager, or
designee, determines is reasonably required. If the city manager, or designee,
deems it feasible, the city manager, or designee, will attempt to give the
owner and occupant, verbal notice of the existence of the public nuisance, and
the proposed timing and method of abatement thereof. The city manager will,
forthwith, report such circumstances to the city council. Where such abatement
is ordered by the city manager, person abating such nuisance will, after
completing the abatement of the public nuisance, comply with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
CHAPTER 2
NOISE AND VIBRATION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Declaration Of Policy
7-2-2: Definitions
7-2-3: Sound Level Measurement Criteria
7-2-4: Noise Standards
7-2-5: Noise Level Measurement
7-2-6: Loud, Unusual And Unnecessary Noises Prohibited
7-2-7: Standards; Criteria
7-2-8: Specific Prohibitions
7-2-9: Vibration
7-2-10: Exemptions
7-2-11: Permits
7-2-12: Enforcement
7-2-13: Immediate Threats To Health And Welfare
7-2-14: Use Of Police At Parties; Second Response (Rep. by Ord. 1568, 6-19-
2018)
7-2-15: Penalty; Additional Remedy
7-2-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit unnecessary,
excessive and annoying noises and vibrations from all sources subject to its
police power. Therefore, the City Council does ordain and declare that
creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, caused or maintained,
any noise or vibration in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance as well as an infraction and
shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the
words and phrases used are defined as follows:
   "A" WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (dBA): The total sound level in decibels of all
sound as measured with a sound level meter with a reference pressure of twenty
(20) micro-pascals using the "A" weighted network scale at slow response. The
unit of measurement shall be defined as dBA.
   AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL: The all-encompassing noise level associated with a
given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the location
and approximate time at which a comparison with an intrusive noise is to be
made.
   CONSTRUCTION: Any site preparation, grading, demolition, assembly, erection,
repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-
way, structures, utilities or similar property.
   DECIBEL (dB): A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty
(20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micro-pascals.
   EMERGENCY MACHINERY, VEHICLE, WORK OR ALARM: Any machinery, vehicle, work or
alarm used, employed, performed or operated in an effort to protect, provide or
restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by
private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
   FIXED NOISE SOURCE: A stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or
motionless including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial
and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air
conditioners and refrigeration equipment.
   IMPULSIVE NOISE: A noise of short duration usually less than one second and
of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and end.
   INTRUSIVE NOISE LEVEL: The total sound level, in decibels (dBA), created,
caused, maintained or originating from an alleged offensive source measured at
a specific location while the alleged offensive source is in operation.
   NOISE: Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans of normal sensitivity or
which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect
on humans of normal sensitivity.
   NOISE CONTROL OFFICER: The Director of Community Development.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A parcel of real property which is developed and used
either in part or in whole for residential purposes.
   SOUND AMPLIFICATION EQUIPMENT: Any device which produces, reproduces, or
amplifies sound.
   SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument meeting American National Standard
Institute's Standard S1-4-1971 or most recent revision thereof for type 1 or
type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and
analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.
   VIBRATION: Mechanical motion of the earth or ground, building, or other type
of structure induced by the operation of any mechanical device or equipment.
(Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord.
1648, 6-21-2023)
7-2-3: SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT CRITERIA:
Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighted scale at slow
response for continuous sound levels or at fast response for impulsive sounds.
(Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-4: NOISE STANDARDS:
No person shall, at any location within the City, create any noise, nor shall
any person allow the creation of any noise within the person's control on
public or private property (hereinafter "noise source"), which causes the noise
level when measured on any other property (hereinafter "receptor property"), to
exceed the applicable noise standard, except as set forth in subsection C1 of
this section.
   A.   Residential Property: Five (5) dBA above the ambient noise level.
   B.   Commercial And Industrial Property: Eight (8) dBA above the ambient
noise level.
   C.   Adjustments:
      1.   Increases to the noise standards as set forth in subsections A and B
of this Section may be permitted in accordance with the following:
   NOISE STANDARDS ADJUSTMENTS
   Permitted   Duration of
   Increase   Increase
   (dBA)      (minutes)*
   0      30
   5      15
   10      5
   15      1
   20   l   ess than 1
* Cumulative minutes during any one hour.
      2.   If the receptor property is located on a boundary between two (2)
different noise zones, the lower noise level standard applicable to the quieter
zone shall apply. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-5: NOISE LEVEL MEASUREMENT:
The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point
on the receptor property, and at least four feet (4') above the ground and five
feet (5') from the nearest structure or wall. Interior noise measurements shall
be made within the receptor residential unit. The measurements shall be made at
a point at least four feet (4') from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the
noise source with windows and doors in a closed position. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-
1996)
7-2-6: LOUD, UNUSUAL AND UNNECESSARY NOISES PROHIBITED:
Consistent with other provisions of this Chapter, and in addition thereto, it
shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make, produce, suffer or allow to
be produced by human voice, machine, animal, or device, or any combination of
same, any loud, unusual, or unnecessary noise which disturbs the peace, quiet,
and comfort of any neighborhood, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any
reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-7: STANDARDS; CRITERIA:
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of
the provisions of Section
7-2-6 of this Chapter exists shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following criteria:
   A.   The frequency of the noise;
   B.   The intensity of the noise;
   C.   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
   D.   The ambient noise level;
   E.   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
   F.   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
   G.   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;
   H.   The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
   I.   The duration of the noise;
   J.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and
   K.   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-8: SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
The following acts, and the causing thereof, are declared to be in violation of
this Chapter if they occur in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area;
and occur:
   A.   Between The Hours Of 10:00 P.M. And 7:00 A.M:
      1.   Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any
radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or
similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound.
      2.   Using or operating any loudspeaker, public address system or similar
device.
      3.   Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes,
crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects.
      4.   Repairing, building, rebuilding, adjusting or testing any motor
vehicle.
   B.   Between The Hours Of 8:00 P.M. And 7:00 A.M:
      1.   Refuse Collection Vehicles:
         a.   Collection of refuse with a collection vehicle in a residential
area or within five hundred feet (500') thereof;
         b.   Operation or permitting the operation of the compacting mechanism
of any motor vehicle which compacts refuse in a residential area or within five
hundred feet (500') thereof.
      2.   Loudspeakers/Public Address Systems: Using or operating for any
commercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device on
a public right of way or public space.
      3.   Powered Model: Operating or permitting the operation of powered
models. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-9: VIBRATION:
Notwithstanding other sections of this Chapter, a person shall not create,
maintain or cause any ground vibration which is perceptible, without the use of
instruments, to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity at any point on any
affected property. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-10: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this Chapter:
   A.   School And Park Facilities: Authorized activities conducted on public
school grounds and City park facilities, associated with normal operation of
the facilities including, but not limited to, school and public athletic and
entertainment events.
   B.   Mechanical Or Electronic Devices: Any mechanical or electronic device,
apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery,
vehicle, work or warning alarm or bell, provided the sounding of any bell or
alarm on any building or motor vehicle shall terminate its operation within
fifteen (15) minutes of its activation.
   C.   Public Speaking Or Assemblies: Noncommercial public speaking and public
assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right of way
without the use of sound amplification equipment.
   D.   Construction Noise: Noise sources associated with or vibration created
by construction, repair, or remodeling of any real property, provided said
activities do not take place between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or
a Federal holiday, and provided the noise level created by such activities does
not exceed the noise standard of sixty five (65) dBA plus the limits specified
in subsection
7-2-4C of this Chapter as measured on the receptor residential property line
and provided any vibration created does not endanger the public health, welfare
and safety.
   E.   Real Property Maintenance: Noise sources associated with the
maintenance of real property, provided said activities take place between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on any day
except Sunday, or between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. on Sunday.
   F.   Activities Preempted By State Or Federal Law: Any activity to the
extent regulation thereof has been preempted by State or Federal law,
including, but not limited to, aircraft, motor vehicles, railroads and other
interstate carriers. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-11: PERMITS:
   A.   Circumstances For Issuance: The noise control officer may grant
amplified sound or noise permits to applicants who cannot comply with the
requirements of this Chapter if the applicant can show that compliance with
this Chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the
community as a whole, or on other individuals, or that compliance would be
impractical. If the noise control officer determines that sufficient
controversy may exist regarding an application, the application shall be
referred to the City Council. A permit shall not be granted to waive compliance
with Section
7-2-15 of this Chapter.
   B.   Determination: In determining whether to grant or deny the application,
the noise control officer shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the
community as a whole, and other individuals, of not granting the permit against
the adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of persons affected; the
adverse impact on property affected; and any other adverse impacts of granting
the permit. Applicants for permits may be required to submit any information
the noise control officer may reasonably require. The noise control officer
shall retain on public file a copy of the decision which shall include a
statement of the reason for the decision.
   C.   Granting Of Permit; Conditions: Permits shall be granted by written
notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time
limit on the permitted activity. The time limit shall be for a maximum time
period not to exceed one year. The permit shall not become effective until the
applicant agrees to all conditions. In the case of noncompliance with any
condition imposed, the permit shall immediately terminate, and the noise source
shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
   D.   Application For Change Of Conditions: Application for extension of time
limits specified in subsection C of this Section or for modification of other
substantial conditions shall be treated as an initial application for a permit.
   E.   Guidelines: The noise control officer may issue guidelines defining the
procedures to be followed in applying for a permit.
   F.   Activities Requiring Permit: Unless otherwise specifically exempted by
this Chapter, permits shall be required for all exterior activities which
utilize amplified sound; such as, but not limited to, outdoor gatherings,
dances, shows, performances or carnivals.
   G.   Appeal: An appeal of the decision of the noise control officer with
respect to any amplified sound or noise permit may be made to the City Council
in writing within ten (10) days after the action of the noise control officer
has been communicated to the applicant. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-12: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Responsible Official: The noise control officer is directed to enforce
the provisions of this Chapter. During times the noise control officer is not
on duty, enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police.
   B.   Interference: No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any
authorized person charged with the enforcement of this Chapter while such
person is engaged in the performance of his duty. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-13: IMMEDIATE THREATS TO HEALTH AND WELFARE:
   A.   Order Immediate Halt: The noise control officer may order an immediate
halt to any sound which exposes any person to continuous sound levels in excess
of those shown in Table A in subsection D of this Section, or impulsive sounds
in excess of Table B in subsection D of this Section. Within two (2) working
days following issuance of such an order, the noise control officer shall apply
to the appropriate court for an injunction to replace the order.
   B.   Exceptions To Issuance Of Order: No order pursuant to subsection A of
this Section shall be issued if the only persons exposed to sound levels in
excess of those listed in Tables A and B of subsection D of this Section are
exposed as a result of:
      1.   Trespass;
      2.   Invitation upon private property by the person causing or permitting
the sound; or
      3.   Employment by the person or a contractor of the person causing or
permitting the sound.
   C.   Remedial Action: Any person subject to an order issued by the Noise
Control Officer pursuant to this section shall comply with such order until:
      1.   The sound is brought into a compliance with the order, as determined
by the Noise Control Officer; or
      2.   A judicial order has superseded the Noise Control Officer order.
   D.   Prohibited Sound Level: The sound levels which pose an immediate threat
to health and welfare are:
TABLE A CONTINUOUS SOUND LEVELS
(Measured At 50 Feet Or 15 Meters)
 
Sound Level Limit (dBA) Duration
90                      8 hours
95                      4 hours
100                     2 hours
105                     1 hour
110                     30 minutes
 
TABLE B IMPULSIVE SOUND LEVELS
(Measured At 50 Feet Or 15 Meters)
 
Sound Level Limit (dB) Number Of Repetitions Per 24-Hour Period
145                    1
135                    10
125                    100
 
(Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-14: USE OF POLICE AT PARTIES; SECOND RESPONSE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
7-2-15: PENALTY; ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
   A.   Violation; Penalty; Infraction:
      1.   Any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of this
chapter is punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation.
      2.   Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense if, after
receiving a written warning or infraction citation, the person commits or
continues to commit a violation of this chapter.
      3.   If a person is found to be in violation of this chapter, the Noise
Control Officer shall issue a written warning of the violation. If the person
continues to be in violation of this chapter, the Noise Control Officer shall
issue an infraction citation. Every violation within a thirty (30) day period
after the first written warning is issued shall be considered an infraction.
   B.   Public Nuisance: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this
section, as an additional remedy, any violation of the provisions of this
chapter, which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal
sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of
residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public
nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily in the manner provided in
chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
CHAPTER 3
DUST AND PARTICULATE MATTER
SECTION:
7-3-1: Declaration Of Policy
7-3-2: Specific Prohibitions
7-3-3: Exceptions; City Permit
7-3-4: Enforcement
7-3-5: Penalty
7-3-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit unnecessary and
excessive emission of dust and particulate matter from all sources subject to
its police power. Therefore, the City Council does ordain and declare that
creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, maintained, or
caused, any emissions of dust or particulate matter in a manner prohibited by
or not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, is a public nuisance
and shall be punished as such. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992)
7-3-2: SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Dust Emissions: A person shall not create, maintain or cause or allow
to be created, maintained or caused, the emissions of dust or particulate
matter from any transport, handling, construction, demolition, excavation,
grading, clearing of land, or storage activity so that the presence of such
dust or particulate matter remains visible in the atmosphere beyond the
property line of the emission source.
   B.   Exclusions: A person or entity shall not be found in violation of
subsection A of this Section if that person or entity has taken every
reasonable precaution to minimize the dust or particulate matter emissions
resulting from its activity. Reasonable precautions include, but are not
limited to, the following: site watering; soil binders; street sweeping;
organic control erosion mats; covering loose soil; sloping and bracing
excavation sites to minimize erosion; and establishing ground cover. (Ord.
1184, 9-1-1992)
7-3-3: EXCEPTIONS; CITY PERMIT:
The City Council reserves the right to exempt certain activities which require
a City permit from the regulations under this Chapter. The exemption under this
Section must appear on the permit. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992)
7-3-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Responsible Official: The City Manager, or his designee, is directed to
enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Interference: No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any
authorized person charged with the enforcement of this Chapter while such
person is engaged in the performance of his duty. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992)
7-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992; amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Standards Of Property Maintenance
7-4-2: Public Nuisance Defined
7-4-3: Enforcement
7-4-1: STANDARDS OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
All land and structures shall be properly maintained in such a manner as to
not: a) depreciate aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties; b)
create a visual eyesore; or c) constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1149, 2-6-
1990)
7-4-2: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
It is a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having
charge of any premises in the City to maintain such premises in such a manner
that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:
   A.   Land Excavations, Grading: Land, the topography, geology or
configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading
operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence or surface water
drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious to the public health,
safety and welfare, or to adjacent properties.
   B.   Abandoned Buildings: Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed
or permitted to remain unreasonably in a state of partial construction.
   C.   Openings In Vacant Structures: The failure to close, by such means as
are acceptable to the City Manager, all doorways, windows and other openings
into vacant structures.
   D.   Unpainted Buildings: Unpainted buildings causing dry rot, warping and
lack of weather protection.
   E.   Broken Windows: Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and
inviting trespassers and malicious mischief; or constituting a harbor for
vagrants, criminal or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort
thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
   F.   Overgrown Vegetation:
      1.   Likely to harbor rats, vermin and other nuisances; or
      2.   Having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of
surrounding property.
   G.   Diseased Trees; Weeds: Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees,
weeds and other vegetation:
      1.   Dangerous to public safety and public welfare; or
      2.   Having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of
surrounding property.
   H.   Abandoned Vehicles, Trailers: The accumulation and storage, for
unreasonable periods of time, of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
automobiles, trailers, campers, boats, and other mobile equipment, in yard
areas.
   I.   Attractive Nuisances: Attractive nuisances dangerous to children in the
form of:
      1.   Abandoned and broken equipment;
      2.   Unprotected and/or hazardous pools, ponds and excavations; or
      3.   Neglected machinery.
   J.   Furniture And Household Equipment: Broken or discarded furniture and
household equipment on the premises for unreasonable periods, and having a
tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding
property.
   K.   Trash And Debris: Packing boxes, lumber, trash, dirt and other debris
either inside or outside buildings and visible from public streets or from the
sight of neighboring properties for unreasonable periods, and having a tendency
to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding property.
   L.   Commercial Buildings: The accumulation of dirt, litter or debris in
vestibules, doorways or the adjoining sidewalks of commercial or industrial
buildings.
   M.   Deteriorated Structure: The maintenance of any structure in a state of
substantial deterioration, such as peeling paint on a facade, broken windows,
roofs in disrepair, damaged porches or broken steps, or other such
deterioration or disrepair not otherwise constituting a violation and which is
viewable from the sight of neighboring properties, where such condition would
have a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding
property.
   N.   Landscaped Areas; Open Spaces: The substantial lack of maintenance and
landscaped areas, including the lack of cultivation, irrigation, fertilizing,
trimming of trees, and lawns, shrubs, vines and any other ground cover and the
lack of maintenance of nonlandscaped areas, where the areas are to be
maintained are viewable by the public from a public right of way or viewable
from the sight of neighboring properties, and where such conditions would have
a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding
properties.
   O.   Conditions Constituting Public Nuisances: Maintenance of premises in
such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general
welfare, or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by
California Civil Code section 3480.
   P.   Cause Depreciated Values: Property maintained (in relation to others)
so as to establish a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments and
social and economic maladjustments to such an extent that the capacity to pay
taxes is reduced and tax receipts from such particular area are inadequate for
the cost of public services rendered therein. (Ord. 1149, 2-6-1990; amd. Ord.
1290, 12-15-1998)
7-4-3: ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever the City Manager, or his duly authorized representative, determines
that any premises within the City is maintained contrary to one or more of the
provisions of this Section, then he or she shall institute the abatement
proceedings in accordance with adopted enforcement procedures. (Ord. 1149, 2-6-
1990)
CHAPTER 5
DAYTIME CURFEW
SECTION:
7-5-1: Purpose
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Offenses
7-5-4: Defenses
7-5-5: Enforcement
7-5-6: Penalties
7-5-7: Cost Recovery
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
This daytime curfew is established pursuant to the city's police powers for the
purpose of preserving and promoting the public health safety and welfare and,
in particular, to protect minors. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the terms used in this chapter
will be defined as follows:
   CURFEW HOURS: Eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. until one thirty o'clock (1:
30) P.M. Monday through Friday.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, without limitation, a fire,
a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, without limitation, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, without limitation to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN: To linger or stay or fail to leave premises when requested to do so
by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
stepparent of a minor; or at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by
a minor's parent or guardian to have the care and custody of that minor.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-
2001)
7-5-3: OFFENSES:
It is unlawful for a minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of
any establishment within the city during daytime curfew hours. (Ord. 1342, 11-
20-2001)
7-5-4: DEFENSES:
It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a minor was:
   A.   Accompanied by a responsible person;
   B.   On an errand at the direction of a responsible person, without any
detour or stop;
   C.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   D.   Involved in an emergency;
   E.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of El Segundo, a civic or
religious organization, or another similar entity, which takes responsibility
for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop,
such supervised activity;
   F.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right to peaceably assemble;
   G.   Emancipated pursuant to law;
   H.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   I.   Allowed to leave campus for lunch or a school related activity and has
in his/her possession a valid, school issued, off campus permit or is
supervised by school personnel;
   J.   Accompanied by a responsible person or has in his/her possession a
written excuse from a responsible person, which provides a reasonable
explanation for the minor's absence from school;
   K.   Not subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation
education pursuant to the California Education Code or when the minor is
authorized to be absent from his or her school pursuant to the provisions of
California Education Code section 48205, or any other applicable state or
federal law; or
   L.   Not in school because the minor's school is not in session. This
defense is not applicable if the minor remains in the public areas in the
immediate vicinity of another school that is in session. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-
2001)
7-5-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer will
ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or
establishment. The officer will not issue a citation under this section unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in this chapter exists. (Ord.
1342, 11-20-2001)
7-5-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Each violation of this chapter will constitute a separate offense and
will be an infraction. Police officers will be authorized to issue a citation
for the offender to appear in a juvenile traffic court of competent
jurisdiction, issue a notice to appear in court pursuant to California Welfare
and Institutions Code section 256, or to file a juvenile application for a
petition to be filed under section 601 or 602 of the California Welfare and
Institutions Code, at the police officer's discretion.
   B.   A minor cited for an infraction under this chapter must attend a court
hearing on the infraction and must be accompanied at the hearing by a
responsible person(s). If a responsible person(s) fails to attend the hearing
with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served,
the court will continue the hearing and will issue a citation to the
responsible person(s) directing said person(s) to appear at the continued
hearing with the minor.
   C.   Persons convicted of violating this chapter may be fined one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first offense within a one year period; two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within a one year period; and five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense within a one year period.
Persons convicted may, in addition or alternatively, be required to perform
community service for a total time not to exceed ten (10) hours over a period
not to exceed thirty (30) days, during times other than his or her hours of
compulsory school attendance or employment. The court may continue the
imposition of the sentence described herein and if, after sixty (60) days, the
minor has had no unexcused absences from school during that period, and the
minor produces proof of that fact to the court, the court will cause the
imposition of the sentence to be set aside.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, if the city council
adopts a resolution to implement cost recovery in accordance with this chapter,
the police officer will issue a warning citation for a minor's first violation
of this chapter in accordance with California Welfare and Institutions Code
section 625.5 and any provisions of that city council resolution. Warning
citations issued in accordance with this subsection will not be counted as a
violation of this chapter for the purpose of determining the amount of fines
for infraction violations. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
7-5-7: COST RECOVERY:
A minor who violates this chapter and the responsible person(s) of such a
minor, will be jointly and severally liable for the costs of the law
enforcement services as provided in Welfare and Institutions Code section
625.5. Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 625.5, this section
will be implemented by city council resolution. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
CHAPTER 5A
NIGHTTIME CURFEW
SECTION:
7-5A-1: Purpose
7-5A-2: Definitions
7-5A-3: Offenses
7-5A-4: Defenses
7-5A-5: Enforcement
7-5A-6: Penalties
7-5A-7: Cost Recovery
7-5A-1: PURPOSE:
This nighttime curfew is established pursuant to the city's police powers for
the purpose of preserving and promoting the public health, safety and welfare
and, in particular, to protect minors. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
7-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the terms used in this chapter
will be defined as follows:
   CURFEW HOURS: Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until sunrise of the following day.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, without limitation, a fire,
a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, without limitation, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, without limitation to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN: To linger or stay or fail to leave premises when requested to do so
by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
stepparent of a minor; or at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by
a minor's parent or guardian to have the care and custody of that minor.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-
2001)
7-5A-3: OFFENSES:
It is unlawful for a minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of
any establishment within the city during nighttime curfew hours. (Ord. 1343,
11-20-2001)
7-5A-4: DEFENSES:
It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a minor was:
   A.   Accompanied by a responsible person;
   B.   On an errand at the direction of a responsible person, without any
detour or stop;
   C.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   D.   Involved in an emergency;
   E.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if that neighbor or other neighborhood
resident did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
   F.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of El Segundo, a civic or
religious organization, or another similar entity, which takes responsibility
for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop,
such supervised activity;
   G.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right to peaceably assemble;
   H.   Emancipated pursuant to law; or
   I.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-
2001)
7-5A-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer will
ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or
establishment. The officer will not issue a citation under this section unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in this chapter exists. (Ord.
1343, 11-20-2001)
7-5A-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Each violation of this chapter will constitute a separate offense and
will be an infraction. Police officers will be authorized to issue a citation
for an offender to appear in a juvenile traffic court of competent
jurisdiction, issue a notice to appear in court pursuant to California Welfare
and Institutions Code section 256, or to file a juvenile application for a
petition to be filed under section 601 or 602 of the California Welfare and
Institutions Code, at the police officer's discretion.
   B.   A minor cited for an infraction under this chapter must attend a court
hearing on the infraction and must be accompanied at the hearing by a
responsible person(s). If a responsible person(s) fails to attend the hearing
with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served,
the court will continue the hearing and will issue a citation the responsible
person(s) directing said person(s) to appear at the continued hearing with the
minor.
   C.   Persons convicted of violating this chapter may be fined one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first offense within a one year period; two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within a one year period; and five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense within a one year period.
Persons convicted may, in addition or alternatively, be required to perform
community service for a total time not to exceed ten (10) hours over a period
not to exceed thirty (30) days, during times other than his or her hours of
compulsory school attendance or employment. The court may continue the
imposition of the sentence described herein and if, after sixty (60) days, the
minor has had no unexcused absences from school during that period, and the
minor produces proof of that fact to the court, the court will cause the
imposition of the sentence to be set aside.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, if the city council
adopts a resolution to implement cost recovery in accordance with this chapter,
the police officer will issue a warning citation for a minor's first violation
of this chapter, in accordance with California Welfare and Institutions Code
section 625.5 and any provisions of that city council resolution. Warning
citations issued in accordance with this subsection will not be counted as a
violation of this chapter for the purpose of determining the amount of fines
for infraction violations. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
7-5A-7: COST RECOVERY:
A minor who violates this chapter and the responsible person(s) of such a
minor, will be jointly and severally liable for the costs of the law
enforcement services as provided in Welfare and Institutions Code section
625.5. Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 625.5, this section
will be implemented by city council resolution. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Use Of Vehicles For Human Habitation
7-6-2: Gambling
7-6-3: Trespassing
7-6-4: Weapons
7-6-5: Merchandise, Food, Or Personal Property On Streets Or Sidewalks
7-6-6: Dances, Games And Exhibitions In Street
7-6-7: Cemeteries Prohibited
7-6-8: Consumption Or Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages
7-6-1: USE OF VEHICLES FOR HUMAN HABITATION:
   A.   Mobile Home, Campers: No person shall use or occupy or permit the use
or occupancy of any mobile home, camper, house trailer or other recreational
vehicle for human habitation, including, but not limited to, sleeping, eating
or resting, on any public property, such as a street, park, beach, square,
avenue, alley, public parking lot or public way, within the city between the
hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
   B.   Motor Vehicles: No person shall use or occupy or permit the use or
occupancy of any motor vehicle for human habitation, including, but not limited
to, sleeping, eating or resting, on any public property, such as a street,
park, beach, square, avenue, alley, parking lot or public way, within the city,
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. For
purposes of this section, “motor vehicle” shall mean any self propelled vehicle
other than a house car, camper or trailer coach. For purposes of this section
“habitation” shall mean the use of a motor vehicle for a dwelling place, and
shall not mean the use of a motor vehicle for amelioration of sickness or other
temporary physical inabilities causing an inability to operate such a motor
vehicle. (Ord. 1261, 10-1-1996; amd. Ord. 1664, 9-17-2024)
7-6-2: GAMBLING:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Any machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game,
ticket, chance, share, interest, instrument or article operated, used, kept,
possessed, placed or maintained in violation of the provisions of:
      1.   Section 330a of the California Penal Code; or
      2.   Any section enumerated in part I, title 9, chapter 9 of the
California Penal Code; is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject
to abatement. (Ord. 762, 3-22-1971)
   B.   Destruction Of Nuisance:
      1.   Any article declared by subsection A of this section to be a
nuisance, as a result of the operation, use, keeping, possession, placing or
maintaining of which any person has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to
any violation of any law of this state or of any ordinance of the city, shall
be destroyed by the chief of police, after the plea or after judgment of
conviction becomes final. The contents of the machine shall be destroyed, or if
money, shall be deposited in the general fund of the treasury of the city.
      2.   If the articles subject to destruction as herein provided are in the
custody of the municipal court of the Inglewood judicial district, the chief of
police shall cause to be made an application to the judge of the court for an
order releasing the articles to him for the purpose of complying with this
subsection; provided, however, that this subsection shall not limit the power
of the chief of police to abate the articles as public nuisances. (Ord. 514, 1-
13-1958)
   C.   Gambling For Money Or Merchandise: It is unlawful for any person,
either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, to keep, conduct or maintain
within the city, any house, room, apartment or place used in whole or in part
as a place where any game, not mentioned in section 330 or section 330a of the
state Penal Code is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice,
billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other devices for money, checks, chips,
credit or other representative of value or for any merchandise or any other
thing of value; provided, however, that it shall be lawful to maintain a
pinball machine or marble game which awards free plays if and only if such free
play may not be exchanged for money, checks, chips, credit or other
representative of value, or for any merchandise or for any other thing of value
except free replays.
   D.   Use Of House, Room: It is unlawful for any person, either as principal,
agent, employee or otherwise, knowingly to permit any house, room, apartment or
place owned by him or under his charge or control in the city to be used in
whole or in part for playing, conducting, dealing or carrying on therein any
game not mentioned in section 330 or in section 330a of the state Penal Code
with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other devices for money,
checks, chips, credit or any other representative of value or for any
merchandise or any other thing of value; provided, however, that it shall be
lawful to permit the playing of pinball machines or marble games which award
free games if and only if such free play may not be exchanged for money,
checks, chips, credit or other representative of value, or for any merchandise
or for any other thing of value except free replays.
   E.   Playing Or Betting: It is unlawful for any person to play or bet at or
against any game not mentioned in section 330 or section 330a of the state
Penal Code which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice,
billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other devices for money, checks, chips,
credit or any other representative of value or for any merchandise or any other
thing of value; provided, however, that it shall be lawful to play any pinball
or marble machine which provides free games if and only if such free play may
not be exchanged for money, checks, chips, credit or other representative of
value, or for any merchandise or for any other thing of value except free
replays. (Ord. 762, 3-22-1971)
   F.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-2-1 of this code. (Ord. 514, 1-13-1958; amd. 2000 Code)
7-6-3: TRESPASSING:
   A.   Prohibited; Exceptions: It is unlawful for any person to trespass in,
upon, on or across the property of another without permission of the person in
charge or control thereof; provided, that the person in charge or control of
the property has complied with the provisions of subsection B of this section.
   B.   Property Posting Required: Any person in charge or control of property
shall post, or cause to be posted, at each of the corners of the property a
sign constructed of metal or wood, or other material equally substantial, which
sign shall be at least one square foot in area and shall be placed not less
than three feet (3') nor more than six feet (6') above the normal level of the
ground at the location thereof. Upon the sign there shall be placed a notice in
writing or printing, in legible letters at least two inches (2") in height, the
words "Private Property - No Trespassing" and such other words as may be
desired, if any, indicating that trespassers are subject to prosecution. Each
such sign shall have either a white or black base, and in the event the white
base is used, the letters shall be in black, and if a black base is used, the
letters shall be in white; provided, that in the event the property exceeds a
total area of one acre, that in addition to the posting of the notice at the
corners thereof, similar signs shall be posted at intervals of not to exceed
three hundred feet (300') on or near the boundary lines of the property.
   C.   Peace Officer Exemption: The provisions of subsection A of this section
shall have no application to a trespass committed by any officially authorized
peace officer or law enforcement agent, when the trespass is committed in the
execution of the officer's or agent's official duty, nor to any person visiting
or calling at the residence or place of business of another person for a
legitimate social reason, or for the purpose of transacting any legitimate
business. (Ord. 231, 6-12-1940)
7-6-4: WEAPONS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to discharge or use any
pistol, shotgun, revolver, air gun, spring gun, sling or other device for
throwing stones, shot or metal slugs within the limits of the city, without a
permit from the city council.
   B.   Application For Permit: Any person desiring the permit required by
subsection A of this section may make application therefor addressed to the
chief of police and shall specify therein the purpose for which the applicant
desires to use the weapon or instrument in the application referred to. (Ord.
29, 12-26-1917; amd. 2000 Code)
7-6-5: MERCHANDISE, FOOD, OR PERSONAL PROPERTY ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Leaving Merchandise, Food, Or Personal Property Prohibited: Unless the
City has issued a sidewalk vending permit or otherwise approved of such
activities, no person shall leave or permit to remain in or upon any sidewalk
or in or upon any parkway in any street within the city, any merchandise,
fruit, melon, vegetable, meat, or any baggage or any article of personal
property. A violation of this subsection by any person in the act of peddling
or vending is not punishable as an infraction, but by the issuance of an
administrative citation, as outlined in section
4-15-8 of this Code.
   B.   Placement Of Containers: Except in the discharge or performance of
official duty, no person shall place any boxes, barrels or other receptacles
for or containing goods, wares, merchandise or any other articles or things in
or upon any public street, whether in the roadway or on the sidewalk, or in the
parkway thereof, with the intent or for the purpose of unpacking or removing
the contents thereof upon the streets, sidewalks or parkways, and except in the
discharge or performance of official duty, no person shall unpack or remove the
contents of or from any such box, barrel or other receptacle for or containing
goods, wares, merchandise or any other articles or things while the same is in
or upon any street, sidewalk or parkway; provided, however, that the provisions
of this subsection shall not prevent peddlers or sidewalk vendors duly licensed
by the city from merchandising their produce or wares in a proper and usual
manner incident to the business of peddling. A violation of this subsection by
any person in the act of peddling or vending is not punishable as an infraction
but by the issuance of an administrative citation, as outlined in section
4-15-8 of this Code.
(Ord. 429, 9-30-1953; amd. Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019)
7-6-6: DANCES, GAMES AND EXHIBITIONS IN STREET:
   A.   Games: Unless by special written permit from the city manager first had
and obtained, no person shall play, carry on or engage in any game in or upon
any street.
   B.   Dancing; Permit: No person shall dance or conduct any dance or engage
in any dancing in any street without a written permit from the city manager to
do so first had and obtained.
   C.   Exhibitions; Permit: No person shall conduct or engage in any
exhibition in any street or use any street or any portion thereof within the
city for any purpose other than street purposes without written permission from
the city manager to do so first had and obtained. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953; amd.
2000 Code)
7-6-7: CEMETERIES PROHIBITED:
The establishment of any cemetery or the maintenance of any cemetery or burying
ground or mausoleum within the corporate limits of the city is hereby
prohibited. (Ord. 131, 9-10-1926)
7-6-8: CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   Public Places: Except as otherwise provided in this code, it is
unlawful to drink any alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of any
alcoholic beverage:
      1.   Upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, pathway, parking lot, park,
beach, or other public property;
      2.   On any public school property;
      3.   In the entranceway to any nonresidential building, which entranceway
is open to view from the public street; or
      4.   On a privately owned automobile parking lot to which the public is
invited and permitted.
   B.   Near Alcoholic Beverage Establishments: With regard to premises that
sell alcoholic beverages for off site consumption, it is unlawful to drink an
alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage when:
      1.   Entering into or being present at such premises;
      2.   Being present upon the sidewalk, pathway or parking lot adjacent to
such a premises.
   C.   Exceptions: The prohibitions set forth in this section will not apply
to:
      1.   A group operating an organized event according to the conditions of
a permit issued by the city pursuant to this code which allows consumption and
possession of alcoholic beverages; or
      2.   An outdoor dining facility that serves alcoholic beverages pursuant
to the terms of a permit issued by the state or the city.
   D.   Definitions:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of
one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances, or which may be ingested in any way.
   OPEN CONTAINER: A bottle, can or other receptacle which has been opened, or
a seal broken or the contents partially removed.
   PREMISES FROM WHICH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE SOLD FOR OFF SITE CONSUMPTION:
The premises of a retail package off sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed
under the alcoholic beverage control act 1 . (Ord. 1344, 12-4-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. Bus. & Prof.C. division 9, § 23000 et seq.
CHAPTER 7
HANDBILLS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Handbill Defined
7-7-2: Distribution
7-7-3: Posting Property To Prevent Handbills
7-7-4: Placing In Vehicles
7-7-5: Hours Of Distribution
7-7-6: Locations Where Prohibited
7-7-7: Exemptions
7-7-1: HANDBILL DEFINED:
"Handbill", for the purposes of this Chapter, includes any printed or written
advertising matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet,
newspaper, paper, booklet or any other printed matter or literature. (Ord. 232,
8-7-1940)
7-7-2: DISTRIBUTION:
   A.   Public Property: It is unlawful for any person, either directly or
indirectly, to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or on any
public thoroughfare, park, ground or other public place within the City. The
provisions of this Section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing,
transmitting or distributing of any handbill to any person willing to accept
the handbill.
   B.   Private Property:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to
distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any
private yard, grounds, walk, porch, steps, mailbox, vestibule, house,
residence, building or any other private property. The provisions of this
subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or
distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of the private
yard, grounds, walk, porch, steps, mailbox, vestibule, house, residence,
building or other private property.
      2.   The provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit
the distribution of handbills by firms securing a handbill on the doorknob with
a rubber band or a container designed to hang on a doorknob.
      3.   The provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit
the placing of a political handbill, a religious handbill, or a newspaper on
the door or in front of and immediately adjacent to the door of any private
residence. (Ord. 916, 12-21-1976)
7-7-3: POSTING PROPERTY TO PREVENT HANDBILLS:
It is lawful for the owner or the occupant of any property to place a sign in a
conspicuous place near the entrance thereof indicating that no handbills are
desired; and, when the property is so signed or posted, it is unlawful for any
person to go upon the premises or property so posted and distribute, deposit,
place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940)
7-7-4: PLACING IN VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to distribute,
deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile
or other vehicle. The provisions of this Section shall not be deemed to
prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner
or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940)
7-7-5: HOURS OF DISTRIBUTION:
It is unlawful for any person to distribute any handbills between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of any day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the
following day. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940; amd. 2000 Code)
7-7-6: LOCATIONS WHERE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful within the City for any person to post, print, stick, stamp,
tack or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done by any other person, any
handbill, notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, tin sign,
advertisement or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public
to or upon any public sidewalk, crosswalk, City tree, curb, curbstone,
lamppost, hydrant, street sign or post, tree, railroad trestle, electric light
or power pole, telephone, telegraph or trolley- wire pole, or upon any fixture
of the fire alarm, police or telegraph systems or lighting systems of the City.
(Ord. 232, 8-7-1940; amd. 2000 Code)
7-7-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution
of the United States mail, nor to the delivery of any handbill to any person
who has requested delivery of the same; nor to the posting of legal notices by
public officers or attorneys in the manner and places prescribed by law; nor to
permanent signs painted on buildings or signs advertising the business painted
on buildings or signs advertising the business conducted on the premises; nor
to official numbers, insignia or wording placed upon any such buildings,
structures, hydrants, polls, posts, sidewalks, crosswalks, curbs, curbstones or
fixtures, by or with the consent of the owner or person in charge or control
thereof. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940)
CHAPTER 8
PROHIBITED CAMPING
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: Sleeping, Lying, Or Storing Personal Property On Sidewalks, Streets,
Alleys, Or Public Right Of Way Prohibited
7-8-3: Camping Prohibited
7-8-4: Removal Of Campsite On Public Property
7-8-5: Disposition And Release Of Personal Property
7-8-6: Violation
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions apply to
Chapter 8.
   A.   “To camp” means to set up or to remain in or at a campsite.
   B.   “Campsite” means any place where bedding, sleeping bag, or other
material used for bedding purposes, or any stove or fire is placed,
established, or maintained for the purpose of maintaining a temporary place to
live, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to,
shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof. (Ord. 1664, 9-
17-2024)
7-8-2: SLEEPING, LYING, OR STORING PERSONAL PROPERTY ON SIDEWALKS, STREETS,
ALLEYS, OR PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person may sleep, lie, or store personal property on public
sidewalks, streets, alleyways, or public right of way at any time as a matter
of individual and public safety and to ensure compliance with pedestrian
accessibility requirements.
   B.   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, a person found in
violation of this section may be immediately removed from the premises. (Ord.
1664, 9-17-2024)
7-8-3: CAMPING PROHIBITED:
No person may occupy a campsite in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, lane,
public right of way, park, bench, or any other publicly-owned property or under
any bridge or viaduct, unless (i) otherwise specifically authorized by this
Code or (ii) upon City Council resolution, the City Council may exempt a
special event from the prohibitions of this section, if the City Council finds
such exemption to be in the public interest and consistent with their goals and
notices and in accordance with conditions imposed by the City Council. Any
conditions imposed will include a condition requiring that the applicant
provide evidence of adequate insurance coverage and agree to indemnify the City
for any liability, damage or expense incurred by the City as a result of
activities of the applicant. Any findings by the City Council shall specify the
exact dates and location covered by the exemption. (Ord. 1664, 9-17-2024)
7-8-4: REMOVAL OF CAMPSITE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Upon discovery of a campsite on public property, removal of the campsite by the
Police Department, or designee, may occur under the following circumstances:
   A.   Prior to removing the campsite, the City shall post a notice, 24-hours
in advance.
   B.   At the time a 24-hour notice is posted, the City shall inform a local
agency delivering social services to homeless people of the location of the
campsite.
   C.   After the 24-hour notice period has passed, the Police Department, or
designee, is authorized to remove the campsite and all personal property
related thereto.
   D.   The foregoing notwithstanding, campsite removal may proceed without the
above-referenced notice only if an imminent threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare exists (e.g., fire on site) that requires immediate removal
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1664, 9-17-2024)
7-8-5: DISPOSITION AND RELEASE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
For purposes of this Chapter, “personal property” means any item reasonably
recognizable as belonging to a person and having apparent utility or monetary
value. Items having no apparent utility or monetary value and items in an
unsanitary condition may be immediately discarded. Weapons, drug paraphernalia,
items appearing to be stolen, and evidence of a crime may be retained as
evidence by the Police Department, or designee, until an alternate disposition
is determined. All personal property removed from the campsite which is not
retained, disposed of, or held as evidence shall be stored by the Police
Department, or designee, for a minimum of 30 days, during which time it shall
be reasonably available for and released to an individual confirming ownership.
(Ord. 1664, 9-17-2024)
7-8-6: VIOLATION:
Any violation of this Chapter shall subject the violating individual to such
penalties, as authorized under the law or otherwise in this code, including
without limitation, the penalties and enforcement mechanisms set forth in
Chapters 1-2 and 1-2A. The foregoing notwithstanding, the City may also enforce
violations of this Chapter as follows:
   A.   A third violation of the same provision within one year shall result in
a 30-day ban of the violating individual from the property in which the
violation occurred. An individual who violates this 30-day ban is considered to
be committing criminal trespass, punishable by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months
or both. (Ord. 1664, 9-17-2024)
CHAPTER 9
PRIVATELY OWNED PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
7-9-1: Definitions
7-9-2: Unlawful Acts
7-9-3: Liquor Consumption Or Possession Of Open Containers
7-9-4: Applicability Of Vehicle Code
7-9-5: Posting Of Notice
7-9-6: Violations; Penalty
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this chapter, have the
meanings set forth herein:
   DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT: Includes, but shall not be limited to, any police
officer of the city of El Segundo who has been given specific or general
authority on behalf of the owner of a parking lot to request that persons
thereon leave the lot.
   SHOPPING CENTER: Any store or stores, business or businesses, office or
offices or theater or theaters, or any combination thereof, in the city of El
Segundo, California, with off street parking facilities. (Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990;
amd. Ord. 1344, 12-4-2001)
7-9-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   Patronage Of Shopping Center: It shall be unlawful for the driver of
any vehicle to park it or allow it to remain parked upon any parking lot in, of
or adjacent to a shopping center except while the driver or the occupants of
the vehicle are patronizing a store or service of said shopping center.
   B.   Remaining After Request To Leave: It shall be unlawful for any person,
with intent to cause public disturbance or annoyance, to be or remain upon any
parking lot in, of or adjacent to a shopping center or when asked to leave by a
police officer or the owner thereof, or his duly authorized agent.
   C.   Noise:
      1.   Causing Disturbance: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
a radio or other sound amplifier emitting loud and raucous noises with the
intent to cause a public disturbance or annoyance.
      2.   Outside A Vehicle: No person shall operate or permit operation of
any vehicle radio system which emits sound audible outside a vehicle when the
vehicle is being operated or parked on private property, open for public use at
a distance greater than twenty five feet (25') from the source of the sound.
(Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990)
7-9-3: LIQUOR CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS:
See section
7-6-8 of this title. (Ord. 1344, 12-4-2001)
7-9-4: APPLICABILITY OF VEHICLE CODE:
All privately owned and maintained off street parking facilities within the
city shall be subject to the provisions of sections 22350 (basic speed law),
23103 (reckless driving), 23109 (speed contest and exhibitions of speed), and
division 16.5 commencing with section 38000 (off highway motor vehicles) of the
California Vehicle Code, if the owner or operator of said parking facility has
caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to that off street
parking facility a notice not less than seventeen inches by twenty two inches
(17" x 22") in size with lettering less than one inch (1") in height to the
effect that the off street parking facility is subject to public traffic
regulations and control. This section shall not require the police department
to provide patrol or enforce any provisions of this code on a privately owned
or maintained off street facility except as provided for in other sections of
this code. (Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990)
7-9-5: POSTING OF NOTICE:
The owner of any private property to which this chapter applies may post a
notice to all persons of the applicability of the regulations contained herein.
However, the failure to post such a notice shall not prevent the enforcement of
any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990)
7-9-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction, punishable as
provided in section
1-2-1 of this code. (Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990; amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 10
MOTOR VEHICLE ALARMS
SECTION:
7-10-1: Definitions
7-10-2: Time Restriction
7-10-3: Enforcement Of False Alarms
7-10-4: Excessive False Alarms; Penalty
7-10-5: Nuisance Declared
7-10-6: Abatement
7-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall be applied to
the terms utilized in this Chapter unless it appears from the context that a
different meaning is intended:
   EMERGENCY SITUATION: Any situation where life or property is in physical
jeopardy.
   FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal emitting from a motor vehicle necessitating a
response by the Police Department where an emergency situation does not exist.
   MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE: A vehicle which is self-propelled as defined in
California Vehicle Code section 415. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
7-10-2: TIME RESTRICTION:
   A.   Prohibitions: It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit
any alarm located in a motor vehicle registered in the name of or driven by
such person to emit any audible sound within the City for a period of more than
five (5) minutes.
   B.   Calculation: The time shall be calculated based upon the emission of
the first audible sound ending five (5) minutes thereafter notwithstanding any
variation or delay in the emissions of audible sound. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
7-10-3: ENFORCEMENT OF FALSE ALARMS:
Any vehicle parked in a public right of way, parking lot, parking structure, or
other public property is subject to enforcement under this Chapter. In
addition, any vehicle parked on private property may be cited hereunder where
the false alarm is clearly audible on the public thoroughfare or nearby private
properties. Any owner of private property upon which a vehicle emitting a false
alarm is parked may summon City enforcement authorities for the purpose of
citing the offending vehicle. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
7-10-4: EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS; PENALTY:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or
permit an alarm to be emitted from a motor vehicle registered in the name of or
driven by such person.
   B.   Penalty: Any violation of this Chapter shall be an infraction and shall
be punishable as provided in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993; amd. 2000 Code)
7-10-5: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any violation of this Chapter is declared a public nuisance which is subject to
abatement pursuant to the procedures described in this Chapter and as
authorized by law. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
7-10-6: ABATEMENT:
   A.   Deactivate Alarm: The Police Department, in order to abate the public
nuisance created by a vehicle in violation of this Chapter, may undertake such
procedures as are reasonably necessary to deactivate the alarm.
   B.   Removal Of Vehicle: Should the Police Department be unable to
deactivate the alarm, the vehicle shall be removed in accordance with the
provisions of California Vehicle Code section 22651.5. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
CHAPTER 11
MARIJUANA
SECTION:
7-11-1: Regulations
7-11-1: REGULATIONS:
For regulations regarding marijuana, commercial marijuana activities, and
marijuana cultivation, see
title 4, chapter 14 and
title 15, chapter 13B of this code. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
CHAPTER 12
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERINGS
SECTION:
7-12-1: Findings; Purpose
7-12-2: Definitions
7-12-3: Loud Or Unruly Gatherings Prohibited
7-12-4: Citation And Notice - Contents
7-12-5: Citation And Notice - Procedure
7-12-6: Violations, Fines And Penalties
7-12-1: FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
   A.   Loud or unruly social gatherings frequently become public nuisances
since they interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, and
threaten public safety. All such activities detrimentally affect the neighbors
that surround these nuisances.
   B.   Frequently, these loud or unruly gatherings create opportunities for
crimes against persons, public peace and property. The City has, both now and
in the past, responded to Code violations multiple times for enforcement
actions.
   C.   In addition, the public services required for responding to incidents
that occur as a consequence of unruly gatherings (for example, driving while
intoxicated, increased social violence, and incidents of sexual assault) are
also disproportionately greater than what is required within the City's
jurisdiction.
   D.   It is in the public interest to establish procedures for recovering
costs incurred by the City when enforcing any provision of this Code through
inspections, nuisance abatement, or other similar, administrative or judicial
means.
   E.   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to, nor will it,
interfere with any California law provision that regulates activities
identified by this chapter; it is intended only to enact measures that are
different from, or supplement, California law to further restrict acts
associated with loud or unruly gatherings. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
7-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
   CITATION: Means an administrative citation issued pursuant to
title 1, chapter 2A of this Code.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Has the same meaning as in section
1-2A-3 of this Code.
   LOUD OR UNRULY CONDUCT: As used in this chapter, includes any of the
following conduct if in violation of any provision of this Code or State law:
   A.   Loud noise;
   B.   Obstruction of a street or public right-of-way, including a sidewalk or
driveway;
   C.   Public intoxication or drinking in public;
   D.   Assault, battery, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of
the peace;
   E.   Vandalism or destruction of property;
   F.   Litter;
   G.   Urinating or defecating in public;
   H.   Trespassing; or
   I.   Illegal drug use.
Loud or unruly conduct does not include any activity that is protected by
article 1, section 4 of the California Constitution, or protected by the First
or Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.
   LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING: Means a gathering of persons at any residence
where loud or unruly conduct occurs at the residence and which threatens or
interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, or the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property.
   PERSON: Means an individual or any firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, business, corporation, company or entity.
   RESIDENCE: Means any lot in a residential zone, and includes any garage,
carport, walkway, yard, patio, deck, or other structure or area on said lot,
whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. The term
"residence" also includes any sidewalk, street or alleyway which abuts the lot.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Means:
   A.   Any person(s) with a right of possession or ownership interests in the
residence where a loud or unruly gathering occurs; or
   B.   Any person who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts, or controls
the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a
gathering at a residence. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
7-12-3: LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERINGS PROHIBITED:
Loud or unruly gatherings are prohibited and constitute a public nuisance
subjecting the owner and/or responsible party to fines and/or penalties under
this section. The City may abate a loud or unruly gathering by all available
means, including, but not limited to, an order of a peace officer requiring
individuals at the loud or unruly gathering to leave the residence, the
issuance of a citation, and/or the arrest of anyone committing a criminal
violation under this section or any other applicable State or local law. (Ord.
1568, 6-19-2018)
7-12-4: CITATION AND NOTICE - CONTENTS:
A peace officer responding to a loud or unruly gathering must post, on the
front entrance of the residence at which the loud or unruly gathering occurs, a
notice stating:
   A.   The name and agency of the officer who responded to the loud or unruly
gathering;
   B.   The address of the residence and the date of the loud or unruly
gathering, along with a description of the loud or unruly conduct observed; and
   C.   That it is unlawful to alter, tamper with or deface this notice, or
remove it prior to thirty (30) days from the date of the posting. (Ord. 1568,
6-19-2018)
7-12-5: CITATION AND NOTICE - PROCEDURE:
   A.   Referral To Code Enforcement Officer: A copy of any notice caused to be
issued by a peace officer during the enforcement of this chapter will be
referred to the Director of Community Development, or his/her designee. Once
referred, the Code Enforcement Division will be responsible for processing,
investigating and implementing the citation. However, the peace officer who
issued the citation may be required to submit evidence and/or attend any
administrative hearing pertaining to the citation, if necessary.
   B.   Notice: The Code Enforcement Officer must serve on all responsible
parties a copy of the notice posted pursuant to subsection A of this section.
The delivery of the notice must be by personal service or by depositing in the
mail for delivery by the United States Postal Service, in a sealed envelope,
postage prepaid. Notice to the property owner must be sent to the address shown
on the County’s last equalized Property Tax assessment roll.
   C.   Administrative Process Applicable To Citations: Unless otherwise
specified herein, all citations issued for violations of this chapter will be
subject to the provisions set forth in title 1, chapter 2A of this Code,
including, but not limited to, the administrative hearing and appeal process.
(Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
7-12-6: VIOLATIONS, FINES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Administrative Fines: Any person who alters, tampers with or defaces a
posted notice issued pursuant to this chapter, and/or who violates section
7-12-3 of this chapter may be subjected to administrative fines and penalties.
Penalties will be established by City Council resolution. Any violation which
arises within twelve (12) months from the date of the first violation will
trigger escalating penalty amounts, as established by City Council resolution.
A violation occurring after a period of twelve (12) consecutive months of no
violations will be considered a first violation.
   B.   Penalties To Same Party: Any escalated penalty amounts will apply to
the same responsible party, regardless of whether different residences
throughout the City are utilized as venues for loud or unruly gatherings.
   C.   Fine For Removal Of Posted Notice: Any person who alters, tampers with
or defaces a posted notice issued pursuant to this chapter will be subject to
an administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   D.   Civil Or Criminal Proceeding: Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to prevent the City from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a
public nuisance or from pursuing any other means available under any other
statute, ordinance or law (civil or criminal), to correct conduct regulated by
this chapter in addition to or as alternatives to the procedures set forth
herein. This chapter in no way limits the authority of law enforcement
personnel to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct
regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
CHAPTER 13
SOCIAL HOST REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-13-1: Purpose
7-13-2: Definitions
7-13-3: Gathering At Which Minors Use Marijuana Or Consume Alcoholic Beverages
Prohibited
7-13-4: Exemptions
7-13-5: Violation; Penalty
7-13-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose and intent of this chapter is:
      1.   To facilitate the enforcement of laws prohibiting the use of
marijuana by minors and the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages by
minors, in an effort to deter, and to promote the reduction of, underage
drinking and drug use;
      2.   To protect public health, safety and welfare and quiet enjoyment of
property and properties neighboring the location of gatherings at which minors
use marijuana or are served and consume alcoholic beverages; and
      3.   To establish a duty of persons twenty one (21) years of age or older
having control over any premises, who knowingly host, permit or allow a
gathering at the premises to take reasonable steps to prevent the service and
consumption of alcoholic beverages or use of marijuana by minors. Reasonable
steps include, but are not limited to, controlling the access to and provision
of marijuana and alcoholic beverages to minors, and monitoring the responsible,
safe and lawful conduct of minors on the premises.
   B.   This chapter should not be construed as adding any additional authority
for any law enforcement officer or government official to either enter private
property or subject any property or person to search or seizure that does not
otherwise exist independent of the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   It is not the intent of this chapter to impose strict liability against
a parent or legal guardian whose best intentions and reasonable efforts to
prevent the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages or use of marijuana
by minors at a gathering are circumvented by the actions of any person to
obtain alcoholic beverages or marijuana at the premises or to bring concealed
alcoholic beverages or marijuana to the premises. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
7-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of words and phrases used in
this chapter:
   ALCOHOL: Means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
other liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit
for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances.
   GATHERING: Means a party, gathering, or event where three (3) or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
   MARIJUANA: Means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds or resin.
   MINOR: Means any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
   PREMISES: Means a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room,
or other dwelling unit, or any commercial, business or industrial site, hall or
meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, and whether
owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT: Means a person twenty one (21) years of age or older who
owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the
gathering occurs.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Means:
   A.   The person in charge of the premises when the gathering occurs; or
   B.   The person who organized the gathering. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
7-13-3: GATHERING AT WHICH MINORS USE MARIJUANA OR CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for either a responsible person or
responsible adult to cause or allow a gathering to take place at the premises
whenever the responsible person or responsible adult knows or reasonably should
have known alcoholic beverages or marijuana are being unlawfully consumed or
used by minors. Liability for a violation of this section will be imputed to
either a responsible person or responsible adult, but not both.
   A.   Prima facie evidence that a responsible person had the knowledge, or
should have had the knowledge, necessary to establish a violation of this
section include those situations where:
      1.   Minors are consuming alcoholic beverages or using marijuana and
there is a minor present on the premises who is obviously under the influence
of alcohol or marijuana; or
      2.   A warning has been issued to the location within the last twelve
(12) months regarding alcohol or marijuana use by minors at the premises.
   B.   Prima facie evidence that a responsible adult had the knowledge, or
should have had the knowledge, necessary to establish a violation of this
section include those situations where:
      1.   A responsible adult is present at the premises during a gathering
where minors are consuming alcoholic beverages or using marijuana; or
      2.   A warning has been issued to the location within the last twelve
(12) months regarding alcohol or marijuana use by minors at the premises.
   C.   A warning for a violation of this section will only be issued where the
responsible adult was not present at the premises during a gathering where
minors are consuming alcohol or using marijuana and there is no evidence that a
minor is present on the premises who is obviously under the influence of
alcohol or marijuana. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
7-13-4: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to:
   A.   Any California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control licensee at any
premises licensed and regulated by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
   B.   Conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages which occurs
exclusively between a minor child and his or her parent or legal guardian,
including the possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in connection
with a cultural or religious activity. This exemption does not include any
conduct that would contribute to the delinquency of a minor (a violation of
Penal Code section 272).
   C.   Conduct which the City is expressly preempted from prohibiting under
State law, specifically, the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and
Safety Act.
   D.   A responsible person or responsible adult who called 911 and reported
that a minor was in need of medical attention due to alcohol consumption or
marijuana use, was the first person to make the 911 call, and when reporting
that a minor was in need of medical assistance, remained on the scene with the
minor until that medical assistance arrived and cooperated with medical
assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene.
   E.   A responsible person or responsible adult who requests immediate
assistance from the Police Department to remove any person who refuses to abide
by the requesting person's performance of duties imposed by this chapter, or to
terminate the gathering because of the requesting person's ability to prevent
minors from consuming alcoholic beverages or using marijuana despite having
taken reasonable steps to do so, as long as such request is made before any
other person makes a complaint about the gathering. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
7-13-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   The City Council may adopt a resolution establishing a schedule of
administrative fines and community service hours for a violation of this
chapter.
   B.   In addition to the administrative fines described in this section, the
responding law enforcement officer may issue an order requiring the gathering
to be disbanded and may cite and arrest any violators under any other
applicable ordinances and statutes.
   C.   For any responsible person who is a juvenile, each parent or legal
guardian of the juvenile will be considered a responsible person liable for any
fines, penalties and fees imposed pursuant to this chapter. The parents or
guardians of a juvenile found to have violated this chapter may request to have
that juvenile serve community service as described in subsection E of this
section, and pay City administrative fees, if any, as an alternative penalty to
paying the applicable civil penalty.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter is deemed to prevent the City from commencing a
civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing any
other means available under any other statute, ordinance or law (civil or
criminal), to correct conduct regulated by this chapter in addition to or as
alternatives to the procedures set forth herein. This chapter in no way limits
the authority of the Police Department to make arrests for any criminal offense
arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter.
   E.   The responsible person or responsible adult may perform community
service and pay City administrative fees, if any, as an alternative to paying
the civil penalty with the prior written consent and approval of the Police
Chief or designee. The Police Chief or designee retains the discretion to
approve the community service requested by the responsible person/adult. Upon
approval of the Police Chief or designee to perform community service, the
responsible person/adult must complete the required hours within one year of
approval and must submit proof of completion to the Police Chief or designee.
Failure to receive approval to perform community service or failure to complete
the required hours of service will result in the imposition of the applicable
civil penalty, which is immediately payable. No reduction in the penalty is
authorized for completion of less than the required hours of community service
unless approved by the City Manager or designee. Community service will only be
approved for the first citation issued within a one-year period.
   F.   Violations of this chapter are not subject to the response cost
reimbursement provisions outlined in sections
1-2A-23, et seq., of this Code. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
TITLE 8
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Definitions And Administration   1
Enforcement And Obedience To Officials   2
Traffic Control Devices   3
Miscellaneous Traffic Provisions   4
Stopping, Standing And Parking   5
Preferential Parking Zones   5A
Special Restrictions   5B
Loading And Unloading   5C
Special Stops   5D
Permit Parking   5E
Carsharing Permits   5F
Oversized Vehicle, Recreational Vehicle And Trailer Permit Parking   5G
Pedestrians   6
Abandoned Or Inoperative Vehicles   7
Use Of Public Streets And Other Rights Of Way For Events   8
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Traffic Division
8-1-3: City Traffic Engineer
8-1-4: Traffic Committee
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in
the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, those definitions shall
apply.
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose
of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
   COACH: Any motor bus or motor coach used as a common carrier of passengers.
   COUNCIL: The city council of the city of El Segundo, California.
   CURB: A physical barrier defining the lateral boundary of the roadway
including returns at intersections.
   DIVISIONAL ISLAND: A raised island or an area designated by double paint
stripes located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams
of traffic.
   LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the
city.
   OVERSIZED VEHICLE: Any vehicle, as defined by section 670 of the California
Vehicle Code, or combination of vehicles, which exceeds twenty two feet (22')
in length, seven feet (7') in width, or eight feet (8') in height, exclusive of
projecting lights or devices allowed by section 35109 or 35110 of the
California Vehicle Code, as may be amended. The term "oversized vehicle" does
not include pickup trucks or sport utility vehicles that are less than twenty
five feet (25') in length and eighty two inches (82") in height.
   PARKWAY: That portion of a street right of way other than a roadway or a
sidewalk.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT: The El Segundo police department.
   POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the police department of the city or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Has the same meaning as section 18010 of the Health
And Safety Code.
   STOP: Complete cessation of movement.
   TRAILER: A trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer (including tent trailers),
unmounted camper, or trailer coach as defined in sections 242, 243, 550, 630,
635, and 636 of the California Vehicle Code, or fifth wheel travel trailer, as
defined in section 324 of the Vehicle Code. The term "trailer" includes
trailers that are attached to another vehicle by means of a hitch or otherwise,
and trailers that are not attached to another vehicle (i.e., "detached"
trailers).
   VEHICLE CODE: The Vehicle Code of the state of California.
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is that minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel to the front line of the permitted structures.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear of the required front yard to the
front of the required rear yard, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967; amd. Ord. 1281, 10-7-1997; Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-1-2: TRAFFIC DIVISION:
   A.   Division Established; Police Administration: There is hereby
established in the police department of the city a traffic division to be under
the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to
the chief of police.
   B.   Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the traffic division with
such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to
enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle
laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic
violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city
traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and
to carry out those duties especially imposed upon the division by this title
and the traffic ordinances of the city.
   C.   Accident Studies: Whenever the accidents at any particular location
become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic
engineer in conducting studies of the accidents and determining remedial
measures.
   D.   Accident Reports: The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system
of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them
shall be filed alphabetically by location. The reports shall be available for
the use and information of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967;
amd. 2000 Code)
8-1-3: CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER:
   A.   Office Established: The office of city traffic engineer is hereby
established. The city engineer shall be ex officio city traffic engineer. He
shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this title and in the
traffic ordinances of the city.
   B.   Powers And Duties: It shall be the general duty of the city traffic
engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of
traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic
accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic
investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials
in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry
out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city.
Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power is granted to the city
traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the
duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Ord.
659, 3-13-1967)
8-1-4: TRAFFIC COMMITTEE:
   A.   Established: There is hereby established an advisory traffic committee
to serve without compensation, consisting of the city traffic engineer, the
chief of police or in his discretion as his representative an officer of the
traffic division and a representative from the city engineer's office. The
chairman of the committee shall be the city traffic engineer.
   B.   Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the traffic committee to
suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all
officers and agencies of the city having authority with respect to the
administration or enforcement of traffic regulations; to stimulate and assist
in the preparation and publication of traffic reports; to receive complaints
having to do with traffic matters; and to recommend ways and means for
improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic
regulations. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIALS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Police And Fire Department Officials
8-2-2: Direction Of Traffic By Unauthorized Persons
8-2-3: Obedience To Authority Required
8-2-4: Bicycle And Animal Riders
8-2-5: Interference With Police Officers
8-2-6: Public Employee Obedience
8-2-7: Emergency Vehicles
8-2-8: Report Certain Property Damage
8-2-9: Removal Of Vehicles From Streets
8-2-10: Authority Of Police In Crowds
8-2-11: Authority Of Others; Parking Citations
8-2-1: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the
event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions to the contrary contained in this Title or the State Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-2: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire
Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person authorized
by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other
signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any
mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the City Traffic Engineer.
(Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO AUTHORITY REQUIRED:
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden
by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a
member of the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or
by law. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-4: BICYCLE AND ANIMAL RIDERS:
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by this Title, except those provisions which by their very
nature can have no application. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-5: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICERS:
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or
other officer or employee of the City in their enforcement of the provisions of
this Title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other
distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of
the City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this
Title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Title,
constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-6: PUBLIC EMPLOYEE OBEDIENCE:
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State or any
county or city, and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the
provisions of this Title except as otherwise permitted in this Title or by the
State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-7: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   Certain Vehicles Designated: The provisions of this Title regulating
the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles
operated by the Police or Fire Department, any ambulance or any public utility
vehicle which has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any
vehicle mentioned in this Section is operated in the manner specified by the
Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.
   B.   Due Care: The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the
operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the
safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of
others.
   C.   Mail Delivery Vehicles: The provisions of this Title regulating the
parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City
department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or
repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office
department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of
United States mail. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-8: REPORT CERTAIN PROPERTY DAMAGE:
   A.   Publicly Owned Property: The operator of a vehicle or the person in
charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any
property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including, but not
limited to, any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole,
electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-
control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any
street, shall within twenty four (24) hours after the accident make a written
report of such accident to the Police Department of the City.
   B.   Contents Of Report: Every such report shall state the time when and the
place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning
and of the person operating or in charge of the vehicle or animal, the license
number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in
the accident.
   C.   Delay Of Report For Incapacity: The operator of any vehicle involved in
an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this
Section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report,
but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection A of this
Section within twenty four (24) hours after regaining ability to make the
report. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-9: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM STREETS:
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of the
City may remove or cause to be removed:
   A.   Time Limit:
      1.   Streets And Highways: Any vehicle that has been parked or left
standing upon a street or highway for seventy two (72) or more consecutive
hours. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
      2.   City Parking Lots, Property: Any vehicle, or portion thereof, that
has been parked or left standing upon a City parking lot or on City property
for seventy two (72) or more consecutive hours. (Ord. 688, 4-8-1968)
   B.   Prohibited Parking Area:
      1.   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or
highway when parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of
the City and signs are posted giving notice of removal.
      2.   Any vehicle parked or left standing when, by ordinance or resolution
of the City, such parking or standing is prohibited and signs are posted giving
notice of the removal.
   C.   Street Cleaning; Construction: Any vehicle which is parked or left
standing upon a street or highway where the use of the street or highway or a
portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the
street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the
use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose
other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway
or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or
structures of unusual size, and the parking of the vehicle would prohibit or
interfere with the use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that the
vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty four (24) hours
prior to the removal. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-10: AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN CROWDS:
At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are together or have
gathered, nothing in this Title shall be construed to prevent any police
officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any
street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or
sidewalk, and the police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of
vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is hereby declared
to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey the police officer's
order, signal or command, regardless of any other provision of this Title.
(Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-11: AUTHORITY OF OTHERS; PARKING CITATIONS:
Police cadets, police service officers and retired senior volunteers are hereby
authorized to issue parking citations and perform such other related duties as
may be required by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1207, 10-5-1993)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Authority To Install
8-3-2: Sign Placement Necessary For Enforcement
8-3-3: Obedience
8-3-4: Installation And Maintenance
8-3-5: Lane Marking
8-3-6: Distinctive Roadway Markings
8-3-7: Removal Of Devices
8-3-8: Hours Of Operation
8-3-9: Unauthorized Painting Of Curbs
8-3-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
   A.   Installation And Maintenance: The City Traffic Engineer shall have the
power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained
official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the
provisions of this Title.
   B.   Notice To Public: Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the
effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be
installed to give notice to the public of the application of the law, the City
Traffic Engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the
necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the
law applicable thereto.
   C.   Additional Devices: The City Traffic Engineer may also place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control
devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or
warn traffic, but he shall make the determination only upon the basis of
traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance
with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this Title or
as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967)
8-3-2: SIGN PLACEMENT NECESSARY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this Title for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs
are in place giving notice of the provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967)
8-3-3: OBEDIENCE:
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control device placed in accordance with this Chapter unless
otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to
the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-4: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Placement: The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and
maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where
traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be
alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic
congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.
   B.   Determination Of Placement: The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain
and determine the locations where the signals are required by field
investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be
pertinent.
   C.   Street Name Signs: Whenever the City Traffic Engineer installs and
maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise
erect and maintain at the intersection street name signs clearly visible to
traffic approaching from all directions unless the street name signs have
previously been placed and are maintained at the intersection. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967; amd. 2000 Code)
8-3-5: LANE MARKING:
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane
lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by
vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the
highway. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-6: DISTINCTIVE ROADWAY MARKINGS:
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive
roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of
streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the
roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of the marking or signs
and markings. The marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as
similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to
provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-7: REMOVAL OF DEVICES:
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or
discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically
required by the Vehicle Code or this Title whenever he shall determine in any
particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the
installation no longer exist. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-8: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any
traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this Title. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
8-3-9: UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS:
No person, unless authorized by the City, shall paint any street or curb
surface; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the painting
of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions
of any resolution or ordinance of the City pertaining thereto. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
CHAPTER 4
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Turning Regulations
8-4-2: One-Way Streets And Alleys
8-4-3: Special Speed Zones
8-4-4: Visibility At Intersections; Remove Vegetation
8-4-5: Vehicles Transporting Hazardous Materials
8-4-6: Truck Routes
8-4-7: Heavy Vehicles; Permit Required
8-4-8: Flange Wheel Machinery
8-4-9: Driving Through Funeral Procession
8-4-10: Clinging To Moving Vehicle
8-4-11: Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways
8-4-12: Riding Or Driving On Sidewalk
8-4-13: Driving Over New Pavement Or Markings
8-4-14: Barriers And Signs Generally
8-4-15: Obstructing Traffic
8-4-16: Limited Access Roadways
8-4-17: Restrictions On Freeway Use
8-4-18: Noncompliance To Signs
8-4-19: Driving On Park Or Recreation Ground
8-4-20: Vehicles On Vacant Property
8-4-21: Auto Theft Prevention; Key Removal
8-4-22: Railroad Crossings
8-4-23: Bicycles
8-4-24: Coasters And Skateboards
8-4-1: TURNING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Marker Authority; Multiple Lanes: The City Traffic Engineer is
authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to
intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at
the intersections, and the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to locate and
indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make
right- or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may
conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.
   B.   Restricted Turn Signs: The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized
to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at these intersections. The
making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on
the signs or they may be removed when the turns are permitted.
   C.   Right Turn On Red Signal:
      1.   No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop
signal at any intersection which is sign posted giving notice of the
restriction as hereinafter provided in this subsection.
      2.   The City Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect
to this subsection where he determines that the making of right turns against
traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and
orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-2: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates any one-way street
or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless the signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-3: SPECIAL SPEED ZONES:
A.   It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
survey pursuant to Vehicle Code section 22357 that a speed greater than 25
miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and
would be reasonable and safe upon the streets set forth in this section, and it
is further determined that the speeds designated herein are appropriate to
facilitate the orderly movement of traffic in a reasonable and safe manner.
Alaska Avenue - Douglas Street to Aviation Boulevard            35
Apollo Street - Park Place to Rosecrans Avenue                  30
Atwood Way - Nash Street to Douglas Street                      35
Aviation Boulevard - 116th Street to El Segundo Boulevard       40
Aviation Boulevard - El Segundo Boulevard to Rosecrans Avenue   40
Continental Boulevard - Mariposa Avenue to El Segundo Boulevard 30
Douglas Street - Imperial Highway to Mariposa Avenue            40
Douglas Street - Mariposa Avenue to El Segundo Boulevard        40
Douglas Street - El Segundo Boulevard to Alaska Avenue          40
El Segundo Boulevard - Main Street to Center Street             35
El Segundo Boulevard - Center Street to Pacific Coast Highway   35
El Segundo Boulevard - Pacific Coast Highway to Douglas Street  40
El Segundo Boulevard - Douglas Street to Isis Avenue            40
Grand Avenue - Eucalyptus Drive to Center Street                35
Grand Avenue - Center Street to Pacific Coast Highway           35
Grand Avenue - Pacific Coast Highway to Duley Road              35
Hawaii Street - Alaska Avenue to Aviation Boulevard             35
Hughes Way - East of Pacific Coast Highway                      40
Imperial Highway - Pacific Coast Highway to Aviation Boulevard  40
Lairport Street - Maple Avenue to Mariposa Avenue               35
Maple Avenue - Pacific Coast Highway to Nash Street             35
Mariposa Avenue - Pacific Coast Highway to Douglas Street       40
Nash Street - Imperial Highway to Mariposa Avenue               35
Nash Street - Mariposa Avenue to El Segundo Boulevard           35
Rosecrans Avenue - West City Limit to Bell Avenue               35
Rosecrans Avenue - Bell Avenue to Pacific Coast Highway         45
Rosecrans Avenue - Pacific Coast Highway to Aviation Boulevard  45
Selby Street - Imperial Highway to Walnut Avenue                30
Utah Street - Douglas Street to Aviation                        35
Vista del Mar - Grand Avenue to 45th Street                     45
Walnut Avenue - Pacific Coast Highway to Selby Street           30
 
B.    Signal Regulation of Speed: The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to
regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic
in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds
otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 1222, 6-7-1994; amd. Ord. 1611,
1-21-2020; Ord. 1674, 7-1-2025)
8-4-4: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS; REMOVE VEGETATION:
Whenever the Traffic Engineer feels that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing
in a parkway obstructs the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the
streets approaching the intersection, he shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or
tree to be immediately removed or reduced in height. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-5: VEHICLES TRANSPORTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
   A.   Driver In Attendance: A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or
substance as identified in title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations must be
attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor
carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, shoulder,
street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet (5') of the
traveled portion thereof, within a residential district except for brief
periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of
the vehicle, or the necessities of operations require the vehicle to be parked
and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place.
   B.   Certain Vehicles Exempt: Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite
and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life
support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools,
are exempt from the provisions of subsection A of this Section. Additionally,
such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing
duties that are evident and necessary as the operator of the vehicle or the
provider of the service.
   C.   Explanation Of Terms: For purposes of this Section:
      1.   A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle
is on the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within one hundred
feet (100') of the vehicle and has it within his unobstructed field of view.
      2.   A qualified representative of a motor carrier is a person who:
         a.   Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle;
         b.   Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance
contained in the vehicle he attends;
         c.   Has been instructed on the procedures he must follow in
emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances;
         d.   Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability
to do so.
   D.   Further Obligations: The rules of this Section do not relieve a driver
from any obligation imposed by Federal, State, or local laws relating to the
transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor carrier safety
regulations or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle
is stopped on a public street or highway. (Ord. 1003, 4-7-1981)
8-4-6: TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   Designation:
      1.   Whenever any resolution of the City designates and describes any
street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons, the City
Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to designate the street or streets by
appropriate signs as "Truck Routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a
maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons.
      2.   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons.
   B.   Pickups And Deliveries: When the truck route or routes are established
and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a
maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons shall drive on the route or routes
and none other, except that nothing in this Section shall prohibit the operator
of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons coming from a
truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted
streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of
goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on
the restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in
the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any
building or structure upon the restricted streets for which a building permit
has previously been obtained therefor.
   C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this Section shall not apply to: 1)
passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or
to 2) any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the
construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
8-4-7: HEAVY VEHICLES; PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: No persons shall move or operate upon any of the City
streets any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the
Vehicle Code without a written permit from the City Traffic Engineer. (Ord.
1154, 7-3-1990)
   B.   Guarantee Repair Of Streets: The City Traffic Engineer may, by written
permit, authorize a load or loads in excess of those allowed for in the Vehicle
Code, if in his judgment, the streets upon which the vehicle used is to be
operated can safely withstand the additional weight or if the applicant will
guarantee to the City that all cost of repair to the streets or to the public
property of the City damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid
in full. The permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon satisfactory
proof of financial responsibility determined under the Vehicle Code as the City
Traffic Engineer in his discretion may require. Extra insurance or other
financial security may be imposed at the discretion of the City Traffic
Engineer as a condition for a permit for unusually large or heavy loads which
pose a substantial risk to public facilities. (Ord. 1154, 7-3-1990; amd. Ord.
1163, 5-7-1991)
   C.   Application For Permit: Application for the permit authorized by this
Section shall be on the standard application form developed by the State
Department of Transportation pursuant to Vehicle Code section 35781.
   D.   Permit Fee: For any permit so issued, there shall be a charge which
shall be equal to the largest fee allowed by the fee schedule developed by the
State Department of Transportation pursuant to Vehicle Code section 35795 for
single or multiple trips. (Ord. 1154, 7-3-1990; amd. 2000 Code)
   E.   Police Escort: Whenever the City Traffic Engineer shall deem a police
escort necessary or advisable in connection with operation under the permit,
the permittee shall pay the current charge for the escorts required. (Ord.
1154, 7-3-1990)
8-4-8: FLANGE WHEEL MACHINERY:
No person shall operate over the City streets any vehicle, piece of equipment
or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges or other projections on the wheels
or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or corrugations, a filler
block may be placed on each section so that a flat bearing surface will be in
contact with the pavement at all times. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-9: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION:
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously
so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over
which the funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the
orders of the Police Department. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-10: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLE:
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on or hold on to with
his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of
receiving motive power therefrom. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-11: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES USING PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this Section, a "commercial vehicle"
means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half (1/2) ton.
   B.   Consent Required: No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle
in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway
itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign
or markings are in place indicating that the use of the driveway is prohibited.
(Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-12: RIDING OR DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or
animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed
driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive
a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that the sidewalk area be
substantially protected by wooden planks two inches (2") thick, and written
permission be previously obtained from the City Traffic Engineer. The wooden
planks shall not be permitted to remain upon the sidewalk area during the hours
from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-13: DRIVING OVER NEW PAVEMENT OR MARKINGS:
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any
newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier
sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to
drive over or across the pavement or marking or when the device is in place
indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
8-4-14: BARRIERS AND SIGNS GENERALLY:
No person, public utility or department of the City shall erect or place any
barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Traffic
Engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any
barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or
by any department of the City. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-15: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk
unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-16: LIMITED ACCESS ROADWAYS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except
at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-17: RESTRICTIONS ON FREEWAY USE:
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle or any vehicle
which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a
"freeway", as defined by State law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or
along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for
the use of pedestrians; provided, official signs are in place giving notice of
the restrictions. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-18: NONCOMPLIANCE TO SIGNS:
No person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of
any barrier or sign erected: a) pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of
the city, or b) by any public utility, or c) by any department of the city, or
d) by any other person pursuant to law or contract with the city, nor shall any
unauthorized person move or alter the position of the barrier or sign. (Ord.
659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-19: DRIVING ON PARK OR RECREATION GROUND:
No persons shall ride, drive or propel, or cause to be ridden, driven or
propelled into or upon any roadway, path or way in any public park or
recreation ground within the city any vehicle, device or other equipment,
including a bicycle. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-20: VEHICLES ON VACANT PROPERTY:
   A.   Prohibition: A person shall not operate any motor vehicle (including
any motorcycle, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, or jeep) or the motor
thereof on any vacant lot, parking lot, vacant property or acreage so as to
disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or person by noise, dust, smoke,
or fumes caused by such motor vehicle.
   B.   Exceptions: This section does not apply to any act prohibited by
section 372 of the California Penal Code, or prohibited or expressly permitted
by any state statute. (Ord. 746, 10-12-1970)
8-4-21: AUTO THEFT PREVENTION; KEY REMOVAL:
   A.   Locked Ignition, Key Removal Required: No person driving or in charge
of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended in any public place or
on any used or new car lot without first stopping the engine, locking the
ignition, removing the ignition key from the vehicle and effectively setting
the brake thereon.
   B.   Key Removal By Officer: Whenever any police officer shall find a motor
vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation
of this section, the police officer is authorized to remove the key from the
vehicle and to deliver the key to the police officer in charge of the police
station. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-22: RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
   A.   Driving Through Crossings Restricted: No person shall drive any vehicle
through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade
crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   B.   Blocking Crossings: No person shall cause or permit any railway train
or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated
in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel
for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision
shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while
blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the
operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the
scene of the accident. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-23: BICYCLES:
   A.   Appointment Of Bicycle Registrar: The chief of police shall be
designated and appointed as the registrar of bicycles of the city.
   B.   Bicycle License Required: It is unlawful for any person to operate or
use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by human power upon any of the public
streets, alleys or public highways within the city without first obtaining a
license required by division 16.7, commencing with section 39000, of the state
Vehicle Code.
   C.   Secondhand Bicycle Report: All persons engaged in the business of
buying secondhand bicycles within the city are hereby required to make a daily
report to the registrar of bicycles on report forms approved by the registrar,
giving the name and address of the person from whom the bicycle was purchased,
the description of the bicycle, the frame number thereof and the number and
symbols of the license indicia found thereon, if any. (Ord. 968, 2-6-1979)
8-4-24: COASTERS AND SKATEBOARDS 1 :
   A.   Use Restricted: No person shall coast or propel himself down, along,
upon or over any sidewalk in or on any skateboard, rollerblades, in-line
skates, wagon, cart, hand wagon, coaster, bicycle or other vehicle in any
business district, public park or recreation area.
   B.   Exception: Skateboarding and freestyle bicycling shall only be
permitted in areas designated by the city. (Ord. 1112, 5-17-1988; amd. 2000
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 4 of this code for provisions relative to
  skateboard parks.
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
8-5-1: Application Of Regulations
8-5-2: Maintenance Of No Parking Areas
8-5-3: No Parking Areas Designated
8-5-4: Parking Within Intersections Permitted
8-5-5: Stopping Or Standing In Parkways
8-5-6: Parking Time Limits
8-5-7: Parking To Display Vehicle For Sale
8-5-8: Repairing Vehicles On Streets
8-5-9: Parking Adjacent To Schools
8-5-10: Parking On Narrow Streets
8-5-11: Parking On Grades
8-5-12: Front And Side Yard Parking
8-5-13: Goods Sold From Wagons Or Pushcarts
8-5-14: Temporary Emergency No Parking Signs
8-5-15: Display Of Warning Devices
8-5-16: Parking Space Markings
8-5-17: No Stopping; Tow Away Zones
8-5-18: Disabled Veterans; Restricted Zones
8-5-19: Curb Parking
8-5-1: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic control device.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code or the ordinances of the
city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified
places or at specified times. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-2: MAINTENANCE OF NO PARKING AREAS:
   A.   Authority: The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to maintain,
by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones,
no parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this
chapter.
   B.   Compliance With Signs And Markings: When the curb markings or signs are
in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle
adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-3: NO PARKING AREAS DESIGNATED:
Except as provided in section
8-5-4 of this chapter, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or
leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or
signal:
   A.   Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated
with appropriate signs or markings.
   B.   On either side of any street between the projected property lines of
any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at the
street.
   C.   In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking
or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger
life or property, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface.
   D.   In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking
area, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the
curb surface.
   E.   Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder,
delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon the track.
   F.   If any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property.
   G.   On any street or highway where the use of the street or highway or a
portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the
street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use
of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose
other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway
or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or
structures of unusual size, and the parking of the vehicle would prohibit or
interfere with the use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of no
parking are erected or placed at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
effective time of the no parking.
   H.   At any place within twenty feet (20') of a point on the curb
immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when the place is
indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
   I.   At any place within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection
in any business district when the place is indicated by appropriate signs or by
red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus
stop.
   J.   Within twenty feet (20') of the approach to any traffic signal,
boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. (Ord. 864, 12-17-
1974)
8-5-4: PARKING WITHIN INTERSECTIONS PERMITTED:
Pursuant to the authority of California Vehicle Code section 22500(a), parking
shall be permitted in "T" intersections opposite the street entrance except
where the curb opposite the street entrance is painted red. (Ord. 864, 12-17-
1974)
8-5-5: STOPPING OR STANDING IN PARKWAYS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967)
8-5-6: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person who owns or has
possession, custody or control of any vehicle may park the vehicle upon any
street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy two (72) hours.
(Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5-7: PARKING TO DISPLAY VEHICLE FOR SALE:
   A.   Streets: No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any
street in the city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it
for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
   B.   City Owned Parking Lots: No operator of any vehicle shall park the
vehicle upon any city owned or city operated parking lot for the principal
purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by
resolution of the council. (Ord. 981, 12-4-1979)
8-5-8: REPAIRING VEHICLES ON STREETS:
   A.   Repairing Or Greasing: No person shall construct or cause to be
constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased,
dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any
public street in the city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a
public street.
   B.   Washing Or Polishing: No person shall wash or cause to be washed,
polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public
street in the city, when a charge is made for the service. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
8-5-9: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
   A.   Authority: The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect
signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school
property when the parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation.
   B.   Compliance: When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon
that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a
vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-10: PARKING ON NARROW STREETS:
   A.   Authority: The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place
signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the
roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20'), or upon one side of a street as
indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not
exceed thirty feet (30').
   B.   Compliance: When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are
erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord.
659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-11: PARKING ON GRADES:
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when
upon any grade exceeding three percent (3%) within any business or residence
district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the
curb or by other means. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-12: FRONT AND SIDE YARD PARKING:
No person shall park or leave standing any unattended vehicle upon a
residential property's front yard or side yard with the exception of the paved
driveway portion which is used for the vehicular passageway or parking for the
occupants of the property and their guests. (Ord. 1281, 10-7-1997)
8-5-13: GOODS SOLD FROM WAGONS OR PUSHCARTS:
   A.   Prohibited; Exception: Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person shall stand or park any wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares,
merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or
offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, on any portion of any street within
the city, except that such wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the
request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10)
minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
persons delivering the articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer
from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. (Ord. 1473, 11-
20-2012)
   B.   Transporting Property; Permit Required:
      1.   No person shall park or stand any vehicle used or intended to be
used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting
patronage for the vehicle without first obtaining a written permit to do so
from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location
where the vehicle may stand.
      2.   Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section
and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person
shall park or stand any vehicle or pushcart on any location other than as
designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of the permit is
convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the
provisions of this section, the permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city
traffic engineer upon the filing of the record of the conviction with the
officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to the person until six (6)
months have elapsed from the date of the revocation. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967; amd.
2000 Code)
8-5-14: TEMPORARY EMERGENCY NO PARKING SIGNS:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the city traffic engineer determines that an
emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or
private assemblages, gatherings or functions or for other reasons, the city
traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be
erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of
vehicles is prohibited on the streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer
shall direct during the time the temporary signs are in place. The signs shall
remain in place only during the existence of the emergency and the city traffic
engineer shall cause the signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
   B.   Compliance: When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are
in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any
vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of the signs. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967)
8-5-15: DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES:
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand (4,000) pounds or
more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any
street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two
(2) flares or two (2) red lanterns or two (2) warning lights or reflectors,
which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the state department of highway
patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semitrailer is
disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district
within the city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street
lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred feet (200') during
darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be
immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred feet (100') in
advance of, and one hundred feet (100') to the rear of such disabled vehicle by
the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four (4) approved class
A - type I turn signal lamps, at least two (2) toward the front and at least
two (2) toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the
requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in
the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed
continuously during darkness while the vehicle remains disabled upon the street
or highway. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-16: PARKING SPACE MARKINGS:
   A.   Authority: The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and
maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings
where authorized parking is permitted.
   B.   Compliance: When the parking space markings are placed on the highway,
subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped,
left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or
shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-17: NO STOPPING; TOW AWAY ZONES:
   A.   Authority: The city traffic engineer shall designate established no
stopping tow away zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating
that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and that they will be towed away at
owner's expense, and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.
   B.   Compliance: During the hours and on the days designated on the signs,
it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of
the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no
stopping tow away zones. (Ord. 912, 10-5-1976)
8-5-18: DISABLED VETERANS; RESTRICTED ZONES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any veteran who is
entitled to either of the exemptions provided in section 9105 of the California
Vehicle Code and section 10783 of the California Revenue And Taxation Code,
shall be allowed to park in restricted zones. This section shall not be
construed, however, to allow the stopping, parking or standing of a vehicle at
the times and places that stopping, parking or standing of all vehicles is
prohibited absolutely by state law or local ordinance. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-19: CURB PARKING:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, a "limited curb parking
space" means an area open for lawful parking alongside of, and adjacent to a
curb, which area is not of sufficient length to permit two (2) or more vehicles
to freely move for parking therein at the same time.
   B.   Right Of Way: Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a limited curb
parking space, whose vehicle arrives at the parking space prior to any other
vehicle and who proceeds beyond the space a distance not to exceed ten feet
(10') for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the right of
way over any person driving or attempting to drive any other vehicle directly
into the limited curb parking space or who in any manner obstructs the limited
curb parking space, and the driver of the other vehicle shall yield the right
of way to the driver who first arrived at the parking space. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
ARTICLE A. PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES
SECTION:
8-5A-1: State Vehicle Code Provisions
8-5A-2: Definitions
8-5A-3: Designation Of Preferential Parking Zones
8-5A-4: Designation Criteria
8-5A-5: Designation Process
8-5A-6: Dissolution Process
8-5A-7: Permits
8-5A-8: Exemptions
8-5A-9: Authority Of City Staff
8-5A-10: Prohibitions
8-5A-1: STATE VEHICLE CODE PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article are expressly enacted under the State
Constitution, article XI, section 11 together with provisions of the California
Vehicle Code, as amended. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as
follows:
   DWELLING UNIT: Any self-contained house, apartment, stock cooperative,
condominium or accessory dwelling unit occupied solely for residential
purposes.
   PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONE: A residential area with streets and boundaries
designated by the City Council wherein vehicles displaying a permit shall be
exempt from parking restrictions established by this article.
   RESIDENT: Any person who lives in a dwelling unit located in a preferential
parking zone.
   VISITOR: A person visiting residents living in a dwelling unit in a
preferential parking zone. (Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017)
8-5A-3: DESIGNATION OF PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES:
The City Council may, after a recommendation of the Traffic Engineer, designate
by resolution those areas satisfying the criteria established in section
8-5A-4 of this article as preferential parking zones. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-4: DESIGNATION CRITERIA:
The criteria referred to in section
8-5A-3 of this article shall be based upon the following considerations
established to the satisfaction of the Council:
   A.   Regular Interference: That "nonresident vehicles", defined as those
vehicles owned and/or operated by persons who are not "residents" as defined in
section
8-5A-2 of this article, do or may substantially and regularly interfere with
the use of the majority of available public street or alley parking spaces in
the proposed zone by adjacent residents;
   B.   Regular Intervals: That the interference by the nonresident vehicles
referred to in subsection A of this section occurs in the proposed zone at
regular and significant daily or weekly intervals;
   C.   Noise: That the nonresident vehicles parked in the area of the proposed
zone cause or are the source of unreasonable noise, traffic hazards,
environmental pollution, or devaluation of real property in the area of the
proposed zone; and
   D.   Shortage Of Parking Spaces: That a shortage of reasonably available and
convenient residential related parking spaces exists in the area of the
proposed zone. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-5: DESIGNATION PROCESS:
   A.   Petition Of Residents: Upon receipt and verification of a petition
signed by residents living in fifty five percent (55%) of the dwelling units of
the area proposed for designation, or upon adoption of a motion by the City
Council, the Traffic Engineer shall undertake such surveys or studies as are
deemed necessary to determine whether the area should be designated a
preferential parking zone and shall report his findings to the Council.
   B.   Notify Affected Residents: Where a preferential parking zone is
requested by the resident petition process, the residents requesting the
designation shall notify all affected residents prior to the presentation of
the petition and shall present verification of such notification to the Traffic
Engineer. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-6: DISSOLUTION PROCESS:
Proceedings to dissolve a preferential parking zone shall be initiated upon
receipt and verification of a petition signed by residents living in fifty five
percent (55%) of the dwelling units within the preferential parking zone or
upon adoption of a resolution by the City Council. A dissolution shall be
accomplished by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-7: PERMITS:
   A.   Issuance And Fees:
      1.   The Director of Public Works shall issue permits for preferential
parking and the Chief Financial Officer shall collect all fees.
      2.   Applicants shall present proof that they reside in a dwelling unit
in a preferential parking zone, and proof that the vehicle for which a permit
is sought is registered at the same address as the applicant.
      3.   Applicants requesting more than three (3) permits for a dwelling
unit may be granted additional permits by the Director of Public Works upon
showing that there are more than three (3) vehicles registered at the dwelling
unit, and that sufficient off street parking is not available to the applicant,
and that to deny such additional permits would constitute a hardship.
      4.   Permit fees shall cover the cost of establishing and maintaining the
preferential parking zone. The permit fees shall be set by City Council
resolution at the time a preferential parking zone is designated.
   B.   Duration: Preferential parking permits issued pursuant to this section
are effective for as long as the permit holder continues to reside in a
dwelling unit included in a preferential parking zone or until such zone is
dissolved.
   C.   Visitor Permits: Any resident may purchase two (2) visitor permits per
dwelling unit. Each such permit shall have a permit number imprinted on it
which corresponds to the address of the permit holder.
   D.   Availability Of Parking: A preferential parking permit shall not
guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on street parking space within
the designated preferential parking zone.
   E.   Restrictions And Conditions: Each permit issued pursuant to this
section shall be subject to each and every condition and restriction set forth
in this article and as further provided by resolution establishing the
preferential parking zone for which it was issued. The issuance of such permit
shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of any
provision of this code or any other law or regulation.
   F.   Ineligible Properties: The following properties may be deemed
ineligible for a permit by the City Council at the time it establishes a
preferential parking zone:
      1.   Properties in the Single-Family Residential (R-1) and Two-Family
Residential (R-2) zones duly developed after May 1, 2025 that are legally
approved to provide fewer than two parking spaces per dwelling unit (regardless
of size or bedroom count).
      2.   Properties in the Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) zone duly
developed after May 1, 2025 that are legally approved to provide fewer than two
parking spaces per dwelling unit (regardless of size or bedroom count) and/or
less than 1 visitor space for every three dwelling units.
      3.   Properties subject to a development agreement.
   G.   Illegal conversion or use of required parking garage or other parking
space. The Public Works Director may deny issuance of a preferential parking
permit or revoke a previously issued permit for a property or dwelling where a
garage and/or other required parking space is not being used for vehicle
parking, e.g. being used for storage of personal items or other use.
(Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985; amd. Ord. 1507, 6-16-2015; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord.
1870, 4-1-2025)
8-5A-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The following vehicles shall be exempt from parking restrictions pursuant to
this article:
   A.   Utility: A vehicle owned or operated by a utility whether privately or
publicly owned, when used in the course of business.
   B.   Governmental Agency: A vehicle owned or operated by a governmental
agency when used in the course of official government business.
   C.   Highway Patrol: A vehicle for which an authorized emergency vehicle
permit has been issued by the commissioner of the California highway patrol
when used in the course of business. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-9: AUTHORITY OF CITY STAFF:
   A.   Implement Program: The director of public works shall promulgate rules
and administer policies designated to implement this program, including the
posting of traffic regulation signs on streets designated as preferential
parking zones. These rules shall be submitted to and approved by the city
council.
   B.   Collection Of Fees: The chief financial officer shall promulgate rules
and administer policies designated to implement the collection of fees for the
preferential parking permit system set forth herein. These rules shall be
submitted to and approved by the city council.
   C.   Enforcement: The police chief shall have the authority to enforce
violations of this article. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
8-5A-10: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Display Of Permit: On Monday through Friday, between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M., and between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M., no vehicle shall be
parked or stopped adjacent to any curb in a preferential parking zone in
violation of any posted prohibition or restriction, unless such vehicle shall
have prominently displayed a duly issued permit on or by the left rear portion
of the rear bumper; or a visitor permit or special event permit to be displayed
on the driver side dashboard.
   B.   Falsify Or Sell Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to forge,
falsify, sell, rent, or lease, or cause to be forged, falsified, sold, rented,
or leased for any value or consideration any preferential parking permit.
   C.   Illegal Acquisition: It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or
otherwise acquire for value or use any preferential parking permit, except as
provided for in this article. (Ord. 1206, 10-5-1993)
ARTICLE B. SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
8-5B-1: Twenty Minute Parking
8-5B-2: Forty Minute Parking
8-5B-3: One Hour Parking
8-5B-4: Two Hour Parking
8-5B-5: Parallel Parking On One-Way Streets
8-5B-6: Diagonal Parking
8-5B-7: Parking Commercial Vehicles In Residential Districts
8-5B-8: Parking On City Property
8-5B-9: Parking In City Owned Public Parking Lots
8-5B-10: Cords Associated With Oversized Vehicles, Recreational Vehicles And
Trailers On Public Streets
8-5B-1: TWENTY MINUTE PARKING:
   A.   Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of
time longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time between eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day except Sundays.
   B.   When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city
traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no
operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle adjacent to any
such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. (Ord.
659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-2: FORTY MINUTE PARKING:
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic
engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of
any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sundays for a
period of time longer than forty (40) minutes. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-3: ONE HOUR PARKING:
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic
engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of
any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sundays for a
period of time longer than one hour. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-4: TWO HOUR PARKING:
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic
engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of
any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sundays for a
period of time longer than two (2) hours. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-5: PARALLEL PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS:
   A.   Parallel Parking Allowed: Subject to other and more restrictive
limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches (18") of
the left hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way
street unless signs are in place prohibiting stopping or standing.
   B.   Sign Permitting Required: In the event a highway includes two (2) or
more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon the
roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left hand side of the
one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting standing or parking.
   C.   Determine When Prohibited: The city traffic engineer is authorized to
determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left hand side
of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the
left hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two (2) or more
separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.
   D.   Exception: The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section
shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the
process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case the vehicle may
be backed up to the curb; provided; that, the vehicle does not extend beyond
the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967)
8-5B-6: DIAGONAL PARKING:
   A.   Manner Of Parking: On any of the streets or portions of streets and
city owned parking lots and property established by resolution of the city
council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place
indicating diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
park the vehicle except:
      1.   At the angle to the curb or bumper block or front limit painted line
indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and
entirely within the limits of the allotted space;
      2.   With the front wheel nearest the curb or bumper block or front limit
painted line within six inches (6") of the curb or bumper block or front limit
painted line.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply when the
vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers,
freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in section
8-5B-5 of this article shall be complied with. (Ord. 1055, 9-6-1983)
8-5B-7: PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle or its trailer,
having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of eleven thousand (11,000)
pounds for more for more than five (5) hours on any public street where a
majority of the buildings situated on the property contiguous thereto are used
for residential purposes except:
   A.   With respect to any commercial vehicle making pick ups or deliveries of
goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on
the restricted streets or highways; or
   B.   With respect to any commercial vehicle delivering materials to be used
in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of
any building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways. (Ord. 1190,
12-15-1992)
8-5B-8: PARKING ON CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the city manager determines that the orderly,
efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of
vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city
manager shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or
posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or
restricted.
   B.   Compliance: When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are
in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the direction or provisions of the signs. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-9: PARKING IN CITY OWNED PUBLIC PARKING LOTS:
No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle or its trailer,
or any recreational vehicle or motor home having a manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight rating of eleven thousand (11,000) pounds or more, for more than five
(5) hours on any city owned public parking lot. (Ord. 1190, 12-15-1992)
8-5B-10: CORDS ASSOCIATED WITH OVERSIZED VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND
TRAILERS ON PUBLIC STREETS:
No person may run electrical cords, extension cords, hoses, cables, wires or
other similar items across, above or on the parkway or sidewalk from a
residential or commercial property to an oversized vehicle, recreational
vehicle or trailer parked on a public street or highway. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
ARTICLE C. LOADING AND UNLOADING
SECTION:
8-5C-1: Determination And Marking Of Loading Zones
8-5C-2: Curb Markings
8-5C-3: Restrictions And Time Limits
8-5C-4: Yellow Loading Zones
8-5C-5: Passenger Loading Zones
8-5C-6: Alleys
8-5C-7: Bus Zones Established
8-5C-1: DETERMINATION AND MARKING OF LOADING ZONES:
   A.   Determination: The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to
determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
      1.   At any place in any business district;
      2.   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in
front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
   B.   Limited Area: In no event shall more than one-half (1/2) of the total
curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
   C.   Loading Zones; Yellow: Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint
upon the top of all curbs within the zones.
   D.   Passenger Loading Zones; White: Passenger loading zones shall be
indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in such zones. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967)
8-5C-2: CURB MARKINGS:
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this Article, to place, and when required herein shall place the
following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the
curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth.
   A.   Red: "Red" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
except as permitted by the California Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may
stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.
   B.   Yellow: "Yellow" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any
time between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day
except Sunday for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers
or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not
consume more that three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials
more than twenty (20) minutes.
   C.   White: "White" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any
purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or for the purpose of
depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three (3)
minutes, and the restrictions shall apply between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sunday and except as follows:
      1.   When the zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the
restrictions shall apply at all times.
      2.   When the zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply
at all times except when the theater is closed.
   D.   Blue: "Blue" indicates parking limited exclusively to vehicles which
bear a special license or display a special placard issued under sections 9105
or 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code.
   E.   Compliance: When the City Traffic Engineer, as authorized under this
Article, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle adjacent to the legible curb marking in violation of any of the
provisions of this Section. (Ord. 945, 12-6-1977)
8-5C-3: RESTRICTIONS AND TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Commercial Vehicles; Time Limit: Permission herein granted to stop or
stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply
only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary
therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes.
   B.   Commercial And Mail Deliveries: The loading or unloading of materials
shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of
express and parcel post packages and United States mail.
   C.   Passenger Loading And Unloading: Permission herein granted to stop or
park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading
or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary
therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.
   D.   Enforcement: Within the total time limits above specified, the
provisions of this Section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and
reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges
hereby granted. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5C-4: YELLOW LOADING ZONES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for
any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such
time as is permitted in Section
8-5C-2 of this Article. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5C-5: PASSENGER LOADING ZONES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for
any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as
is specified in Section
8-5C-2 of this Article. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5C-6: ALLEYS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the
loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley and in no case shall
block an alley to through traffic. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5C-7: BUS ZONES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Authority: The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish
bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common
carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof.
   B.   Area: Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an
intersection. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
ARTICLE D. SPECIAL STOPS
SECTION:
8-5D-1: Sign Placement
8-5D-2: Stop At Through Street Or Stop Signs
8-5D-3: Emerging From Alleys, Driveways
8-5D-1: SIGN PLACEMENT:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates and describes any
street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which
vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad
grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the City Traffic
Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through
street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other
intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so
designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at
any entrance to an intersection when the entrance is controlled by an official
traffic- control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be
placed as provided in, the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5D-2: STOP AT THROUGH STREETS OR STOP SIGNS:
   A.   Through Streets: Those streets and parts of streets established by
resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be through streets for the
purposes of this Article.
   B.   Intersections: The provisions of this Section shall also apply at one
or more entrances to the intersections as the entrances and intersections are
established by resolution of the Council.
   C.   Railroad Grade Crossings: The provisions of this Section shall apply at
those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the
Council. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5D-3: EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop
the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk
area extending across any alley way or driveway. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
ARTICLE E. PERMIT PARKING
SECTION:
8-5E-1: Purpose
8-5E-2: Definitions
8-5E-3: Application Of Regulations
8-5E-4: Appeals
8-5E-5: Parking Prohibited; Exceptions
8-5E-6: Additional Prohibitions
8-5E-7: Parking Permits
8-5E-8: Parking Permit Application
8-5E-9: Fees
8-5E-10: Issuance
8-5E-11: Duration
8-5E-12: Permit Denial
8-5E-13: Permit Form
8-5E-14: Display
8-5E-15: Transferability
8-5E-16: Notice
8-5E-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California
Vehicle Code section 22507, and any successor statute or regulation, to allow
permit parking in specified areas within the city's jurisdiction. (Ord. 1369,
11-18-2003)
8-5E-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this article:
   ADMINISTRATOR: The administrative services director, or designee.
   PERMIT STALL: A parking stall reserved for persons possessing a valid
parking permit issued pursuant to this article.
   SPECIFIED AREA: Locations within the city's jurisdiction designated by city
council resolution as parking permit areas. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-3: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The time limitations on standing or parking in this code will not relieve any
person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the
California Vehicle Code or this code prohibiting or limiting the standing or
parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 1369, 11-
18-2003)
8-5E-4: APPEALS:
Every person who is issued a notice of parking violation pursuant to this
article may request review of that notice under California Vehicle Code section
40215 et seq. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-5: PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Time: Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for
any person to park or leave standing any vehicle on any street or structure in
a specified area for more than two (2) hours between twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Monday through Friday, inclusive,
holidays excepted.
   B.   Parking Or Standing Vehicles: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, it is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle on
any street or structure in a specified area designated as "permit only"
parking.
   C.   Exceptions: This section does not apply:
      1.   To any person parking in a permit stall who possesses a valid
parking permit issued pursuant to this article;
      2.   To any person holding a valid handicap permit issued pursuant to
this code or the California Vehicle Code; or
      3.   To any public emergency vehicle. (Ord. 1426, 2-17-2009)
8-5E-6: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to falsely represent themselves as
eligible for a parking permit under this article or to furnish false
information in an application for a parking permit.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to copy, produce, or otherwise bring into
existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly use or display a facsimile
or counterfeit parking permit, with intent to evade prohibitions or limitations
on parking in a specified area. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-7: PARKING PERMITS:
   A.   Persons holding a valid permit issued pursuant to this article may park
a vehicle in a permit stall regardless of the time restrictions set forth
above.
   B.   The administrator is authorized to issue parking permits pursuant to
this article. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-8: PARKING PERMIT APPLICATION:
Every person seeking a parking permit must file an application with the
administrator containing the following:
   A.   The applicant's name, address and phone number;
   B.   Additional information the administrator may reasonably require;
   C.   The applicant must sign an application under penalty of perjury. (Ord.
1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-9: FEES:
   A.   Applicants for permits issued pursuant to this article must pay to the
city a fee in an amount established by city council resolution.
   B.   Failure to pay the fee in accord with city council resolution, or
policies and procedures promulgated by the administrator, results in the
automatic termination of a parking permit issued pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-10: ISSUANCE:
   A.   The administrator must issue a permit if:
      1.   The application was complete in accordance with this article;
      2.   The applicant paid all fees for the parking permit;
      3.   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
      4.   The applicant accepts the permit in writing.
   B.   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this article must conform to the
general permit conditions of this article. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-11: DURATION:
Parking permits are valid for ninety (90) days, six (6) months, or one year.
Upon expiration, the applicant may apply for and be granted additional parking
permits if the applicant still qualifies under the conditions set forth in this
article. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-12: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit must be denied if the administrator finds that:
   A.   The applicant is not a bona fide city resident or person employed by a
business located within the city's jurisdiction;
   B.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
   C.   The number of permits issued exceed the number of permit stalls
available for use by permittees; or
   D.   The applicant violated any provision of this article. (Ord. 1369, 11-
18-2003)
8-5E-13: PERMIT FORM:
Permits issued pursuant to this article must be in a form prescribed by the
administrator and will include the date of issuance and expiration date. (Ord.
1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-14: DISPLAY:
All permits must be placed so that it is clearly visible from the exterior of
the vehicle. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-15: TRANSFERABILITY:
Permits issued pursuant to this article may not be transferred to persons other
than an applicant's bona fide employee. Any transfer of a permit in violation
of this article renders the permit void. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-16: NOTICE:
Signs giving reasonable notice of the prohibitions contained in this article
must be erected within the specified areas as required by the California
Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
ARTICLE F. CARSHARING PERMITS
SECTION:
8-5F-1: Purpose
8-5F-2: Definitions
8-5F-3: Administration
8-5F-4: Carsharing Parking Permits
8-5F-5: Application Of Regulations
8-5F-6: Parking Permits; Application
8-5F-7: Fees
8-5F-8: Issuance
8-5F-9: Duration
8-5F-10: Permit Denial
8-5F-11: Permit Form
8-5F-12: Display
8-5F-13: Notice
8-5F-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California
Vehicle Code section 22507.1, and any successor statute or regulation, in order
to regulate parking of vehicles participating in a carsharing program within
the city's jurisdiction. The regulations enacted by this article are intended
to protect public health and safety by, among other things, facilitating the
public's use of shared vehicles and reducing the impact of greenhouse gases and
traffic congestion. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this article:
   CARSHARE BUSINESS: A public or private entity owning at least one hundred
fifty (150) motor vehicles operating a carsharing program.
   CARSHARE VEHICLE: A vehicle participating in a carsharing program and
registered with a carshare business.
   CARSHARING PROGRAM: A service operated by a carshare business that rents at
least one hundred fifty (150) carshare vehicles that serve the city on an
hourly or daily rental rate and that has entered into an agreement with the
city authorized by the city council. Vehicles must be allowed to be dropped off
and picked up at a minimum of twenty five (25) different locations in the city.
The twenty five (25) locations must be on separate parcels of property or be
comprised of at least twenty five (25) public parking spaces. (Ord. 1495, 7-1-
2014)
8-5F-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The police chief, or designee, is authorized to issue carsharing
parking permits and permits pursuant to this article.
   B.   The city manager is authorized to promulgate administrative policies
and procedures required to implement the regulations set forth in this article.
(Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-4: CARSHARING PARKING PERMITS:
   A.   Carshare vehicles with a valid permit issued pursuant to this article
may be parked in all valid parking areas within the city notwithstanding time
restrictions for such areas established by this code or other applicable law
including, without limitation, section
8-5-6 of this chapter or resolution 4162, adopted May 16, 2000, as amended.
   B.   Nothing in this section authorizes carshare vehicles to park in areas
where standing or parking is prohibited for some or certain times as identified
by this code or other applicable law including, without limitation, section
8-5-3 of this chapter or resolution 4162, adopted May 16, 2000, as amended.
(Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-5: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The permissions for standing or parking carshare vehicles in this article do
not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions of the California Vehicle Code or this code prohibiting or limiting
the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-6: PARKING PERMITS; APPLICATION:
Every person desiring a carsharing parking permit must file an application with
the police chief, or designee, containing the following:
   A.   The name, address and phone number of the carshare business;
   B.   The license number, make and model of designated carshare vehicles;
   C.   Additional information the police chief, or designee, may reasonably
require;
   D.   The applicant must sign an application under penalty of perjury. (Ord.
1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-7: FEES:
Unless otherwise provided by city council resolution, applications for
carsharing permits may be submitted without charge. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-8: ISSUANCE:
   A.   The police chief will issue a permit if:
      1.   The application was complete in accordance with this article;
      2.   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
      3.   The applicant accepts the permit in writing.
   B.   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this article will conform to the
general permit conditions of this article. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-9: DURATION:
Carsharing parking permits are valid for a period of twelve (12) months, and
may be renewed, if the applicant continues to meet the qualifications therefor.
(Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-10: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit must be denied if the police chief finds that:
   A.   An applicant is not qualified to obtain a permit pursuant to this
article; or
   B.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false. (Ord. 1478,
4-2-2013)
8-5F-11: PERMIT FORM:
Permits issued pursuant to this article will be in a form prescribed by the
police chief and should, at the police chief's discretion, include the license
plate number of the carshare vehicle to which it relates, and the date of
issuance and the day of expiration. (Ord. 1495, 7-1-2014)
8-5F-12: DISPLAY:
All permits will be placed at the lower driver's side of the windshield of the
carshare vehicle to which it relates so that it is clearly visible from the
exterior of the carshare vehicle. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-13: NOTICE:
If required by law, signs giving reasonable notice of the provisions of this
article will be erected within the city as required by the California Vehicle
Code. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
ARTICLE G. OVERSIZED VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND TRAILER PERMIT PARKING
SECTION:
8-5G-1: Purpose
8-5G-2: Parking Prohibited; Exceptions
8-5G-3: Oversized Vehicle Resident Registration Program
8-5G-4: Registration Of Oversized Vehicles, Recreational Vehicles Or Trailers
8-5G-5: Oversized Vehicle Parking Permits
8-5G-6: Oversized Vehicle Parking Permits; Issuance
8-5G-7: Oversized Vehicle Parking Permits; Duration
8-5G-8: Oversized Vehicle Handicap Parking Permits
8-5G-9: Oversized Vehicle Handicap Parking Permits; Issuance
8-5G-10: Oversized Vehicle Handicap Parking Permits; Duration
8-5G-11: Permit Denial
8-5G-12: Penalties For Violations; Review Request
8-5G-13: Application Of Regulations
8-5G-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers, California
constitution article XI, section 11 and California Vehicle Code sections 22507
and 22507.5, and any successor statute or regulation, to allow permit parking
in specified areas within the city's jurisdiction. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-2: PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Public Streets And Highways: No person may park or leave standing any
trailer, recreational vehicle or oversized vehicle on any public street or
highway in the city between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. through six
o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   B.   Intersections: No person may park or leave standing any trailer,
recreational vehicle or oversized vehicle on any public street or highway in
the city within twenty five feet (25') of any intersection.
   C.   Exceptions: The prohibition stated in subsection A of this section does
not apply:
      1.   To any trailer, recreational vehicle or oversized vehicle for which
a valid oversized vehicle parking permit has been issued and is properly
displayed, in accordance with this article.
      2.   To any vehicle for which a valid oversized vehicle handicap parking
permit has been issued and is properly displayed, in accordance with this
article.
      3.   To any oversized vehicle or trailer for which an encroachment permit
has been duly issued by the city.
      4.   To any trailers, recreational vehicles or oversized vehicles parked
or left standing as a result of a mechanical breakdown so as to allow the
performance of emergency repairs on the vehicle for a period not to exceed
twenty four (24) hours.
      5.   To any commercial vehicles making pick ups or delivery of goods,
wares or merchandise, or while providing services to a residence, including,
but not limited to, yard maintenance, pool care and maintenance, repair and
construction services.
      6.   To any tow trucks and similar vehicles that are in the course of
providing services.
      7.   To any public or utility vehicles and trailers that are in the
course of providing services.
      8.   To any motor coach or bus that is operated by a common carrier of
passengers for hire that is associated with a hotel in the city and is parked
adjacent to the hotel.
      9.   To any public emergency vehicle.
      10.   During any state of emergency declared by the city council to exist
within the city of El Segundo. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-3: OVERSIZED VEHICLE RESIDENT REGISTRATION PROGRAM:
The purpose of the oversized vehicle resident registration program is to have
an index of all oversized vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers that are
owned by residents and parked within the city. The onetime registration is
valid for the life of the vehicle and is signified by a sticker that is issued
by the police department. Registration alone does not allow an oversized
vehicle, recreation vehicle or trailer to park at all times on city public
streets or highways. Rather, once such a vehicle has been registered with the
city, the owner may apply for oversized vehicle parking permits pursuant to
this article. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-4: REGISTRATION OF OVERSIZED VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OR TRAILERS:
   A.   Each person registering an oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or
trailer with the city must file with the police department a completed
application containing the following:
      1.   The name, address, and phone number of the registered owner of
designated oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer;
      2.   The name, address, and phone number of the applicant for the permit;
      3.   Proof of residency, which must be current and must include the
following: California driver's license or California identification card and
one of the following: property tax bill or public utility bill (telephone bills
are not acceptable).
      4.   The registration from the California department of motor vehicles
for the oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer that shows the
oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer is registered to a resident
of the city of El Segundo;
      5.   The license number, make, and model of designated oversized vehicle,
recreational vehicle or trailer; and
      6.   Any additional information the police department may require.
   B.   The applicant must sign the application under penalty of perjury.
   C.   The applicant must pay any applicable fees in an amount set by city
council resolution.
   D.   The police chief or designee must issue an oversized vehicle resident
registration sticker to each person who submits a completed application, pays
the registration fee set by city council resolution, and otherwise meets the
requirements of this article. The registration sticker must be issued within
ten (10) working days from the date all requirements have been met.
   E.   The oversized vehicle resident registration sticker must be displayed
on the left side of the rear bumper of the oversized vehicle, recreational
vehicle or trailer that has been registered with the city. The sticker must be
displayed in a manner so that it is clearly visible from the street. (Ord.
1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-5: OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING PERMITS:
   A.   The purpose of the oversized vehicle parking permits is to give owners
of oversized vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers the opportunity, for
a limited time, to park the oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer
on a public street or highway adjacent to their residence, and to allow an out
of town visitor who owns an oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer
to park on a public street or highway adjacent to the residence which the out
of town visitor is visiting for a limited time period. For purposes of this
article, the phrase "adjacent to the residence" means as close as practicable
to the residence, but no more than four hundred feet (400') from the residence.
   B.   A duly issued oversized vehicle parking permit only allows an otherwise
prohibited vehicle to lawfully park on a city street or highway from two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. for two (2) consecutive days.
The permit does not allow the vehicle or trailer to be parked in an otherwise
unlawful manner. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-6: OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Each person who seeks an oversized vehicle parking permit for an
oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer that is currently registered
with the city must:
      1.   Have registered their oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or
trailer and permanently affixed the oversized vehicle residential sticker to
their vehicle or trailer in conformance with section
8-5G-4 of this article.
      2.   File with the police department a completed application form
containing the following:
         a.   The dates for which the permit is requested;
         b.   The dates and duration of any and all oversized vehicle parking
permits issued to the applicant within the immediately preceding ninety (90)
day period;
         c.   Any additional information the police department may require.
      3.   Pay any applicable permit fee set by city council resolution.
   B.   Each person who seeks an oversized vehicle parking permit for an
oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer that is not currently
registered with the city must:
      1.   Be a guest of a resident of the city, and not a resident of the
city.
      2.   File with the police department a completed application form
containing the following:
         a.   The name, address, and phone number of the registered owner of
designated oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer;
         b.   The name, address, and phone number of the applicant for the
permit;
         c.   The registration from the California department of motor
vehicles, or equivalent agency in another state, for the oversized vehicle,
recreational vehicle or trailer;
         d.   The name, address, and phone number of the resident that is being
visited;
         e.   The license plate number, make, and model of designated oversized
vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer;
         f.   The dates for which the permit is requested;
         g.   The dates and duration of any and all oversized vehicle parking
permits issued to the applicant during the current calendar year;
         h.   The dates and duration of any and all oversized vehicle parking
permits issued to the resident being visited during the current calendar year;
and
         i.   Additional information the police department may require.
      3.   Sign the application under penalty of perjury.
      4.   Pay any applicable permit fee set by city council resolution.
   C.   The police chief or designee must issue an oversized vehicle parking
permit to each person who submits a completed application, pays the
registration fee set by city council resolution, and otherwise meets the
requirements of this article. Oversized vehicle parking permit(s) must be
issued within two (2) working days from the date all requirements have been
met.
   D.   Oversized vehicle parking permits issued by the police chief or
designee must include the license plate number of the designated oversized
vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer, the date of issuance, and the day of
its expiration.
   E.   Permits must be displayed in the vehicle for which it has been issued.
The permit must be affixed on the lower driver's side of the windshield or the
driver's window so that it is clearly visible from the street and from the
exterior of the vehicle. For those vehicles without windows, such as a trailer,
permits must be displayed on the side of the trailer so that it is clearly
visible from the street, which is usually the left side of the trailer. (Ord.
1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-7: OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING PERMITS; DURATION:
   A.   For an oversized vehicle parking permit that is issued for a registered
vehicle pursuant to subsection
8-5G-6A of this article, the permit is valid for two (2) consecutive days. An
oversized vehicle parking permit will allow an otherwise prohibited vehicle to
lawfully park on a city street or highway from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. one day and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. the following day. Upon expiration of the permit, the applicant may apply
for and be granted additional oversized vehicle parking permits if the
applicant still qualifies under the conditions set forth in this article. An
applicant may request no more than two (2) consecutive oversized vehicle
parking permits (to allow an otherwise prohibited vehicle to lawfully park on a
city street or highway from 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. for 4 consecutive days) at
one time. An applicant may request no more than twelve (12) 2-day oversized
vehicle parking permits per quarter. A "quarter" for purposes of this section
is January through March, April through June, July through September, and
October through December of each calendar year.
   B.   For an oversized vehicle parking permit that is issued for a vehicle
that is not registered pursuant to subsection
8-5G-6B of this article, the permit is valid for two (2) consecutive days. An
oversized vehicle parking permit will allow an otherwise prohibited vehicle to
lawfully park on a city street or highway from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. one day and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. the following day. Upon expiration of the permit, the applicant may apply
for and be granted additional oversized vehicle parking permits if the
applicant still qualifies under the conditions set forth in this article. The
oversized vehicle parking permit must be associated with the residence being
visited. An applicant may request no more than two (2) oversized vehicle
parking permits (to allow an otherwise prohibited vehicle to park from 2:00
A.M. to 6:00 A.M. for 4 consecutive days) at one time. An applicant may request
no more than twelve (12) 2-day permits per quarter and no more than forty eight
(48) of such permits per calendar year. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-8: OVERSIZED VEHICLE HANDICAP PARKING PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of authorizing the issuance of oversized vehicle
handicap parking permits is to allow a handicapped person to park a designated
oversized vehicle on a street/highway directly in front of (or the side of the
property if it is a corner lot) their residence.
   B.   Requirements: In order to be eligible to receive an oversized vehicle
handicap parking permit, both of the following requirements must be met:
      1.   The applicant must be entitled to receive a handicapped placard or
license plate pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code;
      2.   The oversized vehicle is the only vehicle owned by the resident and
is required to meet the daily transportation needs of the resident. (Ord. 1523,
2-21-2017)
8-5G-9: OVERSIZED VEHICLE HANDICAP PARKING PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Each person desiring an oversized vehicle handicap parking permit must:
      1.   Have registered their oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or
trailer and permanently affixed the oversized vehicle residential sticker to
their vehicle in conformance with this article.
      2.   File with the police department a completed city application form
containing the following:
         a.   The name, address, and phone number of the registered owner and
applicant of designated oversized vehicle;
         b.   The license number, make, and model of designated oversized
vehicle;
         c.   The year for which the permit is requested;
         d.   The years of any and all previous oversized vehicle handicap
parking permits issued to the applicant;
         e.   Additional information the police department may require.
      3.   Sign the application under penalty of perjury.
   B.   The police chief or designee must issue an oversized vehicle handicap
parking permit to each person who submits a completed application and otherwise
meets the requirements of this article. Oversized vehicle handicap parking
permit(s) must be issued within ten (10) working days from the date all
requirements have been met.
   C.   Oversized vehicle handicap parking permits issued by the police chief
or designee must include the license plate number of the designated oversized
vehicle, the date of issuance and the day of its expiration.
   D.   Oversized vehicle handicap permits must be issued without any fees.
   E.   Permits must be displayed in the vehicle for which it has been issued.
The permit must be affixed on the lower driver's side of the windshield or the
driver's window so that it is clearly visible from the street and from the
exterior of the vehicle. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-10: OVERSIZED VEHICLE HANDICAP PARKING PERMITS; DURATION:
Oversized vehicle handicap parking permits are valid for a period of one year,
so long as the permit holder meets the requirements of this section relating to
such permits. Permits may be renewed on an annual basis. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-11: PERMIT DENIAL:
   A.   An oversized vehicle parking permit or an oversized vehicle handicap
parking permit must be denied if the police chief or designee finds that:
      1.   The applicant or the person the applicant is visiting is not a bona
fide city resident;
      2.   The out of town visitor is not a guest of the resident;
      3.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false; or
      4.   If the application is for an oversized vehicle handicap permit, the
applicant is not entitled to receive a handicap placard or license plate under
the California Vehicle Code; or the oversized vehicle is not the applicant's
only vehicle. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-12: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS; REVIEW REQUEST:
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, any person who violates any provision in
this article is guilty of an infraction and will be subject to citation,
towing, or both.
   B.   Every person who displays a fraudulent, forged, altered, or counterfeit
oversized vehicle parking permit or permit number with the intent to avoid
compliance with this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   C.   Every person who displays a fraudulent, forged, altered, or counterfeit
oversized vehicle handicap parking permit or permit number with the intent to
avoid compliance with this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   D.   Every person who displays a fraudulent, forged, altered, or counterfeit
oversized vehicle resident registration sticker with the intent to avoid
compliance with this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   E.   Every person who forges, alters, or counterfeits an oversized vehicle
parking permit, an oversized vehicle handicap parking permit, or an oversized
vehicle resident registration sticker is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   F.   Every person who is issued a notice of parking violation pursuant to
this article may request review of that notice under California Vehicle Code
section 40215 et seq. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-13: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   The prohibitions in this article apply at all times, or at those times
specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
other traffic or to comply with the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device.
   B.   The time limitations on standing or parking in this article do not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions of the California Vehicle Code or this code prohibiting or limiting
the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
   C.   Nothing in this article may be construed to permit vehicle habitation
on a public street as prohibited by section
7-6-1 of this code. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
CHAPTER 6
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Crosswalk Establishment
8-6-2: Crossing Roadways
8-6-3: Standing In Roadway
8-6-4: Obstructing Free Passage Of Pedestrians
8-6-1: CROSSWALK ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Pedestrian Crossings Indicated: The City Traffic Engineer shall
establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places
by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as
follows:
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the
business district and at intersections outside the district, and at other
places within or outside the district where the City Traffic Engineer
determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway.
   B.   Prohibited Crossings: The City Traffic Engineer may place signs at or
adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that
pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
8-6-2: CROSSING ROADWAYS:
   A.   Business Districts: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway in any business
district other than at a crosswalk.
   B.   Crossing Roadway At Right Angle: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at
any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest
route to the opposite curb, except in a marked crosswalk. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-6-3: STANDING IN ROADWAY:
No person shall stand, sit or remain in any roadway other than in a safety
zone, if the action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This
provision shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or to the employee
of any public utility or of any franchise or permit holder holding a franchise
or permit from the City or from any of its authorized officers, when the person
is necessarily upon a street and engaged in the performance of his necessary
duty therein, or to licensed surveyors or to members of their respective
parties or crews, when actually and necessarily engaged in the performances of
their proper functions. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-6-4: OBSTRUCTING FREE PASSAGE OF PEDESTRIANS:
No person shall stop, stand or sit in or upon any sidewalk area or crosswalk in
any manner so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians thereon,
nor shall any person annoy or molest the pedestrians. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
CHAPTER 7
ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-7-1: Purpose
8-7-2: Definitions
8-7-3: Exceptions
8-7-4: Chapter Nonexclusive
8-7-5: Administration; Enforcement
8-7-6: Contractor Authorized To Act
8-7-7: Fixing Administrative Costs
8-7-8: Chief Of Police Authorized To Act
8-7-9: Notice Of Intention To Abate
8-7-10: Request For Hearing By Owner; City Abatement
8-7-11: Public Hearing; Final Determination
8-7-12: Appeal Of Decision
8-7-13: Time For Disposal
8-7-14: Notice To State DMV
8-7-15: Unpaid Costs; Assessments
8-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the abatement and removal as
public nuisances of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or
parts thereof, from private property or public property, not including
highways, and to enable the City to recover costs of administration thereof as
authorized by section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 821, 10-2-
1973)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed
as set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended:
   HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes
street.
   OWNER OF LAND: The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof,
is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
   OWNER OF VEHICLE: The last registered owner and legal owner of record.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: "Public property" does not include "highway".
   VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved,
or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Exceptions Enumerated: This Chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
      2.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junk dealer; or
      3.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is located behind a wall or solid
fence, six feet (6') in height and in good repair, which is not plainly visible
from a highway; or
      4.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of an automobile
repair garage; or
      5.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in a carport which serves as required off-street
parking for a residential use.
   B.   Nuisance Prohibited: Nothing in this Section shall authorize the
maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law
other than chapter 10 (commencing with section 22650) of division 11 of the
California Vehicle Code and this Chapter. (Ord. 956, 5-16-1978)
8-7-4: CHAPTER NONEXCLUSIVE:
This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled
or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition
to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter
enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having
jurisdiction. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-5: ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Chief of Police. In the enforcement of this
Chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public
property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the
identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts
thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 821, 10-2-
1973)
8-7-6: CONTRACTOR AUTHORIZED TO ACT:
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person
or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private
property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or
parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 821,
10-2-1973)
8-7-7: FIXING ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
The City Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be
assessed as administrative costs excluding the actual cost of removal of any
vehicle or parts thereof under this Chapter. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-8: CHIEF OF POLICE AUTHORIZED TO ACT:
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property
within the City, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to cause the
abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed
herein. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-9: NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE:
A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts
thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner
of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such
condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of owner of the land)
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at
(address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Title 8,
Chapter 7 of the El Segundo City Code has determined that there exists upon
said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle registered to                       , license number             ,
which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Title 8,
Chapter 7 of said Code.
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle
(or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this
notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by
the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to
you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is
located.
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is
located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing
of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is
not received by the Chief of Police within such 10-day period, the Chief of
Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts
of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a
public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day
period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts
of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement
shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not
required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner
of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as
aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.
Notice mailed                 (date)
s/                      
      Chief of Police
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of last registered and legal owner of record of vehicle -
notice should be given to both if different)
As last registered and legal owner of record of (description of vehicle - make,
model, and license), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to
Title 8, Chapter 7 of the El Segundo City Code has determined that said vehicle
(or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and
constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Title 8, Chapter 7
of said City Code.
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle
(or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this
notice.
As registered and legal owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a
vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a
request is not received by the Chief of Police within such 10-day period, the
Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or
said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.
Notice Mailed                  (date)
   s/                     
      Chief of Police
(Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-10: REQUEST FOR HEARING BY OWNER; CITY ABATEMENT:
   A.   Hearing By Police Chief: Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or
owner of the land received by the Chief of Police within ten (10) days after
the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing
shall be held by the Chief of Police on the question of abatement and removal
of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the
cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which
it is located.
   B.   Denial Of Responsibility: If the owner of the land submits a sworn
written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his
land within such ten (10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a
request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the
hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the
hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the
vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to
determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said
ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the
City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof
as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-11: PUBLIC HEARING; FINAL DETERMINATION:
   A.   Denial And Reasons: All hearings under this Chapter shall be held
before the Chief of Police who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems
pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of
the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on
the said private property or public property. The Chief of Police shall not be
limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in
person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for
consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.
   B.   Conditions Imposed By Police Chief: The Chief of Police may impose such
conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the
circumstances to carry out the purpose of this Chapter. It may delay the time
for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if in his opinion, the
circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Chief of
Police may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same
removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter
provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be
charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall
include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct
identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the
site.
   C.   Landowner Nonliability: If it is determined at the hearing that the
vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and
that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Chief of Police
shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against
the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect
such costs from such owner of the land.
   D.   Notify Landowner Of Decision: If the owner of the land submits a sworn
written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his
land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written
presentation to the Chief of Police but does not appear, he shall be notified
in writing of the decision. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-12: APPEAL OF DECISION:
   A.   File Notice Of Appeal: Any interested party may appeal the decision of
the Chief of Police by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within five (5) days after his decision.
   B.   Council Action: Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which
may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.
   C.   Notice Of Time And Place Of Hearing: The City Clerk shall have written
notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons
specified in Section
8-7-9 of this Chapter.
   D.   Conduct Of Hearing: In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall
not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.
   E.   Delay Action To Remove Pending Hearing: No action shall be taken to
remove, destroy or dispose of any vehicle or parts thereof during the pendency
of an appeal from the decision of the Chief of Police to the City Council
pursuant to this Section. (Ord. 956, 5-16-1978)
8-7-13: TIME FOR DISPOSAL:
Five (5) days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts
thereof to be a public nuisance, or five (5) days from the date of mailing of
notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section
8-7-11 of this Chapter, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing
body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be
disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a
vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made
operable. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-14: NOTICE TO STATE DMV:
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof,
notice shall be given to the State Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted
to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available,
including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates.
(Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-15: UNPAID COSTS; ASSESSMENTS:
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against
the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section
8-7-11 of this Chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the
order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be
assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to section 38773.5 of the
California Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for
collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes.
(Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
CHAPTER 8
USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS OF WAY FOR EVENTS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Purpose
8-8-2: Definitions
8-8-3: Administration By Director
8-8-4: Notices
8-8-5: Permit Requirements
8-8-6: Exceptions
8-8-7: Fees
Administrative Appeals
8-8-8: Right Of Administrative Review
8-8-9: Time For Administrative Review
8-8-10: Commencement Of Administrative Review
8-8-11: Administrative Review
8-8-12: City Council Appeal
Permit Applications
8-8-13: Application For Permit
8-8-14: Additional Information Required For Parades
8-8-15: Additional Information Required For Block Parties
8-8-16: Supplemental Information Required By The Director
Action On Permit Applications
8-8-17: Permit Application; Review By City Officers
8-8-18: Event Time Requirements
8-8-19: Block Party Time Requirements
8-8-20: Free Speech Event Time Requirements
8-8-21: Permit Issuance
8-8-22: Permit Denial
8-8-23: Alternative Time, Place, Or Manner
Permit Conditions
8-8-24: Indemnification Agreement
8-8-25: Liability Insurance
8-8-26: Notice To Adjoining Property Owners
8-8-27: Special Permit Conditions
8-8-28: Subsequent Conditions
Permit Revocation/Suspension
8-8-29: Permit Revocation
8-8-30: Emergency Suspension Of Authorized Event
Conduct Of A Permitted Event
8-8-31: Cordoning Off The Route Or Site Of An Event
8-8-32: Public Conduct During An Authorized Event
8-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California
Vehicle Code section 21101(e), and any succeeding statute, for the purpose of
regulating parades, athletic events, block parties and public assemblies on or
within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public rights of way
that obstruct, delay or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicle or
pedestrian traffic, or which do not comply with applicable traffic laws or
controls. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
   ATHLETIC EVENT: Any event where a group of persons collectively engage in a
sport or form of physical exercise on or within a city street, parking
facility, sidewalk, or other public right of way, including, without
limitation, jogging, running, walking, racing, bicycling, rollerblading, and
rollerskating.
   BLOCK PARTY: A noncommercial social gathering on a local, not arterial or
collector, street or area requiring partial or complete street closure to
vehicular traffic and use of the street for the festival.
   CITY MANAGER: The city manager or designee.
   DIRECTOR: The city of El Segundo’s director of recreation, parks, and
library, or designee.
   EVENT: Any parade, athletic event, block party or public assembly that may
require partial or complete street closure to vehicular traffic and use of the
street for the event.
   FREE SPEECH: Activity protected by the first amendment of the United States
constitution and/or article 1, section 2 of the California constitution
provided that such activity is a significant part of the event.
   GROUP: Two (2) or more individuals.
   IN WRITING: Telegram, facsimile or any other written document.
   PARADE: Any organized march or organized procession of animals, vehicles or
persons on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public
right of way.
   PERMITTEE: A person or entity to which the city issues a permit pursuant to
this chapter.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any group of people participating in an organized activity
on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right of
way, other than a group of people participating in an athletic event, block
party or parade.
   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER: Has the same definition as set forth in Government
Code section 3301, and any successor statute. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003; amd. Ord.
1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
8-8-3: ADMINISTRATION BY DIRECTOR:
The director will receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise
implement this chapter according to the procedures herein. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-
2003)
8-8-4: NOTICES:
   A.   Where the provisions of this chapter require that an applicant/
permittee be served with notice, such notice will be deemed served when
personally delivered to such applicant/permittee or five (5) days following
deposit in the first class U.S. mail, addressed to such applicant/permittee at
the applicant/permittee's last known address.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a permittee/
applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the basis for such
decision. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to conduct, sponsor, or knowingly
participate in any event on or within any city street, sidewalk, parking
facility, or other public right of way that obstructs or interferes with the
normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or which does not comply with
applicable traffic laws or controls.
   B.   Activity in subsection A of this section is permissible when a permit
for such an event is obtained pursuant to this chapter. A permit is not deemed
issued until the director receives the applicant's written acceptance in
accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-6: EXCEPTIONS:
A special event permit is not required for a parade consisting of a vehicular
funeral procession or wedding procession. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-7: FEES:
   A.   Established: Except as otherwise provided by federal, state, or local
laws, or other city council authorized restrictions, all fees applicable to
this chapter including, without limitation, fees for using public property,
will be established by city council resolution.
   B.   Service Charges: Charges will be imposed for city services provided to
a permittee other than public safety and emergency services. Such charges will
be determined by the applicable servicing city department(s) and will be based
on the actual cost incurred by the city in providing such services. Such
service charges will include, without limitation, charges for labor,
supervision, overhead, administration and the use of any and all city
equipment, supplies, and the like. Additional charges may be imposed to cover
the cost of extraordinary permit investigation and staff costs, if the director
determines this necessary.
   C.   Traffic Control Fee: Permittee will pay the city a fee in an amount
equal to the city's total estimated costs for providing all of the personnel
and materials, including, without limitation, public safety personnel,
necessary to control and monitor pedestrian and vehicular traffic for such
event. Such fee will be paid by the permittee before the director issues a
permit. The traffic control fee may be waived by the director for any permit
authorizing an event involving an exercise of free speech rights. Such waiver
may be granted only upon a showing of the applicant's inability to pay, which
will be supported by a financial declaration.
   D.   Fee Waivers: Upon an applicant's request, the director may, but is not
required to, seek a fee waiver from the city council for an event. Fees may
only be waived for the following applicants:
      1.   Nonprofit groups with current internal revenue code 501(c)(3) status
or 501(c)(6) status, government agencies, and public schools; or
      2.   Community service groups or organizations without current internal
revenue code 501(c)(3) status or 501(c)(6) status where the city council, by
resolution, determines that the proposed event provides services that meet
community needs and it is in the public interest to waive such fees. (Ord.
1362, 6-3-2003)
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
8-8-8: RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative review of
the director's decision pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-9: TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be commenced
within five (5) days from the date on which written notice of the director's
decision is served on the applicant/permittee.
   B.   If the request is untimely, the director may, nevertheless, extend the
time for commencing such review for good cause shown. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-10: COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A request for administrative review will be on a form provided by the director
and contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the person making the
request;
   B.   A description of the decision, determination or order which is the
subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was
made or issued;
   C.   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and
   D.   Such other information as may be required by the director. (Ord. 1362,
6-3-2003)
8-8-11: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the director will
provide a copy of the notice to the city manager within two (2) business days.
   B.   Upon receiving a request for review from the director, the city manager
will review the request and, within ten (10) days of receiving the request
notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:
      1.   The director's decision is affirmed;
      2.   The director's decision is modified;
      3.   The director's decision is reversed and a permit is issued or issued
without special conditions.
   C.   The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a
time and place determined at the city manager's sole discretion.
   D.   In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any notification to
the requester must set forth any modifications of the director's decision.
(Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-12: CITY COUNCIL APPEAL:
Unless otherwise provided, an applicant may appeal the city manager's decision
to the city council within ten (10) days of that decision as provided elsewhere
in this code or by city policy and procedure. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
PERMIT APPLICATIONS
8-8-13: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Permit applications will be filed by an individual.
   B.   Permit applications will be in a form prescribed by the director and,
for all events, will contain all of the following information:
      1.   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers
of the person filing the application;
      2.   If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the name,
mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the organization; and if
requested by the director, written documentation of the authority under which
the applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;
      3.   The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the
person who will be present during, and responsible for, the event;
      4.   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone number
of any workers to be employed during the event;
      5.   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone number
of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and the applicant is
unavailable;
      6.   The nature of the event;
      7.   The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of the
event;
      8.   The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries;
      9.   The estimated number of participants in the event;
      10.   The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and structures
that will be used in the event;
      11.   A description of any sound amplification equipment to be employed
at the event;
      12.   The number, size, and material of construction of any signs or
banners to be used in the event;
      13.   The parking requirements for the event;
      14.   The location of any water, first aid, or comfort stations to be
provided at the event;
      15.   The type and number of any vendors who will sell food, beverages or
other goods or services at the event for which a business license is required
by this code; and
      16.   The type of entertainment. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-14: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR PARADES:
In addition to the information required in this chapter, every application for
a parade will include the following information:
   A.   The time when units of the parade will begin to assemble;
   B.   The proposed assembly point for the parade;
   C.   The proposed parade route;
   D.   The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade;
   E.   The estimated duration of the event; and
   F.   The number, types and size of floats. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-15: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR BLOCK PARTIES:
In addition to the information required by this chapter, every applicant for a
block party will include the following information:
   A.   How many occupied houses are within the proposed block party
boundaries;
   B.   Drawing of the street layout, block party boundaries and proposed
barricades; and
   C.   Petition of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the property owners/residents
on the street within the affected area must show their consent in writing. The
petition must clearly state the time, date, place and sponsor of the event.
Petitioner information must include name, address, telephone and signature.
(Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-16: SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIRECTOR:
In addition to the information required in this chapter, applications for all
permits authorizing an event will include such supplemental information which
the director may find reasonably necessary, given the nature of the event, in
order to determine whether to approve or deny a permit authorizing such event
in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS
8-8-17: PERMIT APPLICATION; REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS:
   A.   After an event permit application is filed, the director will
immediately forward the application to directors, or designees (collectively
"reviewing officers"), whose departments are affected by the proposed event for
their recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without limitation:
      1.   The fire chief;
      2.   The police chief; and
      3.   The public works director.
   B.   Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers will consider the
application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide the director with
written recommendations regarding:
      1.   Any special conditions for a permit;
      2.   Whether, based on the scope of the proposed event, a pre-event
operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be necessary, the
director will notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting within
a reasonable time before the event; and
      3.   Any additional recommendations.
   C.   The reviewing officers must complete their review within the time that
the director must make a decision on the application. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-18: EVENT TIME REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for a permit
authorizing an event will be filed in the director's office at least:
      1.   Fifty (50) days before the date of such event to ensure
administrative review and city council appeals;
      2.   Thirty (30) business days before the date of such event, in which
case the opportunity for a city council appeal is deemed waived; or
      3.   A lesser time period approved by the director provided that there is
sufficient time to process the application pursuant to this chapter. Any
applicant submitting an application pursuant to this section less than thirty
(30) days before an event is deemed to have waived the administrative review
and city council appeal.
   B.   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for a permit
authorizing an event will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the
director within fifteen (15) business days after receiving the completed
application. Following his/her decision, the director will promptly attempt to
notify the applicant orally, and will provide written notification to the
applicant and the city manager.
   C.   Unless otherwise provided, the applicant's acceptance of the approval
or conditional approval must be received by the director within five (5)
business days after the applicant was served with notification of the decision.
Failure of affected persons to receive actual notice of an event after
permittee has provided reasonable notice will not invalidate a permit. (Ord.
1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-19: BLOCK PARTY TIME REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Completed applications for a permit authorizing a block party:
      1.   Will be filed in the director's office at least fifteen (15)
business days before the date of such event or ten (10) business days if the
applicant wishes to waive his/her administrative review rights;
      2.   Will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the director
within seven (7) business days after receiving the application. The director
will promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally and provide written
notification to the applicant and city manager.
   B.   Applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval must be
received by the director within five (5) business days after the applicant is
served with notice. Failure to accept the decision or to timely file a request
for administrative review will be deemed a withdrawal of the application.
   C.   If the applicant filed a completed application at least fifteen (15)
business days before the event and the permit is denied or conditioned, the
applicant may request an administrative review to the director in writing
within three (3) business days of being served with notice of the decision.
   D.   Applicant will be deemed to have waived his/her administrative review
rights should the applicant fail to:
      1.   Submit a completed application at least fifteen (15) days before the
event;
      2.   Fail to request review of the director's decision.
   E.   The director's decision is a final determination. There will be no
right of city council appeal. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-20: FREE SPEECH EVENT TIME REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Completed applications for a permit authorizing a free speech event:
      1.   Will be filed in the director's office at least two (2) business
days before the date of such event to ensure an administrative review. The
director may, but is not required to, accept a completed application less than
two (2) business days before an event upon good cause shown. Applications will
not be accepted less than twenty four (24) hours before an event.
      2.   Will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the director
within one business day after receiving the application. The director will
promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally, and provide written
notification to the applicant and city manager. Such notice will provide
detailed facts and reasons for any denial or conditional approval.
      3.   The director will consult with the city attorney's office before
denying, or specially conditioning, a permit for a free speech event.
   B.   Applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval must be
received by the director at least twenty four (24) hours before the event.
Failure to accept the director's decision or to timely file an administrative
review request will be deemed a withdrawal of the application.
   C.   The applicant may appeal to the city manager in writing within one
business day of either oral or written notification, whichever is first.
   D.   An administrative hearing will be held at a time and place mutually
agreeable to the parties. If the parties cannot agree on the time or place,
then it will be held the next business day after the director's decision at
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. in the city manager's office. The city manager will
issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and will also notify
the applicant and the director in writing of the city manager's decision. Any
notification will describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons
supporting the decision.
   E.   The city manager's decision is a final determination. There will be no
right of city council appeal.
   F.   Applicant will be deemed to have waived his/her administrative review
rights should the applicant fail to:
      1.   File a completed application at least two (2) days before an event;
      2.   Seek review of the director's decision; or
      3.   Attend the administrative hearing personally or through an
authorized representative. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-21: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   The director will issue a permit if:
      1.   The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
      2.   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
      3.   Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional approval in
writing.
   B.   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter will conform to the
general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special permit
conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the director to protect public safety
or welfare. Such special conditions may include, without limitation, conditions
for controlling pedestrian or vehicle traffic and for protecting public or
private property. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-22: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit may be denied for the following reasons:
   A.   The application is incomplete;
   B.   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application
information requested by the director;
   C.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
   D.   Applicant seeks approval for an event that is so close in time and
location to another event scheduled for the same date as to cause unreasonable
traffic congestion or to overextend public safety or emergency services;
   E.   The event's time, route, or method will unreasonably interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site or route of the event;
   F.   The concentration of persons, animals, or vehicles at the event, or at
the site of an assembly or disbanding, prevents public safety or emergency
services from reaching areas at or contiguous to the event;
   G.   The size of the event will overextend public safety or emergency
services to the extent that the safety of event participants, attendees, or the
remainder of the city will be seriously jeopardized;
      1.   This provision does not authorize denying a permit because of the
need to protect participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit
conditions can be imposed;
   H.   The event consists of a parade that will not move from its point of
origin to its point of termination in four (4) hours or less, or an amount of
time otherwise approved by the director;
   I.   The location of the event will substantially interfere with
construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or along
the city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right of way to be
occupied by the event;
   J.   The event will occur along a route or location adjacent to a hospital
or extended care facility, and the noise created by the event would
substantially disrupt the operation of the hospital or extended care facility
or disturb the patients within;
   K.   The event will occur at a time when a school is in session and along a
route or at a location adjacent to the school or a class thereof, and the noise
created by the activities of the event will substantially disrupt the
educational activity of such school or class;
   L.   The decorative material on parade floats is not fire resistive or flame
retardant or motorized parade floats and towing apparatus are not provided with
portable fire extinguisher readily accessible to the operator, as provided in
the latest adopted edition of the uniform fire code, or any similar provision
in subsequent revisions of such code;
   M.   The application is not timely submitted and there is insufficient time
to investigate and process the application pursuant to the timelines herein.
(Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-23: ALTERNATIVE TIME, PLACE, OR MANNER:
If the director denies a permit for an event that would be acceptable by
changing the event's time, place, or manner, then the director will inform the
applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the alternative
time, place, or manner then the director will issue a permit in accordance with
this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
PERMIT CONDITIONS
8-8-24: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
Permittee will enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city which will,
in part, indemnify city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any
liability arising from permittee's event in a form approved by the city
attorney's office. Such agreement will be filed with the director before
issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-25: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   Insurance Requirements: Permittee will obtain liability insurance from
an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of California and
having a financial rating in "Best's Insurance Guide" of not less than "A VII".
Such insurance will provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for
death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way
connected with such event. Such insurance will be based upon the size and
nature of the event, the risks foreseeably involved, and will be in the amount
prescribed by city council resolution or city policy. Insurance will name the
city and the city's elected and appointed officials, officers, and employees as
additional insureds under the coverage afforded. In addition, such insurance
will be primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance
available to the city and will include a severability of interest (cross
liability) clause. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served at the event, the
policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability in an amount not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   B.   Certificates Of Insurance: A copy of the policy or a certificate of
insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form approved by the
city's risk manager, must be filed with the director not less than five (5)
business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before the date of
the event unless the director for good cause waives the filing deadline.
   C.   Waiver Of Insurance Requirements: The insurance required by this
section must be waived by the director for any permit authorizing an event
involving an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-26: NOTICE TO ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS:
The permittee will attempt to notify all affected persons, by any reasonable
means, regarding the event's nature, date, and time as specified by the
director. Failure of the permittee to give such notice will not invalidate a
permit. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-27: SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS:
   A.   Grounds For Special Permit Conditions: The director may condition a
permit with reasonable requirements concerning the time, place, or manner of
holding such event as necessary to protect the safety of persons and property
or to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the site of the
event, provided that these requirements will not be imposed in a manner that
will unreasonably restrict the exercise of free speech rights.
   B.   Conditions Included: Conditions may include, without limitation, the
following:
      1.   Assembly or disbanding area for a parade;
      2.   Accommodating an event's pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including
restricting events to city sidewalks, portions of a city street, parking
facility, or other public right of way;
      3.   Avoiding substantial interference with public safety and/or
emergency service access;
      4.   The number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures to be
displayed or used in the event;
      5.   Inspection and approval by city personnel of stages, booths, floats
and other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the event, in order
to ensure that such structures or vehicles are safely constructed and can be
safely operated;
      6.   A cleaning deposit if the event includes using structures,
displaying or using horses or other large animals, operation of water stations,
food sales, beverage sales, and/or sale of other goods or services;
      7.   Provision and use of traffic cones and barricades;
      8.   Provision and operation of first aid stations or sanitary
facilities, including handicap accessible sanitary facilities;
      9.   Provision and use of garbage containers, and the cleanup and
restoration of the site of the event at the termination of the event;
      10.   Use of sound amplification equipment, and restrictions on the
amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the course of
the event;
      11.   The manner for providing notice of permit conditions to event
participants;
      12.   Provision and use of emergency services;
      13.   Alternate sites, times, dates or modes for exercising free speech
rights;
      14.   The manner of which alcohol sales and service, if any, will be
conducted and proof of valid ABC license. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-28: SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS:
   A.   Grounds For Special Permit Subsequent Conditions: The director may
condition previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts not
previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
   B.   Notice Of Special Permit Subsequent Conditions: Should subsequent
conditions be required, the director will serve written notice on the permittee
of this decision. When acting upon information obtained twenty four (24) hours
before an event, the director may orally inform the permittee, and city
personnel overseeing the event, of the new conditions.
   C.   Administrative Review By City Manager: Except where otherwise provided,
a permittee may seek administrative review of imposition of subsequent
conditions to the city manager as provided in this chapter. The city manager's
decision is a final determination. There will be no right of city council
appeal.
   D.   Hearing: Except where otherwise provided, an applicant conducting a
free speech event may appeal the decision to impose subsequent conditions
through a hearing before the city manager. The city manager's decision is a
final determination. There will be no right of city council appeal.
      1.   An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing provided the
applicant appeals the director's decision within twenty four (24) hours of
receiving notice of such conditions and the event's purpose is for free speech.
      2.   The hearing will be at the city manager's office at four o'clock (4:
00) P.M. the next business day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise
agreed upon. The city manager will issue a decision orally at the conclusion of
the hearing and will also notify the applicant and the director in writing of
the city manager's decision. Any notification will describe, with
particularity, the facts and reasons supporting the decision. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-
2003)
PERMIT REVOCATION/SUSPENSION
8-8-29: PERMIT REVOCATION:
   A.   The director will revoke an event permit upon learning or discovering
facts requiring permit denial not previously disclosed or reasonably
discoverable.
   B.   The director may revoke an event permit when the permittee or event
violates the permit's terms and conditions, or when event participants violate
applicable laws or regulations; provided, however, that this subsection will
not authorize revoking a permit because of the need to protect participants
from the conduct of others; and, provided further, that the director will not
revoke a permit without warning the permittee and allowing him/her to correct
the violation(s) within a reasonable time.
   C.   If the director revokes a permit before the date of the event, the
director will immediately serve written notice of revocation on the permittee
and will provide copies of the notice to all city personnel charged with
carrying out any responsibility under this chapter. If the director revokes a
permit on the day of the event after learning of facts justifying revocation
less than twenty four (24) hours before the event commences, the director will
announce such action to the event participants, to those city officers and
employees monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the person
in charge of the event, if such person can be located at the site of the event.
Written notice will be delivered after such action to the permittee and city
manager.
   D.   An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing before the city manager
provided:
      1.   Applicant Appeal: The applicant appeals the director's decision
within forty eight (48) hours of receiving notice of such conditions; and
      2.   Time Event Is Scheduled: The event is scheduled at least forty eight
(48) hours after the hearing time.
      3.   Hearing: The hearing will be at the city manager's office at four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise
agreed upon. The city manager will issue a decision orally at the conclusion of
the hearing and will also notify the applicant and the director in writing of
the city manager's decision.
      4.   Content Of Notices Of Revocation: Any notification of action,
whether oral or written, will describe with particularity the facts and the
reasons for the decision.
   E.   The city manager's decision is a final determination. There will be no
right of city council appeal.
   F.   The director or city manager can only revoke a permit for a free speech
event after consulting with the city attorney's office. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-30: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF AUTHORIZED EVENT:
The city manager and any sworn public safety officer may temporarily suspend an
event whenever there is an emergency that requires such action to protect
public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and event participants will
immediately comply with the suspending officer's instructions. The director
will immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and will notify the
applicant and the city manager in writing, within twenty four (24) hours after
the suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the
suspension. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
CONDUCT OF A PERMITTED EVENT
8-8-31: CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR SITE OF AN EVENT:
The director of public works, or designee, is authorized and directed to
establish traffic and crowd control devices on or within the city's streets,
parking facilities, sidewalks, or other public rights of way, and to undertake
other actions necessary to cordon off the route or site of an event. In
addition, the director of public works, or director, will, when appropriate,
cause the route or site of such event to be posted as a no parking zone for the
duration of the event and sufficiently in advance thereof as may be necessary
to prevent vehicles from parking along the route or at the site of the event.
(Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-32: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING AN AUTHORIZED EVENT:
   A.   Interference With Event: It is unlawful to physically obstruct, impede,
hamper or otherwise interfere with any event authorized by a permit or with any
person, animal or vehicle participating or used in such event.
   B.   Driving Through The Site Of Parade Or Athletic Event: It is unlawful to
drive a vehicle between vehicles or persons traversing the route of a parade or
athletic event authorized by a permit when such vehicles or persons are in
motion.
   C.   Prohibited Parking: It is unlawful to park along or within any portion
of the route or site of an event authorized by a permit, when the route or site
had been posted as a no parking zone by the director in the manner authorized
by this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways   1
Excavations And Obstructions   2
Street Trees   3
Newsracks   4
Cable Television Service, Minimum Consumer Protection Standards   5
Community Antenna Television Systems   6
Public Buildings   7
Permits Authorizing Events Conducted In City Parks And Facilities   8
Wireless Communications Facilities In The Public Right-Of-Way   9
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Temporary Street Closure
9-1-1: TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURE:
The Chief of Police shall have the right, authority and power at any time to
close any street or any portion thereof temporarily to vehicular, pedestrian or
other traffic when in the opinion of the Chief of Police the public peace,
health or safety requires the temporary closing; provided, however, that in all
such cases, suitable signs shall be conspicuously posted giving notice of the
fact that the street or portion thereof is closed, or a police officer or
person designated by the Chief of Police is present thereat for the purpose of
giving the notice. No person shall, in case the street or portion thereof is so
closed, enter into or upon the closed portion or drive any vehicle into or upon
the same contrary to the notice of the order of the police officer or person so
designated. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as depriving the City
Council or Street Superintendent from concurrent power to likewise temporarily
close any street or portion thereof within the City, but the delegation of
power to the Traffic Authority herein made shall be construed as in addition
thereto. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953; amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Work In Public Right Of Way; Permits, Fees And Deposit
9-2-2: Permit Issuance; Bond
9-2-3: Proof Of Insurance
9-2-4: Street Damage By Moving Vehicles
9-2-5: Planting Vegetation
9-2-6: Obstructions In Streets
9-2-7: Excavating Or Injuring Streets
9-2-8: Lights On Obstructions Or Excavations
9-2-9: Torches, Signs And Barriers
9-2-10: Permit Violation
9-2-1: WORK IN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY; PERMITS, FEES AND DEPOSIT:
   A.   Permit Required; Fees: Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of
this Chapter, a permit shall be required for any work or encroachment in the
public right of way, and the permittee shall pay to the City a permit fee, a
fee for subdivision plan checks or USA underground alert service, as
applicable. All fees shall be fixed and established by City Council from time
to time by resolution.
   B.   Fees Additional To Deposit Or Bond: The fees shall be in addition to
any cash deposit or bond for restoration which the permittee may be required to
make or furnish.
   C.   Deposit; Inspection Cost; Refund: In addition, permittee will be
required to provide a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost of inspection
and any unused portion thereof will be refunded to permittee.
   D.   Failure To Obtain Permit; Permit Fee Double: When work for which a
permit is required by this Chapter is started and/or completed prior to
obtaining such permit, a special investigation fee shall be charged which shall
be double the normal permit fee for the work. The payment of such double fee
shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of the
permit. (Ord. 1130, 1-3-1989)
9-2-2: PERMIT ISSUANCE; BOND:
The Street Superintendent shall issue a permit to any person to perform any act
referred to in this Chapter when the same is necessary for building or
construction purposes or for the improvement of the street, alley, thoroughfare
or place; provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued until the
person has given the City a good and sufficient bond, to be approved by the
Street Superintendent indemnifying the City against any damage that may arise
by reason of the performance of any such acts and for any expense incurred by
the City in restoring the street, alley, thoroughfare or place to its proper
condition. (Ord. 10, 2-28-1917)
9-2-3: PROOF OF INSURANCE:
In addition to the requirement of Section
9-2-2 of this Chapter, no permit shall be issued until the person has provided
the Street Superintendent for the City proof of both general liability and
workers' compensation insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance
reflecting current insurance policies. The City shall be named as additional
insured under the general liability policy. The certificate of insurance shall
provide that thirty (30) days' notice of cancellation be furnished the City by
registered or certified mail. (Ord. 1094, 2-3-1987)
9-2-4: STREET DAMAGE BY MOVING VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to
drive, drag, propel or move, or cause to be moved upon any street, alley,
thoroughfare or place with a surface improved or finished by oiling or
otherwise within the City, any plow, harrow or cutting or scratching instrument
or any heavy vehicle or machine liable to break the surface of, or do injury to
the surface of the street, alley, thoroughfare or place, except in pursuance of
a lawful contract to improve the street, alley, thoroughfare or place, or a
permit therefor granted by the City Council at its option in case of urgent
necessity. (Ord. 10, 2-28-1917)
9-2-5: PLANTING VEGETATION:
No person shall place or plant, or cause to be placed or planted, any tree,
shrub or bush in any public street, alley, thoroughfare or place within the
City, without obtaining permission from the City Council. The City Council,
upon the granting of any permit hereunder, shall specify the manner in which
the acts permitted thereby are to be performed and in case the permit shall be
for the planting of trees, the same shall specify the place in which the same
are to be planted, the distance apart, the kind of trees and such other
regulations as to the City Council shall seem best. (Ord. 10, 2-28-1917)
9-2-6: OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS:
No person shall erect, construct, place, maintain, leave or abandon any
building, fence, porch, steps, post, pole, track, wire, pipe, conduit or other
structure in whole, or in part, in or upon any street within the City; and no
person shall place, affix, paint, maintain, leave or abandon any sign, placard,
notice, advertisement, seat, bench, table, stand, material or other obstruction
in any street within the City, without a special permit in writing to do so
first had and obtained from the Chief of Police or the Street Superintendent or
the City Council; provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall
not apply: (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953; amd. 2000 Code)
   A.   To United States mail boxes;
   B.   To poles and facilities of public utilities lawfully using the public
streets of the City;
   C.   To portable and usual garbage and rubbish receptacles when conforming
to and placed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City; and
   D.   To notices, placards, posters or any of the other articles or means
above mentioned or referred to, erected or placed by any City or other public
officer, official or employee acting within the scope of his office or
employment, as a public officer, official or employee. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
9-2-7: EXCAVATING OR INJURING STREETS:
No person shall dig in, excavate, tear up, deface or injure any street without
an express written permit to do so first had and obtained from either the
Superintendent of Streets or the City Council, and it is unlawful for any
person to violate or permit or cause to be violated any of the terms or
conditions imposed in the permit if and when issued. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
9-2-8: LIGHTS ON OBSTRUCTIONS OR EXCAVATIONS:
No person placing or maintaining any obstruction or making any excavation in
any street shall fail or neglect to provide, during the period between sunset
of any day and sunrise of the succeeding day, suitable and adequate lights to
warn users of the street of the obstructions or excavations. (Ord. 429, 9-30-
1953)
9-2-9: TORCHES, SIGNS AND BARRIERS:
No person other than an officer or employee of the City and who is at the time
acting in the line of employment as the officer or employee, shall handle,
interfere or tamper with, displace, remove, damage or extinguish any torch,
light or lantern, whether illuminated or not, or any sign, obstruction or
barrier, when the torch, light, lantern, sign, obstruction or barrier is placed
in, on, upon, near or about any excavation, embankment, improvement, cut, fill,
earth, material or flooded area in any public street, road, alley, easement,
way or place within the City. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
9-2-10: PERMIT VIOLATION:
Whenever any permit or special permit has been issued by either the Chief of
Police, the Street Superintendent or the City Council, under or pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person to violate, or cause
or permit to be violated, or to fail or refuse to observe or perform any of the
requirements set forth in any of the terms or conditions imposed in the permit
or special permit or subject to which the same is authorized or granted. (Ord.
429, 9-30-1953; amd. 2000 Code)
CHAPTER 3
STREET TREES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Purpose
9-3-2: Definitions
9-3-3: Director's Authority
9-3-4: Director's Duties
9-3-5: Tree Removal Or Maintenance By Director
9-3-6: Tree Removal Or Maintenance By Private Persons
9-3-7: Prohibitions
9-3-8: Cost Recovery
9-3-9: Private Trees
9-3-10: Tree Replacement
9-3-11: Permit Conditions
9-3-12: House Moving Permit
9-3-13: Improvement Approval
9-3-14: Payments And Charges
9-3-15: Appeals
9-3-16: Tree Trust Fund
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to article XI, section 7 of the California
constitution for the purpose of enhancing public health, safety, and welfare by
regulating the planting and removal of trees, and other vegetation, located
within the city's streets and public rights of way. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter:
!DEF! DIRECTOR: The city manager, or designee.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any city street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path
or any other "public way", as defined by Streets And Highways Code section
18609, and any successor statute.
   PUBLIC STREET: Any city street or public right of way including, without
limitation, the curb and gutter.
   TREES: Collectively means trees, shrubs, and other vegetation. (Ord. 1466,
11-1-2011)
9-3-3: DIRECTOR'S AUTHORITY:
   A.   Tree Maintenance: The director may direct the manner in which trees,
shrubs, and other vegetation are planted, trimmed, pruned, cut, removed,
placed, and otherwise maintained in and along all public streets.
   B.   Kind And Spacing Of Trees: The director will identify the type and
variety of trees that may be placed in, upon, or along any street or portion
thereof and the distance apart at which such trees will be planted.
   C.   Improper Planting: Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter, the director may remove it in accordance
with this chapter. The cost of removal may be charged to the property owner
responsible for the planting thereof.
   D.   Permits: The director will receive applications, issue and revoke
permits, and otherwise implement this chapter according to the procedures
herein. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-4: DIRECTOR'S DUTIES:
   A.   Planting Trees: The director will cause trees to be planted in, upon,
or along the streets of this city in accordance with all applicable laws and
encourage the planting, care, and preservation of all such desirable trees.
   B.   Records: The director will prepare and maintain all necessary maps,
plans, and records relating to the various functions carried on under this
chapter.
   C.   Reports: The director will report to the city council annually on the
work and activities carried on under the provisions of this chapter. The
director will also prepare and properly submit all reports required by law in
connection with the planting or maintaining of trees on the streets of this
city.
   D.   Pest Control: The director will properly control and remedy, by
recognized methods, all insect pests and diseases which, if untreated, may
permanently injure, disfigure, or kill any street tree or trees.
   E.   Tree Guards: Tree stakes or guards may be placed around trees,
providing the same are near the tree for protecting or training such tree and
providing that no hazard to public safety is created.
   F.   Protection From Injury: No person will pile building material, or other
material, around any tree, plant or shrub in a street in such a manner that
will in any way injure the tree.
   G.   Landscaping Plans: The director will review landscaping plans for
proposed developments and may require that trees be planted in any of the
streets, parking lots, and other public places abutting the proposed
development in accordance with the city tree policy.
   H.   Administrative Policies And Procedures: The director is authorized to
promulgate administrative policies and procedures to implement this chapter.
(Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-5: TREE REMOVAL OR MAINTENANCE BY DIRECTOR:
The director may remove or maintain trees from public streets if the director
determines that one or more of the following conditions exist:
   A.   If a tree is dead, in severe physical decline; or if there is splitting
or cracking of major limbs or the tree trunk; or if the tree appears dangerous
or obstructive to public safety or travel.
   B.   If the tree is incurably infected with a disease which will permanently
injure, disfigure, or kill it.
   C.   If there is a conflict between tree roots and sewer lines when:
      1.   The street tree is located within ten feet (10') of the sewer
lateral;
      2.   Tree roots are evidenced by photographs and/or physical inspection
of the sewer line as verified by the director; and
      3.   Repair methods that allow sewer line repair/replacement to occur
with minimal disruption to the tree are deemed inappropriate by the director.
   D.   If tree growth resulted in sidewalk, curb, or gutter disruption that
cannot be reasonably repaired without removing the tree.
   E.   If the director determines that a specific tree is an inappropriate
species, which was not permitted by the city, or conflicts with the city's tree
master plan.
   F.   When the director determines that tree removal or maintenance is
justified to otherwise protect public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 1466,
11-1-2011)
9-3-6: TREE REMOVAL OR MAINTENANCE BY PRIVATE PERSONS:
Private persons seeking to remove or maintain a tree from a public street must
apply to the director for a tree permit. The director may issue a permit to
such private parties to remove or maintain a tree if all the following apply:
   A.   Tree removal or maintenance will occur under the direction of a
certified arborist and completed by a licensed contractor. Tree removal or
maintenance must adhere to standards issued by the International Society Of
Arboriculture;
   B.   Trees sought to be removed must meet the criteria set forth in this
chapter for removal;
   C.   All removal or maintenance costs are borne by the permittee. A
permittee must submit a refundable two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) security
deposit with the city to ensure compliance with this section;
   D.   A permittee must pay a permit fee to the city in an amount established
by city council resolution;
   E.   A permittee is required to mail notice to homeowners within fifty feet
(50') of the tree proposed for removal informing them of the intent and reason
for the removal. The persons have fourteen (14) days to protest the removal to
the recreation and parks commission;
   F.   The permittee complies with all other permit conditions listed in this
chapter including, without limitation, entering into a hold harmless agreement
with the city. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-7: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful to attach or keep attached to any tree, tree guard, or
tree stake located within a street, park, or other public place any wire, rope,
sign or any other matter without first obtaining a tree permit issued in
accordance with this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to plant, prune, deface, destroy, or
remove or in any manner injure any tree on any street without first obtaining a
tree permit issued in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-8: COST RECOVERY:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, or when tree removal is requested
by a permittee, the city will bear the cost of removing trees and other
vegetation under this chapter. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-9: PRIVATE TREES:
If any tree standing on private property, but overhanging or extending into any
street, is dead, appears ready to fall, is dangerous or obstructive to public
safety or travel the director will have the tree or parts of it that are
dangerous or obstructive, cut down and removed in accordance with the nuisance
abatement proceedings set forth in this code. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-10: TREE REPLACEMENT:
Whenever a tree is removed or destroyed pursuant to any tree permit, the
permittee must plant another tree, of the kind and size specified in the
permit, to replace the one destroyed or removed, within forty (40) days after
the permit was issued. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-11: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
The director may condition a tree permit on the following:
   A.   That the permittee plant another tree in the place of the one removed
or destroyed.
   B.   That a particular species of tree, as determined by the city's approved
street tree list, be used as a replacement. The director will select the
species of tree that may be planted.
   C.   That the permittee enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city
which will, in part, indemnify the city, its officers, employees, and agents,
from any liability arising from the permittee's activities in a form approved
by the city attorney. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-12: HOUSE MOVING PERMIT:
No person will move any building or other object along any street in such
manner that trees are injured without first obtaining a permit. If deemed
advisable, the director may require any person moving a building or other
object into or along a street in this city to furnish a bond in an amount
sufficient to cover the damage to or destruction of trees or shrubs on any
street. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-13: IMPROVEMENT APPROVAL:
No improvement will be installed or earth removed which may affect the root
system of a street tree, if such improvement or earth removal is to be within
six feet (6') of such street tree, without first obtaining a permit. (Ord.
1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-14: PAYMENTS AND CHARGES:
The director, subject to city council approval, will establish charges for
obtaining permits under this chapter. Permit charges must be made at the time
of issuance. The charges to be made for a permit are to merely cover costs of
investigation, supervision or inspection and may be reestablished periodically.
(Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-15: APPEALS:
The director's decisions in implementing this chapter may be appealed to the
recreation and parks commission. A decision of that commission is final. (Ord.
1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-16: TREE TRUST FUND:
All fees, fines, or assessments as defined in this chapter or the tree policy
will be deposited in a tree trust fund and reinvested into the city's community
forest. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
CHAPTER 4
NEWSRACKS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Purpose
General Provisions
9-4-2: Definitions
9-4-3: Administration
9-4-4: Prohibitions
9-4-5: Encroachment Permits
9-4-6: Notices
9-4-7: Fees
Permits
9-4-8: Application Form And Content
9-4-9: Change In Application Information
9-4-10: Time For Reviewing Application
9-4-11: Permit Issuance
9-4-12: Permit Denial
9-4-13: Notice Of Denial
9-4-14: Expedited Review
9-4-15: Term; Renewal
9-4-16: Uniform Newsracks
9-4-16-1: Priority System For Uniform Newsrack Permits
Permit Conditions; Newsrack Regulations
9-4-17: Permit Conditions
9-4-18: Installation Requirements
9-4-19: Prohibited Areas
9-4-20: Maintenance
9-4-21: Harmful Matter
Appeals
9-4-22: Right Of Administrative Review
9-4-23: Time For Administrative Review
9-4-24: Commencement Of Administrative Review
9-4-25: Administrative Review
9-4-26: City Manager Decision Final
Enforcement
9-4-27: Minor Violations
9-4-28: Notice Of Hearing For Newsrack Removal
9-4-29: Hearing Procedure
9-4-30: Compliance With Removal Order
9-4-31: Recovering City Expenses
9-4-32: Emergency Removal
9-4-33: Abandonment; Disposal
9-4-34: Enforcement Procedures
9-4-35: City Attorney Enforcement Authority
9-4-36: Liability For Fines
Preexisting Newsracks
9-4-37: Existing Newsracks
9-4-38: Newsracks Within The Downtown Specific Plan Area
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted in accordance with California constitution article XI,
section 7, for the purpose of establishing uniform regulations for allowing
newsracks to be placed within the public right of way. The city's intent in
adopting this chapter is to establish reasonable time, place, and manner
restrictions on the commercial use of public rights of way in order to preserve
public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
   ADMINISTRATOR: The city manager or designee.
   BLINDER RACK: Any opaque material placed in front of the harmful matter and
within the publication vending machine which prevents exposure to public view.
   DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN AREA: The geographical area within the city's
jurisdiction identified by the downtown specific plan adopted on or about
August 1, 2000, as amended.
   DRIVEWAY: A surfaced area which crosses a sidewalk designed or used for
vehicular access between a lot and a public street.
   HARMFUL MATTER: Matter which when taken as a whole, predominantly appeals to
the prurient interests of the average person, applying contemporary statewide
standards, meaning a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion,
and which is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and
lacks significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific
value for minors. When it appears from the nature of the matter or the
circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is
designed for clearly defined deviant sexual groups, the predominant appeal of
the matter must be judged with reference to its intended recipient group.
   LOT: Lot has the same meaning as set forth in the zoning regulations of this
code.
   NEWSRACK: Any self-service coin operated box, container, storage unit or
other dispenser designed, used or maintained for the display or sale of any
written or printed material, including, without limitation, newspapers, news
periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and records.
   PERMIT: A permit issued to a person pursuant to this chapter allowing a
newsrack to be installed within a specifically designated portion of a public
right of way. "Permit" may also include a uniform newsrack permit issued in
accordance with this chapter.
   PERMITTEE: A person or entity to whom a permit was issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any city street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path
or any other "public way", as defined by California Streets and Highways Code
section 18609, and any successor statute.
   PUBLIC STREET: Any city street or public right of way including, without
limitation, the curb and gutter.
   UNIFORM NEWSRACK: A newsrack of a style, size and color designated by
council by resolution for permanent installation. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The administrator is authorized to receive applications, issue and revoke
permits, and otherwise administer and implement this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-
2003)
9-4-4: PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to install, place or maintain a newsrack or
uniform newsrack in any public right of way that violates any provision of this
chapter including, without limitation, failing to obtain a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-5: ENCROACHMENT PERMITS:
Persons who obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter are not required to also
obtain an encroachment permit under this code to install newsracks. (Ord. 1370,
12-2-2003)
9-4-6: NOTICES:
   A.   Where the provisions of this chapter require that an applicant/
permittee be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when personally
delivered to the applicant/permittee; when deposited in first class United
States mail, addressed to the applicant/permittee's last known address; or when
sent via facsimile to the applicant/permittee's last known facsimile number.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a permittee/
applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the basis for such
decision. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-7: FEES:
All fees applicable to this chapter are established by city council resolution.
(Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
PERMITS
9-4-8: APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENT:
   A.   Permit applications must be filed by a natural person in the name of
each applicant proposing to obtain a permit.
   B.   Every application must be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's
authorized representative, under penalty of perjury.
   C.   Permit applications, and permits, will be in a form prescribed by the
administrator and contain all of the following information:
      1.   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers
of the person filing the application;
      2.   The proposed location for the newsrack; and
      3.   Such additional information as the administrator may reasonably
require to process the application.
   D.   Applications must be accompanied by an administrative fee for
processing the application. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-9: CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION:
   A.   Whenever any change occurs in the information contained in the permit,
the permittee must give the administrator written notice of the change within
thirty (30) days of the date that the change becomes effective.
   B.   If a permittee fails to give the administrator timely written notice of
a change in the information contained in the application, the administrator may
charge the permittee an additional administrative fee. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-10: TIME FOR REVIEWING APPLICATION:
After receiving a completed application, the administrator must review the
application and either issue or deny a permit within thirty (30) days. (Ord.
1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-11: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   The administrator must issue a permit if:
      1.   The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
      2.   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
      3.   The applicant accepts the permit in writing.
   B.   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform to the
permit conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-12: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit can be denied for the following reasons:
   A.   The application is incomplete;
   B.   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application
information requested by the administrator;
   C.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
   D.   The application is submitted by a person with a suspended permit or
whose permit was revoked; or
   E.   The application seeks authorization for a newsrack that is prohibited
by this code or unlawful under any other local, state, or federal law. (Ord.
1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-13: NOTICE OF DENIAL:
Where the administrator denies a permit, the administrator must serve notice to
the applicant. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-14: EXPEDITED REVIEW:
Pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8(c), and any
successor statute or regulation, the permits under this chapter are designated
for expedited judicial review pursuant to the procedure set forth in California
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8, or any successor statute or regulation.
(Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-15: TERM; RENEWAL:
Unless suspended or revoked, permits issued pursuant to this chapter have a
term of one year. Permits must be renewed not later than thirty (30) days
before they expire in order to be maintained. Should a permit expire, the
permittee must comply with this chapter to obtain a new permit. (Ord. 1370, 12-
2-2003)
9-4-16: UNIFORM NEWSRACKS:
   A.   By resolution, the council may from time to time establish uniform
newsrack locations. The council must first hold a public hearing for which
notice must be sent at least fifteen (15) days in advance to all persons
requesting notice, or whose name and address appears on an existing newsrack in
the subject location, and after such hearing must find that the location
carries a substantial volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, that uniform
newsracks are feasible at the location, and that it is in the public interest
for such newsracks.
   B.   The resolution must describe the location; designate the particular
point(s) at that location where uniform newsracks may be installed; specify the
maximum number of uniform newsracks to be allowed at the location; and specify
the style, size, color or other attributes required of uniform newsracks at the
location. Such specification should not require uniform newsracks made by any
particular manufacturer. The resolution may direct the administrator to install
a kiosk(s), pedestal(s), or other support structure to accommodate a stated
number of newsracks.
   C.   No person may install a uniform newsrack at a uniform newsrack location
without first obtaining a uniform newsrack permit from the administrator.
   D.   Upon the adoption of a resolution by council establishing a uniform
newsrack location, interested persons may apply for such permit. The
administrator must hold all such applications for thirty (30) days after the
date the resolution was adopted and may then issue all permits applied for up
to the maximum number established, if any, in the resolution.
   E.   No fee will be charged for the uniform newsrack permit.
   F.   A uniform newsrack permit will, in addition to all other provisions of
this section, be conditioned with all other requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
1375, 4-6-2004)
9-4-16-1: PRIORITY SYSTEM FOR UNIFORM NEWSRACK PERMITS:
   A.   Uniform newsrack permits are determined on a priority system as
follows:
      1.   The administrator will give first priority to newspapers that are
adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation in the city of El Segundo
in accordance with Government Code section 6020 et seq., when applicable law
requires the city to publish its legal notices in such newspapers.
      2.   The administrator will give second priority to all other newspapers
that are not adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation within the
city of El Segundo.
   B.   Should there be a conflict between newspapers within the same priority
seeking the same uniform newsrack location, and there are insufficient uniform
newsrack locations to accommodate the competing newspapers after first filling
as many uniform newsrack locations as possible by utilizing the criteria set
forth above, then the administrator will assign uniform newsrack locations at
random by placing the names of all applicants for the remaining spaces at a
uniform newsrack location into a container from which the names will be drawn
one at a time until the remaining uniform newsrack locations are assigned. Such
drawing is open to the public at a time and date designated by the
administrator.
   C.   Applications remaining after assignment of all uniform newsrack
locations must be denied. Where fewer applications are received than the
maximum number of spaces allowed by the resolution, permits for the remaining
spaces may be allotted on a first come, first served basis.
   D.   Annually, during December, the administrator must use the above
criteria for assigning uniform newsrack locations if the priorities of
newspapers change; newsracks are abandoned; or permittees fail to renew a
permit. (Ord. 1375, 4-6-2004)
PERMIT CONDITIONS; NEWSRACK REGULATIONS
9-4-17: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter have the following general conditions:
   A.   Permittees must maintain a valid business license issued pursuant to
this code.
   B.   Permittees must pay all fees required by this chapter.
   C.   Newsracks cannot unreasonably:
      1.   Interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
      2.   Interfere with or impede ingress or egress from any residence or
place of business located adjacent to a public right of way.
      3.   Interfere with any public utility facility located within the public
right of way or in close proximity thereto.
   D.   Except as otherwise provided, newsracks must be placed within the
public right of way.
   E.   Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city
which will, in part, indemnify city, its officers, employees, and agents, from
any liability arising from a permittee's activities in a form approved by the
city attorney's office.
   F.   Permits are not transferable to another person or to another location.
   G.   The name, address, and telephone number of the permittee must be
permanently affixed to newsracks.
   H.   Each newsrack must have affixed to it in a readily visible place a
notice setting forth the name and address of the person responsible for
maintaining the newsrack and a working telephone number to call to report a
malfunction, or to obtain a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin
return mechanism.
   I.   Each newsrack must be maintained in accordance with this code. (Ord.
1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-18: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each newsrack must comply with each of the following requirements:
   A.   Size: No newsrack may exceed five feet (5') in height, thirty inches
(30") in width, or two feet (2') in depth.
   B.   Placement: Newsracks may only be placed in a public right of way near a
curb or adjacent to a wall of a building. The rear of newsracks placed near a
curb must be placed not less than eighteen inches (18") nor more than twenty
four inches (24") from the face of the curb. The rear of newsracks placed
parallel to a wall or building must be placed not more than six inches (6")
from the wall or building. No newsrack may be placed or maintained in a public
right of way opposite one or more newsracks.
   C.   Groups Of Newsracks: Newsracks may be placed next to each other;
provided, that no group of newsracks must extend more than ten feet six inches
(10'6") along a curb or wall and a space of no more or less than three feet
(3') must separate each group of newsracks from another group of newsracks.
There may be no more than three (3) of the above described groups of newsracks
located on a public right of way within a block.
   D.   Anchoring: Each newsrack must be securely anchored to the ground or
sidewalk.
   E.   Coin Return Mechanism: Each newsrack must be equipped with a working
coin return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to obtain an
immediate refund in the event a person is unable to receive the publication
paid for. The coin return mechanisms must be maintained in good working order.
(Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-19: PROHIBITED AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no newsrack may be placed,
installed, used or maintained as follows:
   A.   Within one foot (1') of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or
trees.
   B.   Within three feet (3') of:
      1.   The entrance or exit to any building;
      2.   Any display window in any building abutting a sidewalk or public
right of way. No newsrack may be located directly in front of any display
window of any building abutting a public right of way without the written
consent of the person or entity legally in occupancy or otherwise in control of
the premises on which the display window is located. Proof of such consent must
be included in the permit application. If such consent is withdrawn, any
newsrack placed in front of a display window must be removed within fourteen
(14) days of the date of written notice from the city to the owner of such
newsrack.
   C.   Within five feet (5') of:
      1.   Any marked crosswalk.
      2.   The curb return of any intersecting public streets.
      3.   Any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or any other
emergency facility.
      4.   Any designated bus stop area or any sign marking a designated bus
stop.
      5.   Bus bench.
      6.   Any curb painted blue, pursuant to the provisions of California
Vehicle Code section 21458.
   D.   Within ten feet (10') of any driveway.
   E.   In any location whereby the clear passage on a sidewalk for pedestrian
traffic is reduced to less than five feet (5').
   F.   Within any public street.
   G.   Within one hundred feet (100') of a newsrack containing the same
edition of the same publication, except where bulk of a particular edition is
such that more than one rack is required, in which case said newsracks must be
placed side by side.
   H.   Within three hundred feet (300') of a uniform newsrack location, except
for any period, not to exceed thirty (30) days, during which a uniform newsrack
permit has been granted at the location but the applicant has been unable to
obtain a uniform newsrack.
   I.   Chained or otherwise attached to any fixture. All newsracks must be
permanently affixed to the pavement or otherwise anchored to a concrete base.
Newsracks anchored to concrete bases must have a minimum weight of one hundred
(100) pounds empty. Uniform newsracks which have been established and permitted
pursuant to this chapter may be permanently affixed to the pavement or
authorized support structures as established by city council resolution.
   J.   Be used for advertising, selling or storing material other than that
dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publication sold therein.
   K.   No newsrack may remain empty for a period of thirty (30) consecutive
days. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-20: MAINTENANCE:
Each newsrack must be maintained in a clean and attractive condition and in
good repair at all times, and no issue or edition of any publication may be
allowed to remain in any such newsrack for a period exceeding the publication
period of the material offered for sale therein or thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days after the date of the initial issuance or publication of such
material, whichever is lesser. Specifically, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, each newsrack must be reasonably free of dirt and
grease; be reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint; be
reasonably free of rust and corrosion; have no broken, cracked, dented,
blemished or discolored plastic or glass parts; have no torn, peeling or fading
paper or cardboard parts or inserts; and have no broken or misshapen structural
parts. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-21: HARMFUL MATTER:
Pursuant to California Penal Code section 313.1(d), any harmful matter
displayed in a public place from which minors are not excluded must be
concealed with blinder racks, so that the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the
material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
APPEALS
9-4-22: RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative review of
the administrator's decisions pursuant to this chapter including, without
limitation, decisions regarding permit denial. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-23: TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be commenced
within five (5) days from the date on which written notice of the
administrator's decision is served on the applicant/permittee.
   B.   If a request is untimely, the administrator may, nevertheless, extend
the time for commencing such review for good cause shown, but in no event may a
request be filed more than thirty (30) days after notice was served. (Ord.
1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-24: COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   A request for administrative review must be on a form provided by the
administrator and contain the following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the person making the
request;
      2.   A description of the decision, determination or order which is the
subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was
made or issued;
      3.   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and
      4.   Such other information as may be required by the administrator.
   B.   A request for administrative review must be accompanied by a fee in an
amount determined by city council resolution. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-25: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the administrator
will provide a copy of the notice to the city manager within two (2) business
days.
   B.   Upon receiving a request for review from the administrator, the city
manager will review the request and, within ten (10) business days of receiving
the request notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:
      1.   The administrator's decision is affirmed;
      2.   The administrator's decision is modified;
      3.   The administrator's decision is reversed and a permit is issued.
Under such circumstances, the fee collected for an appeal must be returned to
the permittee within thirty (30) days of the city manager's decision.
   C.   The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a
time and place determined at the city manager's sole discretion. In the event
of a hearing, the rules of evidence will not apply. The city manager may
consider such evidence as the city manager may deem reliable. The city manager
may adopt such additional reasonable rules of procedure that may facilitate the
progression of such a hearing. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-26: CITY MANAGER DECISION FINAL:
The city manager's decision is final. There is no right to appeal a decision to
the city council. Any court challenge must be filed within ninety (90) calendar
days of the city manager's decision in accordance with California Code of Civil
Procedure section 1094.6. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
ENFORCEMENT
9-4-27: MINOR VIOLATIONS:
In the case of minor violations of this chapter that can be corrected at the
site, any city employee, as an alterative to removing the newsrack, is
authorized to correct the violation summarily. The permittee will bear the cost
of any such correction. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-28: NOTICE OF HEARING FOR NEWSRACK REMOVAL:
   A.   Action To Remove: Upon discovering a newsrack that lacks a permit or
otherwise violates this chapter, the administrator may take action to remove
such a newsrack in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Written Notice: To initiate proceedings for removing newsracks, the
administrator will cause written notice to be mailed and conspicuously posted
on the newsrack. Notice must be titled in letters at least one inch (1") in
height and read substantially as follows:
   Removal Hearing Notice
On                 , 20    , the City of El Segundo will determine whether this
Newsrack should be removed in accordance with the El Segundo Municipal Code
("ESMC"). If the Newsrack is found to violate the ESMC and is not promptly
removed by the owner, then the City may remove it and impound it at the owner's
expense. If the City removes the Newsrack, all costs associated with such
removal, impoundment, and storage, must be paid by the owner before the
Newsrack is returned.
The alleged violations consist of the following:
   
   
   
All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters should attend
a hearing to be conducted by the City, to be held at             on
            ,            at the hour of         .m., when their testimony and
evidence will be heard and given due consideration.
Dated:
                            
Administrator
   C.   Mailing/Posting: Notice of the hearing will be served by posting the
newsrack and by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed
to the newsrack owner. The notice must be posted on the newsrack and mailed at
least ten (10) days before the hearing date. Proof of posting and mailing will
be by declaration. Failure of any person to receive the notice will not affect
the validity of any provision set forth in this chapter.
   D.   Confirmation: The administrator is not required to wait ten (10) days
to proceed if the intent to permanently abandon or vacate a newsrack or uniform
newsrack location is confirmed in writing by the owner of such newsrack. (Ord.
1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-29: HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   The hearing must be conducted by a hearing officer selected by the
administrator. At the time set for such hearing, the hearing officer will
conduct a hearing to determine, based upon the evidence presented, whether the
newsrack violates this chapter. At the hearing, the hearing officer will accept
reliable evidence from any person if such evidence bears on the issue of
whether the newsrack violates this chapter. The hearing officer is authorized
to take testimony and is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations under
the Code of Civil Procedure section 2093(a). Based upon the evidence submitted
including, without limitation, any written staff reports regarding alleged
violations, the hearing officer will determine whether or not the newsrack
violates this chapter and should be removed.
   B.   As soon as is practicable following the close of such hearing, the
hearing officer will render a decision on the matter. If the newsrack is found
to violate this chapter, the hearing officer will issue an order requiring the
newsrack to be removed within a reasonable time and manner as set forth in the
order. The hearing officer will promptly give written notice to the responsible
person and any other interested person who requests, in writing, notice of such
decision, including, a copy of the order. The order issued by the hearing
officer will be deemed a final order and may be judicially reviewed pursuant to
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. There is no right to a city council
appeal. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-30: COMPLIANCE WITH REMOVAL ORDER:
At no cost to the city, the newsrack will comply with all of the provisions of
a removal order. If the newsrack owner fails, for any reason, to comply with a
removal order within the time required in the order, the administrator, will
cause the newsrack to be removed and impounded by city forces or by private
contractor. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-31: RECOVERING CITY EXPENSES:
The administrator will keep an account of the costs, including incidental
expenses, of removing, impounding, and storing such newsracks. Newsrack owners
must pay the city all reasonable costs associated with the noticing, removal,
and storage of the newsrack before regaining possession of such newsracks.
(Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-32: EMERGENCY REMOVAL:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever the administrator
determines that a newsrack constitutes an immediate threat or hazard or danger
to persons or property, the administrator, without observing procedures set
forth in this chapter with reference to newsrack removals, will immediately
cause such a newsrack to be removed in such manner as the administrator
determines is reasonably required. If the administrator deems it feasible, the
administrator may attempt to give the newsrack owner verbal notice of the
danger and the proposed timing and removal of the newsrack. Where such removal
is ordered, the administrator will, after completing the removal of the
newsrack, comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-33: ABANDONMENT; DISPOSAL:
The owner of any impounded newsrack who fails to obtain the release of the
newsrack within thirty (30) days after impoundment, is deemed to have abandoned
the newsrack, and the newsrack may be disposed of by the administrator in the
time and manner prescribed by law, for the disposal of abandoned personal
property. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-34: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter, violations of a
permit may be enforced as follows:
      1.   Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the city attorney's
discretion.
      2.   Abated as a public nuisance.
      3.   Enjoined as unfair business practices that are presumed to nominally
damage each and every resident of the community in which the permittee
operates.
   B.   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to
any other criminal or civil remedies. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-35: CITY ATTORNEY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to the
city attorney by this code or California law, the city attorney is authorized
to:
   A.   Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for
violations of this chapter including, without limitation, administrative or
judicial nuisance abatement and suits for injunctive relief;
   B.   Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties,
forfeitures, and other money accruing to the city under this chapter. (Ord.
1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-36: LIABILITY FOR FINES:
All fines, fees, penalties, and interest imposed pursuant to this chapter are
civil debts owed to the city by the person fined. In the event that judicial
action is necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the city, the person
or persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs of suit and
attorney fees incurred by the city to collect the fine. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
PREEXISTING NEWSRACKS
9-4-37: EXISTING NEWSRACKS:
   A.   Any person who owns or is entitled to possession of any newsrack
located within a public right of way upon the effective date of this chapter,
must either remove the newsrack or obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter
within one calendar year after the effective date of this chapter.
   B.   If any such newsrack remains in place without a permit after the time
period, the administrator may begin removal proceedings as provided in this
chapter.
   C.   If the newsrack owner does not comply with the administrator's notice
of removal, or does not appeal it, within the time set in such notice, the
administrator may remove and impound the newsrack. The owner or other persons
entitled to possession of the newsrack may obtain possession of such impounded
newsrack in the time and manner set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-
2003)
9-4-38: NEWSRACKS WITHIN THE DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN AREA:
Persons possessing a valid newsrack permit issued before the effective date of
this chapter and who had a newsrack located within the city's downtown specific
plan area, must comply with all of the following before installing newsracks:
   A.   If the person removed newsracks from the public right of way in
accordance with the city's direction before the effective date of this chapter,
the person must obtain a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or, if
applicable, a uniform newsrack permit, before installing newsracks within the
downtown specific plan area;
   B.   If the person has existing newsracks that were not removed at the
city's direction before the effective date of this chapter, the person must
obtain a permit within one calendar year after the effective date of this
chapter for the continued use of such newsracks. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
CHAPTER 5
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE, MINIMUM CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Subscriber Billings
9-5-3: Technical Standards
9-5-4: Testing Requirements
9-5-5: Business And Service Office
9-5-6: Staffing Levels
9-5-7: Request For Cable Service And Repair Standards
9-5-8: Installation Practices
9-5-9: Verification Of Standards
9-5-10: Complaints
9-5-11: Review By Operator
9-5-12: Escrow Account
9-5-13: Complaint File And Reports
9-5-14: Operating Policies
9-5-15: Rates And Services
9-5-16: Identification Of Employees
9-5-17: Quality Of Service
9-5-18: Tenant Rights
9-5-19: Operator Rules And Regulations
9-5-20: Rights Of Individuals
9-5-21: Continuity Of Service Mandatory
9-5-22: Violations; Remedies; Administrative Adjudication
9-5-23: Nuisance Abatement
9-5-24: Assessment Lien
9-5-25: Alternate Actions
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: Also referred to as "Cable Television
System", "Cable System", "CATV System", or "Community Antenna TV System", means
a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated
signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to
provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within a community but such term does not include:
   A.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
   B.   A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility
uses any public right of way;
   C.   A facility of common carrier, except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
   D.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
   CABLE SERVICE: The total of the following:
   A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming service; and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of
such video programming or other programming service.
   CHANNEL OR CABLE CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency
spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a
television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
   CITY: The City of El Segundo as represented by the City Council or any
delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
   CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form
to another.
   COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of El Segundo.
   FCC: The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor.
   FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued by the City,
whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes
the construction or operation of a cable system.
   FRANCHISE FEES: Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the City
on an operation or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as
such. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
   A.   Any tax fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such
tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their
services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against the franchisee or cable subscribers);
   B.   Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by
franchisee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
   C.   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the
franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
   D.   Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
   FRANCHISEE OR OPERATOR: Any "person" operating a cable television system
within the City of El Segundo pursuant to a franchise.
   INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers'
terminals, and the provision of services.
   LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL: Any channel where the operator or its designated
agent is the primary programmer, and provides video programs to subscribers.
   PAY-CABLE, PAY-TELEVISION OR PAY-PER-VIEW: The delivery to subscribers, over
the cable communications system, of television signals for a fee or charge to
subscribers over and above the charge for basic cable service, on a per
program, per channel, or other subscription basis.
   PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust,
corporation, or organizational entity.
   RESIDENT: Any person residing in the City as otherwise defined by applicable
law.
   SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services provided by an
operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the operator.
   STATE: The State of California.
   STREET: Each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or
hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by
others and located within the City limits: streets, roadways, highways,
avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights of way and similar public
property and areas that the franchisee shall permit to be included within the
definition of street from time to time.
   SUBSCRIBER: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which
elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the operator by
means of or in connection with the cable communications system. (Ord. 1159, 2-
5-1991)
9-5-2: SUBSCRIBER BILLINGS:
Any operator itemization of franchise fee costs on subscribers' bills shall be
in accordance with Federal law. If an operator elects to indicate the franchise
fee as a separate item on the subscriber billing, it shall also itemize, at a
minimum, the five (5) cost items representing the largest recurring operational
costs to the operator. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-3: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
The cable communications system shall comply at all times with FCC technical
quality and performance guidelines. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-4: TESTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Test And Compliance Procedure: Every operator shall submit, within
sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof, a detailed test plan
describing the methods and schedules for testing its cable system on an ongoing
basis to determine compliance with the provisions of Section
9-5-3 of this Chapter. Subsequently, the testing for compliance with the
technical standards shall be performed at intervals no greater than twelve (12)
months. City representatives may witness the testing, and written test reports
shall be submitted to the City. If more than ten percent (10%) of the locations
tested fail to meet the technical standards, the operator shall be required to
indicate what corrective measures have been taken, and the entire test shall be
repeated. A second failure of more than ten percent (10%) may result, at the
City's option, in imposition of the remedies set forth at Section
9-5-22 of this Chapter. Following a second failure to meet the technical
standards, each day the operator does not meet the technical standards shall be
deemed a separate violation of this Chapter.
   B.   Special Tests: In addition to the annual testing described at
subsection A of this Section, at its discretion, the City may require
additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or
tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Requests for such additional
tests will be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence
indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such
tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy. The City shall
endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize
hardship or inconvenience to the operator or to the subscriber.
   C.   Cost Of Tests: The operator shall bear the cost of all tests required
by this Chapter. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-5: BUSINESS AND SERVICE OFFICE:
Each operator shall maintain a business and service office (the "office")
within five (5) miles of the City limits. The office shall have the necessary
facilities, equipment and personnel to provide the following services under
normal conditions of operation:
   A.   Toll-free telephone lines.
   B.   Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including
wait time and the time required to transfer the call, not to exceed thirty (30)
seconds for ninety percent (90%) of callers. The operators shall have no more
than six (6) months after the effective date hereof to comply with this
requirement.
   C.   The number of rings before a call is answered by automated answering
and distributing equipment shall not exceed four (4).
   D.   Customers shall receive a busy signal during normal business hours less
than three percent (3%) of the total time that the cable office is open for
business.
   E.   Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty four (24) hour
basis, including weekends and holidays.
   F.   The operator shall procure and maintain automatic telephone monitoring
equipment capable of measuring performance in accordance with subsection B and
D of this Section. A monthly report of this performance shall be submitted to
the City.
   G.   Open to the public nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
Mondays through Thursdays, and from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. Fridays except for holidays, and at least four (4) additional hours
weekly outside of the above hours.
   H.   Adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and respond to service
requests and complaints. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-6: STAFFING LEVELS:
Every operator shall maintain the following minimum staffing levels:
   A.   An agency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to
and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty four (24) hour basis.
   B.   An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber
within seven (7) days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and
feeder cable have been activated.
   C.   An installation staff capable of scheduling all appointments with
subscribers for installation of service within a specified four (4) hour time
period. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-7: REQUEST FOR CABLE SERVICE AND REPAIR STANDARDS:
   A.   Efficient Service: Every operator shall render efficient service, make
repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be
preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system,
preferably between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access
and reproduction, shall be maintained for all service interruptions and
requests for cable service as required by Section
9-5-13 of this Chapter.
   B.   Repair Force: Every operator shall maintain a repair force of
technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service
within the following time frames:
      1.   System Outage: Within two (2) hours, including weekends, of
receiving subscriber calls which by number identify a system outage of sound or
picture of one or more channels, affecting at least twenty five percent (25%)
of the subscribers of the system.
      2.   Partial System Outage: Within eight (8) hours, including weekends,
of receiving subscriber calls which identify a partial system outage of sound
or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least twenty (20) subscribers.
      3.   Isolated Outage: Within twenty four (24) hours, including weekends,
of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or
picture for one or more channels, affecting an individual subscriber.
      4.   Inferior Reception Quality: Within forty eight (48) hours, including
weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning
picture or sound quality.
   C.   Response By Operator: An operator shall be deemed to have responded to
a request for service under the provisions of this Section when a technician
arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of
a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, response shall be
deemed to have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of
arrival.
   D.   No Charge: No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service
call unless the service request can be demonstrated to be both repeated and
noncable system in origin, or to involve subscriber negligence. (Ord. 1159, 2-
5-1991)
9-5-8: INSTALLATION PRACTICES:
Consistent with Section
9-5-6 of this Chapter, no service connection to a subscriber's home or business
shall be installed without scheduling an appointment with the subscriber
beforehand. Further, no conduit or equipment shall be installed or work
performed on the building or property of the subscriber without the
subscriber's express approval of the manner of installation. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-
1991)
9-5-9: VERIFICATION OF STANDARDS:
Upon reasonable notice, each operator shall demonstrate compliance with any or
all of the standards required in Sections
9-5-5 through
9-5-8 of this Chapter. The operator shall provide sufficient detail to permit
the City to verify the extent of compliance. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-10: COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Complaints To Operator: Each operator shall establish a written
procedure for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints
without intervention by the City. The operator's procedures shall be filed with
the City within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof. The written
procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a
complaint either orally or in writing that the operator has violated any
provision of this Chapter, or the terms and conditions of the subscriber's
contract with grantee. At the conclusion of operator's investigation of a
subscriber complaint, but in no event more than ten (10) business days after
receiving the complaint, operator shall notify the subscriber and the City in
writing of the results of the investigation and its proposed action or
resolution, if any. The operator shall also notify the subscriber of the
subscriber's right to file a complaint with the City in the event the
subscriber is dissatisfied with the operator's decision. No other proceedings
to resolve subscriber complaints shall be undertaken until the complaint
procedure established by this Chapter has been exhausted.
   B.   Complaints To City: A subscriber who is dissatisfied with operator's
proposed decision or who was not provided with a written decision within the
ten (10) business day period shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed
by the City. The subscriber shall initiate the review by filing a written
complaint together with the operator's written decision, if any, with the City
and by the City notifying the operator of the filing. The subscriber shall make
such filing and notification within twenty (20) days of receipt of operator's
decision or, if no operator decision has been provided, within thirty (30) days
after filing the original complaint with operator. The City may extend these
time limits for reasonable cause. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-11: REVIEW BY OPERATOR:
   A.   City Determination: The City shall determine, solely upon a review of a
subscriber complaint and the operator's decision, if any, whether further
action is warranted. In the event the City does not initiate further
proceedings within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the complaint, the
operator's proposed action or resolution shall be final.
   B.   Further Investigation: If the City decides to initiate further
investigation, the City shall require the operator and the subscriber to
submit, within ten (10) days of notice thereof, a written statement of the
facts and arguments in support of their respective positions. The operator or
the subscriber may request in such statement that a hearing be conducted by the
City.
   C.   Hearing: A hearing if requested shall be conducted the by City
following notice in writing specifying the time and place of such hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted informally by the City Manager or his designee, and
the parties may offer any evidence pertinent to the dispute.
   D.   Additional Evidence: The parties shall produce any additional evidence,
including testing reports from the operator, which the City may deem necessary
to an understanding and determination of the dispute.
   E.   Council Decision: The City shall issue a written decision within
fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written statements or, if a hearing is
requested, within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing, setting
forth the basis of the decision. The decision may be appealed to the City
Council. The Council's decision shall be final. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-12: ESCROW ACCOUNT:
The City shall establish an escrow account wherein a subscriber may deposit a
disputed portion of the subscriber's monthly service charge. If a subscriber
either continues to make full and timely payment of all monthly service charges
to operator or deposits any disputed portion of such monthly service charges to
said escrow account, operator shall not discontinue service during the pendency
of a complaint submitted under the provisions of this Chapter. Any amounts
deposited in the escrow account shall be paid to the operator or subscriber in
accordance with a final determination of a complaint. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-13: COMPLAINT FILE AND REPORTS:
   A.   Complaints: Each operator shall keep an accurate and comprehensive file
of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. Complete records of the
operator's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept. These files and
records shall remain open to the public during normal business hours, so that
individuals are able to inspect their own files.
   B.   Summaries And Logs To City: Each operator shall also maintain a summary
of service requests, identifying the number and nature of the requests and
their disposition, for each month. In addition, each operator shall maintain a
log and summary of all service interruptions. Such summaries and logs shall be
submitted to the City by the tenth day of the succeeding month. (Ord. 1159, 2-
5-1991)
9-5-14: OPERATING POLICIES:
   A.   Provide Information To Subscribers: When subscribers are connected or
reconnected to the cable system, and at least once annually thereafter, each
operator shall provide each subscriber with written information concerning the
procedures for making inquires or complaints, including the name, address and
local telephone number of the employee or agent to whom such inquiries or
complaints are to be addressed, and also furnish information concerning the
City office responsible for administration of the franchise with the name and
telephone number of the office. The notice shall also indicate the operator's
business hours, legal holidays and procedures for responding to inquiries after
normal business hours.
   B.   Notice Of Policy Changes: Each operator shall provide all subscribers
and the City written notice no less than thirty (30) days prior to any proposed
change in these policies. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-15: RATES AND SERVICES:
   A.   Notice Of Rate Changes: Each operator shall provide all subscribers and
the City with at least thirty (30) days' written notice prior to the
implementation of any change in rates or programming services.
   B.   Copies To City: Copies of all notices provided to subscribers shall be
filed concurrently with the City. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-16: IDENTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES:
Every employee of each operator or its contractors or subcontractors dealing
with the public shall be clearly identified on sight to the public as a
representative of the operator. Every vehicle of each operator or its
contractors or subcontractors shall be similarly identified. Each operator's
telephone number shall also be clearly marked on all such vehicles. Each
operator's employees and agents shall also wear an identification badge with
the employee or agent's name and photograph. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-17: QUALITY OF SERVICE:
The City may evaluate the overall quality of service provided by operator to
subscribers at any time, based upon the number of subscriber complaints
received by the operator and the City, and operator's response to those
complaints. The City's evaluation that service quality is inadequate may lead
to direction to the operator to cure the inadequacies. The operator shall
commence corrective action within thirty (30) days after receipt of written
notice. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-18: TENANT RIGHTS:
It is the City's intent that tenants not be discriminated against in the
ability to subscribe to cable services. Each operator shall be required to
provide service to tenants in individual units of a multiple housing facility
with all services offered to other dwelling units within the franchise area, so
long as the owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by
operator, to the following:
   A.   To operator's providing the service to units of the facility;
   B.   To reasonable conditions and time for installation, maintenance, and
inspection of the system on the facility premises;
   C.   To reasonable conditions promulgated by operator to protect operator's
equipment and encourage widespread use of the system; and
   D.   To not discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants
who receive cable service and those who do not. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-19: OPERATOR RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Each operator shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the operator to exercise it rights and perform
its obligations under the franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted service to
each and all of its customers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter or
applicable State and Federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-20: RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
   A.   Discrimination Prohibited: The operator shall not deny service, deny
access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, PEG access channel
users, or general citizens on the basis of income, race, color, religion,
national origin, age or sex. Operator shall comply at all times with all other
applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations, and all executive and
administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby
incorporated and made part of this Chapter by reference.
   B.   Comply With Federal Law: The operator's policy with regard to
personally identifiable information shall be consistent with Federal law.
   C.   Fairness: The entire system of the operator shall be operated in a
manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its
facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens,
businesses, public agencies and other entities having a legitimate use for the
system, and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-
1991)
9-5-21: CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY:
   A.   Subscriber Right:
      1.   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving
service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the operator are
honored. In the event that the operator elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify,
or sell the system, or the City give notice of intent to terminate or fails to
renew this franchise, the operator shall act so as to ensure that all
subscribes receive continuous, uninterrupted service.
      2.   In the event of a change of operator, or in the event a new operator
acquires the system, the original operator shall cooperate with the City and
the new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.
During such period, the original operator shall be entitled to the revenues for
any period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to
reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.
   B.   Failure Of Operator: In the event operator fails to operate the system
for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the City or without
just cause, the City may, at its option, operate the system or designate an
operator until such time as operator restores service under conditions
acceptable to the City or a permanent operator is selected. If the City is
required to fulfill this obligation for the operator, then during such period
as the City fulfills such obligation, the City shall be entitled to collect all
revenues from the system, and the operator shall reimburse the City for all
reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by the City
that are the result of the operator's failure to perform. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-22: VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
   A.   Remedies For Violations: Any breach of the provisions of this Chapter
is subject to any or all of the following remedies:
      1.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
      2.   The City may enforce the provisions of this Chapter by civil action,
including injunctive relief.
      3.   Any private citizen may enforce this Chapter by civil action.
      4.   Any material violation of a provision of this Chapter is subject to
administrative assessment of penalties and order to remedy the violation
pursuant to subsection B of this Section.
      5.   Any material violation of a provision of this Chapter is declared a
nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to subsection C of this Section.
      6.   Revocation of the franchise.
   B.   Administrative Adjudication Of Violations Of Consumer Protection
Standards: The City may prosecute administratively any material violation of
this Chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth at subsections D and E of
this Section. The hearing officer shall have the authority to: 1) order the
operator to undertake remedial action to cure any breach of its obligations
under this Chapter; 2) levy a penalty upon the operator up to five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per day, per violation; and 3) find that the operator has not
violated any of its obligations under this Chapter.
   C.   Nuisance Abatement: The City may prosecute any material violation of
this Chapter as a nuisance pursuant to the procedure set forth at Sections
9-5-23 through
9-5-25 of this Chapter.
   D.   Procedure For administrative Adjudication Of Violation Of Chapter:
      1.   Notice Of Violation: The City Manager may notify the operator of any
violation of this Chapter. The notice may be by telephone or telecopy and shall
be confirmed in writing and establish a reasonable time to cure the violation.
The period to cure shall be a minimum of five (5) working days (except in cases
of emergency where a shorter time may be prescribed consistent with the nature
of the emergency).
      2.   Operator Response: Upon receiving the City Manager's notice of a
breach of this Chapter, the operator shall investigate the alleged breach, and
within the time period established in the notice, notify the City Manager in
writing of the results of the investigation and its action to cure the
violation, if any. In the event the City Manager does not refer the matter to
the City Council or to an administrative hearing as provided under subsection E
of this Section within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the operator's
response, the operator's proposed action or resolution shall be final. (Ord.
1159, 2-5-1991)
   E.   Administrative Hearing Procedures:
      1.   The City Manager shall select an independent hearing officer.
      2.   The hearing shall be conducted according to California Code of Civil
Procedure section 1280 et seq. (the "General Arbitration Act").
      3.   Any failure of the operator to comply with the final order of the
hearing officer shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise.
      4.   The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to the City Council.
(Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991; amd. 2000 Code)
9-5-23: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
   A.   Commencement Of Nuisance Abatement Proceedings; Notice: Whenever the
City Manager reasonably believes a public nuisance under this Chapter exists,
he may commence abatement proceedings. The City Manager shall cause a written
notice to be issued to abate such nuisance.
      1.   The notice shall contain a description of the nuisance. It shall
refer to this Section and the violation of this Chapter at issue, and shall
direct compliance by removal or correction of the condition which is in
violation of the provisions of this Chapter within the time period set forth at
subsection
9-5-22D1 of this Chapter. The notice shall further describe the consequences of
failure to comply as prescribed in this Section.
      2.   The notice shall be served on the operator by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested. Delivery by first class mail shall be
used when delivery by registered or certified mail is refused. Such notice by
mail shall be sufficient for purposes of this Chapter.
      3.   Failure of any person to receive a notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings under this Chapter.
   B.   Voluntary Abatement Of Public Nuisances: The operator may abate the
nuisance at any time within the abatement period. The City Manager shall be
advised of the abatement and shall inspect the system to ensure that the
nuisance has in fact been abated.
   C.   Involuntary Abatement: Upon failure of the operator to correct the
condition as described in the notice by the date specified, the City Manager
shall cause an administrative hearing to be held to determine whether a
nuisance exists. The City Manager shall give the operator at least fourteen
(14) days' written notice of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted
pursuant to subsection
9-5-22E of this Chapter, and the hearing officer may order the nuisance abated
and/or assess penalties up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per
violation until the nuisance is abated. The operator shall be liable for all
costs of abatement as provided for at California Government Code section
38773.5. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-24: ASSESSMENT LIEN:
   A.   Special Assessment; Notice: The total cost for abatement of the
nuisance and any resulting penalties, as confirmed by the City Council, shall
constitute a special assessment against the operator's land and, upon
recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a notice of lien, shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
   B.   Add To Tax Billing: After confirmation and recordation, a copy of the
notice of lien may be turned over to the tax collector to add the amounts of
the assessments to the next regular tax bill levied against the operator.
Thereafter the assessment amounts shall be collected at the same time and in
the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected and shall be subject
to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case
of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes. After recordation, the
lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means
provided by law. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-25: ALTERNATE ACTIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City from commencing a
civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing any
other means available to it under provisions of applicable ordinances or State
law to correct hazards or deficiencies in real property in addition to or as
alternatives to the proceedings set forth herein. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
CHAPTER 6
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Intent
9-6-2: Short Title
9-6-3: Definitions
9-6-4: Grant Of Franchise
9-6-5: Transfer Of Ownership Or Control
9-6-6: Franchise Renewal
9-6-7: Police Powers
9-6-8: Franchise Fee
9-6-9: Forfeiture Or Revocation
9-6-10: Procedures Upon Termination Or Expiration
9-6-11: Receivership And Foreclosure
9-6-12: Franchise Processing Costs
9-6-13: Regulation Of Franchise
9-6-14: General Financial And Insurance Provisions
9-6-15: Design And Construction Provisions
9-6-16: Service Provisions
9-6-17: Operation And Maintenance
9-6-18: Rights Reserved To Grantor
9-6-19: Rights Reserved To Grantee
9-6-20: Franchise Violations
9-6-21: Reports
9-6-22: Compliance With State And Federal Laws
9-6-23: Separability
9-6-24: Notices
9-6-25: Captions
9-6-26: Enforcement Of Franchise
9-6-27: State Video Franchises
9-6-1: INTENT:
The city finds that the development of cable television and communications
systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents
of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated
with cable television, the city further finds that the public convenience,
safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers
which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate.
Consistent with federal and state law, it is the intent of this chapter and
subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best
possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an
integral part thereof. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-2: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF EL SEGUNDO CABLE
COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Words used in the present
tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not
defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM (Also Referred To As CABLE TELEVISION
SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, CATV SYSTEM, Or COMMUNITY ANTENNA TV SYSTEM): A facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple
subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
   A.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
   B.   A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility
uses any public right of way;
   C.   A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
   D.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
   CABLE SERVICE: The total of the following:
   A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming service; and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of
such video programming or other programming service.
   CHANNEL OR CABLE CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency
spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a
television channel as defined by the federal communications commission.
   COMMENCE CONSTRUCTION: That time and date when construction of the cable
communications system is considered to have commenced, which shall be when the
first connection is physically made to a utility pole, or undergrounding of
cables is initiated.
   COMMENCE OPERATION: That time and date when operation of the cable
communications system is considered to have commenced which shall be when
sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the
offering of full services to a dwelling unit located within the franchise area
and such services are actually offered to a resident of the franchise area.
   COMMERCIAL USE CHANNEL: The channel capacity designated for commercial use
as defined and required by federal law.
   COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION: That point in time when all distribution
facilities specified in the franchise agreement have been installed by the
grantee so as to permit the offering of cable service to all of the potential
subscribers in the franchise area, as well as the provision, in an operational
state, of any facilities required by the franchise agreement.
   CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form
to another.
   COUNCIL: The governing body of the city of El Segundo.
   FCC: The federal communications commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor.
   FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by a
franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise,
permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise,
which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise award ordinance, or a contractual
agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted,
including referenced specifications, franchise applications, franchise
requirements ordinances and other related materials.
   FRANCHISE FEES: Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a
franchising authority or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable
subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term
"franchise fee" does not include:
   A.   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such
tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their
services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against grantee or cable subscribers);
   B.   Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by
grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
   C.   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the
franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
   D.   Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
   GRANTEE: Any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and
under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor,
transferee or assignee.
   GRANTOR OR CITY: The city of El Segundo as represented by the city council
or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
   GROSS ANNUAL RECEIPTS: The annual gross revenues received by the grantee
from all sources of operations of the cable communications system, excluding
refundable deposits, except that any sales, excise or other taxes collected for
direct pass through to local, state or federal government shall not be
included.
   INITIAL SERVICE AREA: The area of the city which will receive service
initially, as set forth in the franchise agreement.
   INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers'
terminals, and the provision of service.
   LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL: Any channel where the grantee or its designated
agent is the primary programmer, and provides video programs to subscribers.
   PAY CABLE, PAY TELEVISION OR PAY PER VIEW: The delivery to subscribers, over
the cable communications system, of television signals for a fee or charge to
subscribers over and above the charge for basic cable service, on a per
program, per channel, or other subscription basis.
   PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust,
corporation, or organizational entity.
   PROGRAMMER: A person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides
program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital, or
other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to
subscribers, by means of the cable communications system.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES OR PEG ACCESS
FACILITIES: The total of the following:
   A.   Channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental
use; and
   B.   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
   RESIDENT: Any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by applicable
law.
   SCHOOL: Any accredited nonprofit educational institution including primary
and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private.
SECTION: Any section, subsection, or provision of this franchise chapter.
   SERVICE AREA OR FRANCHISE AREA: The entire geographic area within the city
designated in a franchise agreement to receive cable service.
   SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services provided by a
grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee.
   STATE: The state of California.
   STATE FRANCHISEE: Any holder of a state issued video franchise operating in
the city, as defined in Public Utilities Code section 5830(p).
   STREET: Each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or
hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by
others and located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways,
avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights of way and similar public
property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the
definition of street from time to time.
   SUBSCRIBER: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which
elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by
means of or in connection with the cable communications system. (Ord. 1165, 6-
4-1991; amd. Ord. 1418, 4-1-2008)
9-6-4: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Grant:
      1.   In the event that grantor shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive,
revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct, a cable
communications system within the franchise area, or a renewal of an existing
franchise, said franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to
provide the services of a cable communications system as required by the
provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement
shall include those provisions of the grantee's "application for franchise"
that are finally negotiated and accepted by the grantor and grantee.
      2.   Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained
herein shall be consistent with federal laws and regulations and State general
laws and regulations. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions
of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the grantor can grant a
franchise, the general law and/or statutory requirements shall, without
exception, control.
      3.   Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general
ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the
franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the other codes and
ordinances of the grantor regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of
construction.
   B.   Franchise Required: No cable communications system shall be allowed to
occupy or use the streets in the franchise area or be allowed to operate
without a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   Establishment Of Franchise Requirements: The grantor may establish
appropriate requirements for new franchises or franchise renewals, and may
modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing conditions and
state of art in the cable industry. Such requirements shall not be retroactive
to franchises then in effect, except as set forth in Section
9-6-7 of this Chapter, but shall become applicable when the franchise is
renewed.
   D.   Authority To Grant Franchise: The grantor may grant a franchise for all
or any defined portion of the City. The service area shall be the entire area
defined in the franchise agreement. The initial service area shall be that
portion of the franchise area scheduled to receive initial service, as stated
in the franchise agreement.
   E.   Use Of Public Streets And Ways: For the purpose of operating and
maintaining a cable communications system in the franchise area, and subject to
the provisions of subsection
9-6-15J of this Chapter, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along
the public streets and ways within the franchise area such wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
pedestals, attachments, and other property and equipment as are necessary and
appurtenant to the operation of the cable communications system. Prior to
construction or alteration, however, the grantee shall in each case file plans
with the appropriate grantor agencies and local utility companies, and receive
written approval before proceeding. Grantee shall in any event comply with all
applicable grantor construction codes and procedures.
   F.   Duration: The term of any new franchise and all rights, privileges,
obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as established in the
franchise agreement, unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided.
   G.   Franchise Nonexclusive: Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive.
The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises for a cable communications system as it deems
appropriate; provided, however, that such additional grants shall not operate
to materially modify, revoke or terminate any rights previously granted to any
grantee.
   H.   New Franchise Applications: Applicants for a new franchise shall submit
to the grantor written applications utilizing the standardized format provided
by the grantor, at the time and place designated by the grantor for accepting
applications, and including the application fees designated by grantor.
   I.   Grant Procedure: All new franchise applications when filed shall be
available for public inspection at places designated by the grantor. No later
than ninety (90) days after the final date for filing applications, one or more
public hearings shall be held on the applications. A decision shall be made by
the grantor not later than ninety (90) days after the conclusion of all such
public hearings based upon an evaluation of the application, the hearings, and
other information that the grantor may deem relevant. Grantor may grant one or
more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-5: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL:
   A.   Transfer Of Franchise: Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a
privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Said franchise cannot in
any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but
not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation,
receivership, or other means without the prior written consent of the grantor,
and then only under such reasonable conditions as the grantor may establish.
Such consent as required by the grantor shall be given or denied no later than
ninety (90) days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   B.   Ownership Or Control: The grantee shall promptly notify in writing the
grantor of any proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other
party of, control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not
limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever
manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has
occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or transfer by any person or group of
persons of ten percent (10%) or more of the beneficial ownership interest of
the grantee. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee
shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the grantor
shall have consented in writing thereto, which consent shall be given or denied
no later than ninety (90) days following any request, and shall not be
unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent
to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the grantor may inquire
into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee
shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry.
In seeking the grantor's consent to any change in ownership or control, the
grantee shall have the responsibility:
      1.   To show to the satisfaction of the grantor whether the proposed
purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the "proposed transferee"), which in the
case of a corporation, shall include all directors and all persons having a
legal or equitable interest in five percent (5%) or more of its voting stock:
         a.   Has ever been convicted of any felonious acts including, but not
limited to, any violation of Federal, State or local law or regulations, or is
presently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts;
         b.   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of
competent jurisdiction; or
         c.   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding
arising out of or involving a cable system.
      2.   To establish, to the satisfaction of the grantor, the financial
solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data
for the proposed transferee which the grantee was required to submit in its
franchise application and such other data as the grantor may request. Financial
statements shall be audited, certified and qualified by a certified public
accountant or a financial officer of the proposed transferee.
      3.   To establish to the satisfaction of the grantor that the financial
and technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it
to maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the
franchise under the existing franchise terms.
   C.   Financial Institution: The grantor agrees that any financial
institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement
of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the
right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor
shall take control and operate the cable communications system, in the event of
a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial
institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will ensure
continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the
term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial
institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding
one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said
period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the
franchise to another grantee. If the grantor finds that such transfer after
considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public
interest qualities of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall
transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the
public interest. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall be given or
denied no less than ninety (90) days after any request, and shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
   D.   Grantor Rights To Streets: The consent or approval of the grantor to
any transfer by the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the
rights of the grantor in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its
terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise.
   E.   Completion Of Construction: In the absence of extraordinary
circumstances, the grantor shall not approve any transfer or assignment of the
franchise prior to completion of initial construction of the cable system.
   F.   Successor Signature: In no event shall a transfer of ownership or
control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to
the franchise agreement. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-6: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
Franchise renewal shall be as prescribed by applicable law. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-
1991)
9-6-7: POLICE POWERS:
   A.   Right Subject To Police Powers: In accepting a franchise, the grantee
acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police powers of the
grantor to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and
welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws
and ordinances enacted by the grantor pursuant to such power.
   B.   Conflicting Provisions: Any conflict between the provisions of this
Chapter and any other present or future lawful exercise of the grantor's police
powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise
that is not of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively
to any cable communications system franchise which contains provisions
inconsistent with this Chapter shall prevail only if upon such exercise the
grantor finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety,
property or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law. (Ord. 1165, 6-
4-1991)
9-6-8: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   Annual Franchise Payment: A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay
to the grantor an annual fee in an amount as designated in the franchise
agreement. Such payment shall commence as of the effective date of the
franchise or any renewal date. The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be
furnished a statement within sixty (60) days of the close of the calendar year,
either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or
certified by a financial officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts
of gross receipts and all payments, deductions and computations for the period
covered by the payment. Upon ten (10) days' prior written notice, grantor shall
have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee's records, in
accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures, and if such audit
indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent (2%) or more, the grantee
shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit.
   B.   Acceptance By Grantor: No acceptance of any payment by the grantor
shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim
the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee
under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the
grantee.
   C.   Failure To Make Required Payment: In the event that any franchise
payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified
herein, grantee shall pay as additional compensation:
      1.   An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate
equal to the average rate of return on invested funds of the City during the
period for which payment was due.
      2.   If the payment is late by forty five (45) days or more, a sum of
money equal to five percent (5%) of the amount due in order to defray those
additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of delinquent
payment.
   D.   Fee Payments: Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with
the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement.
   E.   Itemization Of Costs: Any grantee itemization of franchise fee costs on
subscribes' bills shall be in accordance with Federal law. If grantee elects to
indicate the franchise fee as a separate item, it shall also itemize, as a
minimum, the five (5) cost items representing the largest recurring operational
costs to grantee. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-9: FORFEITURE OR REVOCATION:
   A.   Grounds For Revocation: If the grantee has been given due notice and a
reasonable opportunity to cure, the grantor reserves the right to revoke any
franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated
with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall
represent a default under this Chapter and a material breach of the franchise:
      1.   If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of its
material obligations under this Chapter or under such documents, agreements and
other terms and provisions entered into by and between the grantor and the
grantee, subject to the provisions of subsection
9-6-20C of this Chapter.
      2.   If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect, the liability and indemnification coverages or the security fund or
bonds as required herein.
      3.   If any court of competent jurisdiction, or any Federal or State
regulatory body by rules, decisions or other action determines that any
material provision of the franchise documents, including this Chapter, the
franchise agreement and grantee's proposal is invalid or unenforceable prior to
the commencement of initial system construction.
      4.   If the grantee ceases to provide all services for any reason within
the control of the grantee over the cable communications system.
      5.   If the grantee wilfully violates any of the material provisions of
this Chapter or the franchise agreement or attempts to practice any fraud or
deceit upon the grantor.
      6.   If the grantee becomes insolvent, or upon listing of an order for
relief in favor of grantee in a bankruptcy proceeding.
   B.   Procedure Prior To Revocation:
      1.   The grantor may make written demand that the grantee comply with any
such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct
any action deemed cause for revocation. In the event the stated violation is
not reasonably curable within ninety (90) days, the franchise shall not be
terminated or revoked, or damages assessed, if the grantee provides within the
said ninety (90) days a plan, satisfactory to the grantor, to remedy the
violation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a
period exceeding ninety (90) days following receipt of such written demand by
the grantor, the grantor may place its request for termination of the franchise
upon a regular Council meeting agenda. The grantor shall cause notice to be
served upon such grantee, at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of such
meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the
time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least
once, ten (10) days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation
within the franchise area.
      2.   The grantor shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall
determine, within ninety (90) days, based upon the preponderance of the
evidence, whether the grantee has committed a material breach of this Chapter
or the franchise agreement, and, if so, whether such breach was wilful.
      3.   If the grantor determines that the grantee has wilfully committed a
material breach, then the grantor may, by resolution, declare that the
franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and security fund and bonds
forfeited, or the grantor may, at its option and if the material breach is
capable of being cured by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate
remedial action within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions
as the grantor shall determine are reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord.
1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-10: PROCEDURES UPON TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION:
   A.   Disposition Of Facilities: In the event a franchise expires, is
revoked, or otherwise terminated, the grantor may order the removal of the
above-ground system facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable
period of time as determined by the grantor or require the original grantee to
maintain and operate its cable system for a period not to exceed twenty four
(24) months as indicated in subsection D of this Section.
   B.   Restoration Of Property: In removing its plant, structures, and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its equipment
without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments. The
liability, indemnity and insurance, and the security fund and bonds provided
shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until
full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this Section.
   C.   Restoration Grantor, Reimbursement Of Costs: In the event of a failure
by the grantee to complete any work required by subsection A of this Section
and/or subsection B of this Section or any other work required by grantor by
law or ordinance, within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice, and
to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause such work to be done
and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor the cost thereof within thirty (30)
days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the grantor may recover
such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by grantee. The grantor
shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions
of this Section.
   D.   Extended Operation: Upon either the expiration or revocation of a
franchise, the grantor may require the grantee to continue to operate the cable
communications system for a defined period of time not to exceed twenty four
(24) months from the date of such expiration or revocation. The grantee shall,
as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable
communications system under the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the
franchise agreement and to provide the regular cable service and any of the
other services that may be provided at that time. The grantor shall be
permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this
Section.
   E.   Grantor's Right Not Affected: The termination and forfeiture of any
franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the grantor under any
provision of law. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-11: RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE:
   A.   Receivership Or Bankruptcy: Any franchise granted shall, at the option
of the grantor, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of
the grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or
unless:
      1.   Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty
(120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the
terms and provisions of this Chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto,
and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall
have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and
      2.   Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty
(120) days, execute an agreement duly approve by the Court having jurisdiction
on the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be
bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise
agreement.
   B.   Foreclosure Or Involuntary Sale: In the case of a foreclosure or other
involuntary sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or any
part thereof, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and
to the purchaser at such sale, in which event the franchise and rights and
privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days
after service of such notice, unless:
      1.   The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as
and in the manner in this Chapter provided; and
      2.   Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with the
grantor to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-12: FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS:
   A.   Costs Involved: For either a new franchise award, franchise renewal or
transfer, costs to be borne by the grantee which receives the new franchise
award, renewal or transfer shall include, but shall not be limited to, all
costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting provided for
pursuant to a franchise, development and publication of relevant ordinances and
franchise agreement, fees, and any cost not covered by the application fees,
incurred by the grantor in its study, preparation of proposal solicitation
documents, evaluation of all applications, including, but not limited to,
consultant and attorney fees.
   B.   Processing Costs Additional: These franchise processing costs are over
and above the construction inspection and permit fees specified in subsection
9-6-15K1a and the franchise fee specified in Section
9-6-8 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-13: REGULATION OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Regulatory Authority: The grantor shall exercise regulatory authority
under the provisions of this Chapter and applicable law. If the franchise area
served by the cable communications system also serves other contiguous or
neighboring communities, grantor may, at its sole option, participate in a
joint regulatory agency, with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and
related communications.
   B.   Preemption Of Regulatory Authority: If any areas of local regulatory
authority are preempted by State, Federal or judicial action, and such
preemption is later lifted and no longer in effect, the grantor shall have the
authority to reassert regulation at any time thereafter, so long as such
regulation is not in conflict with the provisions of any existing franchise
agreement.
   C.   Regulatory Responsibility: The grantor, acting alone or acting jointly
with other grantors, may exercise or delegate the following regulatory
responsibility:
      1.   Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable
communications system franchise.
      2.   Coordination of the operation of public, educational and government
(PEG) access channel and facilities.
      3.   Providing technical, programming and operational support to public
agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care
institutions.
      4.   Establishing jointly with the grantee, or as otherwise specified in
the franchise agreement, procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated
to public use and sharing of public facilities, if provided for in any
franchise agreement.
      5.   Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services.
      6.   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, State or national telecommunications networks.
      7.   Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policy.
   D.   Public Usage Of System: If so specified in the franchise agreement, the
grantor may utilize a portion of the cable communications system capacity, and
associated facilities and resources, to develop and provide noncommercial cable
services that will be in the public interest. In furtherance of this purpose,
the grantor may establish a commission, public corporation, or other entity to
receive and allocate facilities, support funds and other considerations
provided by the grantor, the grantee, and/or others. Such an entity, if
established, may be delegated the following responsibilities:
      1.   Receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization, channel capacity,
facilities, funding and other support provided specifically for public usage of
the cable communications system.
      2.   Review the status and progress of each service developed for public
benefit.
      3.   Reallocate resources jointly with the grantee on a periodic basis to
conform with changing priorities and public needs.
      4.   Report to the grantor and the grantee annually on the utilization of
resources, the new public services developed and the benefits achieved for the
grantor and its residents.
   E.   PEG Access Facility Management:
      1.   Intent: It is the intent of the grantor to ensure that PEG access
facilities provided for in any franchise agreement shall be managed in the best
public interest so that programming using such facilities will be open to all
residents, and available for all forms of public expression, community
information and debate of public issues. Pursuant to these objectives, the
grantor may delegate the responsibility for PEG access facility management to a
nonprofit entity which may include, but not be limited to, any of the
following:
         a.   A nonprofit public corporation.
         b.   A PEG access facility management commission or committee,
appointed by grantor, and representing a broad spectrum of the community.
         c.   An established nonprofit entity with special cablecasting
capability, such as a local or regional community college.
      2.   Functions: The entity designated to manage the PEG access facilities
shall have the following functions:
         a.   Responsibility for program production for and management of the
public access facilities as may in the franchise agreement be designated for
community-based programming. Community channels may include public, educational
and government access channels, as designated in the franchise agreement.
         b.   To assure that the PEG access facilities are made to all
residents of the franchise area on a nondiscriminatory, first- come, first-
served basis.
         c.   To assure that no censorship or control over program content of
the PEG access facilities exists except as necessary to comply with Federal
prohibition of material that is illegal.
         d.   To devise, establish, and administer all rules, regulations, and
procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the PEG access facilities.
         e.   To prepare, in conjunction with the grantee, such regular or
special reports as may be required or desirable.
         f.   To hire and supervise staff.
         g.   To make all purchases of materials and equipment that may be
required.
         h.   To develop sources of funding, such as foundation or Federal or
State grants, to further community programming.
         i.   To perform such other functions relevant to the PEG access
facilities as may be appropriate.
         j.   Establishment of budgets on an annual basis, and utilization of
funds and resources received from the grantor or the public usage entity
designated in subsection D of this Section, for the purpose of PEG access
programming.
      3.   Access Rules: The PEG access facility management entity shall
complete a set of rules for the use of the PEG access facilities which shall be
promptly forwarded to the grantor. The rules shall be prepared in cooperation
with the grantee, and confirmed by agreement between the PEG access facility
management entity and the grantee. The rules shall, at a minimum, provide for:
         a.   Access on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis for
all residents of the franchise area.
         b.   Prohibition of commercial use by public access programming
producers.
         c.   Prohibition of any presentation of obscene material.
         d.   Public inspection of the log of producers, which shall be
retained by the PEG access facility management entity for a period of four (4)
years.
         e.   Procedures by which individuals or groups who violate any rule
may be prevented from further access to the facilities.
         f.   Free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time, cablecasting
facilities, and technical support as are provided for in the agreement between
the PEG access facility management entity and the grantee.
      4.   PEG Access Facility Management Entity Reports To Grantor: The PEG
access facility management entity shall provide a report to the grantor and the
grantee, at least annually, indicating achievements in community-based
programming and services.
   F.   Reservation By Grantor: The grantor reserves the right, at its
discretion, from time to time, to determine if the entities described in
subsections D and E of this Section are performing their purposes in a manner
satisfactory to the grantor, and if they are not, the grantor may receive and
reallocate all or a portion of the channel capacity, operations appropriation,
and capital appropriation, including any facilities and equipment purchased
previously with such appropriation, to another entity. A new entity shall be
required to comply in all respects with the legal responsibilities described in
subsections D and E of this Section.
   G.   Rates: The grantee shall establish rates for its services that must be
applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area. The
grantor retains the right to institute rate regulation to the extent permitted
by applicable law.
   H.   Annual Review Of Performance And Quality Of Service: At grantor's sole
option, within ninety (90) days of the first anniversary of the effective date
of each franchise, and each year thereafter throughout the term of the
franchise, the grantor may hold a public hearing at which the grantee shall be
present and shall participate, to review the performance and quality of service
of the cable communications system. The reports required in Section
9-6-21 of this Chapter regarding subscriber complaints, the records of
performance tests and the opinion survey report shall be utilized as the basis
for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints
during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be
considered.
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing,
grantor shall issue a report with respect to system performance and quality of
service. If areas of franchise noncompliance are found, grantor may direct
grantee to correct the noncompliance within a reasonable period of time.
      2.   Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the noncompliance
shall be considered a breach of the franchise, and grantor may, at its sole
discretion, exercise any remedy within the scope of this Chapter considered
appropriate.
   I.   System And Services Review: To provide for technological, economic, and
regulatory changes in the state of the art of cable communications, to
facilitate renewal procedures, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in
the cable system, and to achieve a continuing, advanced modern system, the
following system and services review procedures are hereby established:
      1.   At grantor's sole option, the grantor may hold a public hearing on
or about the fifth anniversary date of the franchise agreement at which the
grantee shall be present and shall participate, to review the cable
communications system and services. Subsequent system and services review
hearings may be scheduled by the grantor each five (5) years thereafter.
      2.   Sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled system and services review
hearing, grantee shall submit a report to grantor indicating the following:
         a.   All cable system services reported in cable industry trade
journals that are being commonly provided on an operational basis, excluding
tests and demonstrations, to communities in the United States with comparable
populations, that are not provided to the grantor.
         b.   Any specific plans for provision of such new services by the
grantee, or a justification indicating why grantee believes that such services
are not feasible for the franchise area.
      3.   Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review
hearing shall include, but shall not be limited to, services provided,
feasibility of providing new services, application of new technologies, system
performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights or
privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding processes, developments in
the law, and regulatory constraints.
      4.   Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics for
discussion at any review hearing.
      5.   Not later than sixty (60) days after the conclusion of each system
and service review hearing, grantor shall issue a report, including
specifically a listing of any cable services not then being provided to the
grantor that are considered technically and economically feasible. Grantor may
request grantee to provide such services within a reasonable time, under
reasonable rates and conditions. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-14: GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Construction Bond:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after the granting of a new franchise, or a
renewal which requires significant system construction, and prior to the
commencement of any construction work by the grantee, the grantee shall file
with the grantor a construction bond in the amount specified in the franchise
agreement in favor of the grantor and any other person who may claim damages as
a result of the breach of any duty by the grantee assured by such bond.
      2.   Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by
the grantor and shall, among other matters, cover the cost of removal of any
properties installed by the grantee in the event said grantee shall default in
the performance of its franchise obligation.
      3.   In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the
liability of the grantee for damages.
      4.   Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or permit
consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond and security
fund specified, respectively in subsections B and C of this Section.
      5.   Upon completion of construction, any construction bonds then in
force shall be released.
   B.   Performance Bond:
      1.   In addition to the construction bond set forth above, the grantee
may be required, at least thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of
operation, to file with the grantor a performance bond in the amount specified
in the franchise agreement in favor of the grantor and an other person who may
be entitled to damages as a result of any occurrence in the operation or
termination of the cable communications system operated under the franchise
agreement and including the payments required to be made to the grantor
hereunder.
      2.   Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by
the grantor and shall among other matters cover the cost of removal of any
properties installed by the grantee in the event said grantee shall default in
the performance of its franchise obligation.
      3.   In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the
liability of the grantee for damages.
      4.   Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or permit
consolidation of the performance bond with the construction bond and security
fund specified, respectively in subsections A and C of this Section.
   C.   Security Fund:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise,
the grantee shall deposit into a bank account, established by the grantor and
maintain on deposit through the term of this franchise, the sum specified in
the franchise agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all
the provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of any agency of the grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults under this Chapter, and the payment by the grantee of any claims,
liens and taxes due the grantor which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the system.
Subject to the provisions of subsection C4 of this Section, the security fund
may be assessed by the grantor for purposes including, but not limited to, the
following:
         a.   Failure of grantee to pay grantor sums due under the terms of the
franchise.
         b.   Reimbursement of costs borne by the grantor to correct franchise
violations not corrected by grantee, after due notice.
         c.   Monetary remedies or damages assessed against grantee due to
default or violation of franchise requirements.
      2.   At grantor's sole option, some portion of the security fund may be
provided in the acceptable form of an irrevocable letter of credit, in lieu of
a cash deposit.
      3.   Within thirty (30) days after notice to it that any amount has been
withdrawn by the grantor from the security fund pursuant to subsection C1 of
this Section, the grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore
such security fund to the amount required by the franchise agreement.
      4.   If the grantee fails, after thirty (30) days' written notice to pay
to the grantor any franchise fee or taxes due and unpaid; or, fails to pay to
the grantor within such thirty (30) days, any damages, costs or expenses which
the grantor shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the
grantee in connection with the franchise; or fails, after thirty (30) days'
notice of such failure by the grantor to comply with any material provision of
the franchise which the grantor reasonably determines can be remedied by an
expenditure of the security fund, the grantor may thereafter withdraw the
amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon
such withdrawal, the grantor shall notify the grantee of the amount and date
thereof.
      5.   The security fund deposited pursuant to this Section shall become
the property of the grantor in the event that the franchise is revoked for
cause by reason of the default of the grantee in accordance with the procedures
of Section
9-6-9 of this Chapter. The grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of
such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on deposit no later than
ninety (90) days after the expiration of the term of the franchise; provided,
that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee. The
grantee shall be entitled to any interest accrued on the cash portion of the
security fund.
      6.   The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security fund
are in addition to all other rights of the grantor whether reserved by this
Chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right
with respect to such security fund shall constitute an election of remedies or
a waiver of any other right the grantor may have.
   D.   Indemnification:
      1.   The grantee shall by acceptance of any franchise granted indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions,
agents, and employees from any and all claims, suits, judgments for damages or
other relief, costs and attorney fees in any way arising out of or through or
alleged to arise out of or through:
         a.   The act of the grantor in granting the franchise; and
         b.   The acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, employees, or
agents including, but not limited to, any failure or refusal by grantee, its
servants, employees or agents to comply with any obligation or duty imposed on
grantee by this Chapter or the franchise agreement.
         c.   The exercise of any right or privilege granted or permitted by
this Chapter or the franchise agreement. Such indemnification shall include,
but not be limited to, all claims arising in tort, contracts, infringements of
copyright, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations or otherwise.
      2.   In the event any such claims shall arise, the grantor or any other
indemnified party shall tender the defense thereof to the grantee. Provided,
however, that the grantor in its sole discretion may participate in the defense
of such claims at its expense, and in such event, grantee shall not agree to
any settlement of claims without grantor approval.
      3.   The grantee shall not be required to indemnify the grantor for
negligence or wilful misconduct on the part of grantor's officials, boards,
commissions, agents or employees.
   E.   Insurance:
      1.   The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise
insurance in amounts at least as follows:
         a.   Workers' Compensation Insurance: In such coverage as may be
required by the workers' compensation insurance and safety laws of the State
and amendments thereto.
         b.   Comprehensive General Liability: Comprehensive general liability
insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily injury and
property damage shall be maintained at the sum specified in the franchise
agreement.
         c.   Comprehensive Automobile Liability: Comprehensive automobile
liability including, but not limited to, nonownership and hired car coverage as
well as owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage
shall be maintained at the sum specified in the franchise agreement.
      2.   The grantee shall furnish the grantor with copies of such insurance
policies or certificates of insurance.
      3.   Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the grantor,
its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as additional insured,
and shall be primary to any insurance carried by grantor, and shall contain the
following endorsement; or one substantially similar:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
canceled by the surety or the intention not to renew be stated by the surety
until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City by registered mail or written
notice of such intention to cancel or not renew.
      4.   The minimum amounts set forth in the franchise agreement for such
insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the grantee to the
grantor under the franchise issued hereunder to the amounts of such insurance.
      5.   All insurance carriers providing coverage under subsection E1 of
this Section shall be duly licensed to operate in the State. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-
1991)
9-6-15: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS:
   A.   System Design: The cable communications system shall be constructed in
accordance with the design requirements contained in the franchise agreement.
   B.   Geographical Coverage: The grantee shall design and construct the cable
system in such a manner as to have the capability to pass by every single-
family dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, school and public agency
within the franchise area. Service shall be provided to subscribers in
accordance with the schedules and line extension policies specified in the
franchise agreement. Cable system construction and provision of service shall
be nondiscriminatory, and grantee shall not delay or defer service to any
section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference.
   C.   Cablecasting Facilities: The grantee shall provide cablecasting
facilities in accordance with the requirements of the franchise agreement.
   D.   System Construction Schedule:
      1.   The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system
construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.
      2.   As required by the franchise agreement, the grantee shall provide a
detailed construction plan indicating progress schedule, area construction
maps, test plan, and projected dates for offering service. In addition, the
grantee shall update this information on a monthly basis, by submitting a copy
of its normal internal progress reports, showing specifically whether schedules
are being met and the reasons for any delay.
   E.   Remedies For Delay In Construction: The grantor may, at its sole
option, apply any or all of the remedies in connection with delays in system
construction as specified in Section
9-6-20 of this Chapter.
   F.   Provision Of Service: After service has been established by activating
trunk and distribution cables for any area, the grantee shall provide service
to any requesting subscriber within that area within thirty (30) days from the
date of request.
   G.   Undergrounding Of Cable: The undergrounding of cable is encouraged. In
any event, cables shall be installed underground at grantee's cost where
utilities are already underground, or where required by law. Previously
installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded and relocated in concern with
other utilities, when such other utilities convert from aerial to underground
construction.
   H.   New Development Undergrounding:
      1.   In cases of new construction or property development where utilities
are to be placed underground, upon request by the grantee, the developer or
property owner shall give grantee at least seventy two (72) hours' notice of
the particular date on which open trenching will be available for grantee's
installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults to be provided at grantee's
expense. Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching.
      2.   Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the
development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if
grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults within five (5)
working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the
notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be
closed after the five (5) day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne
by grantee.
   I.   Underground At Multiple-Dwelling Units: In cases of multiple- dwelling
units serviced by aerial utilities, grantee shall make every effort to minimize
the number of individual aerial drop cables giving preference to undergrounding
of multiple drop cables between the pole and the dwelling unit.
   J.   Street Occupancy:
      1.   Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities
whenever possible and economically feasible, and shall not construct or install
any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether
on public property or on privately-owned property until the written approval of
the grantor is obtained.
      2.   Grantee shall notify the grantor at least ten (10) days prior to the
intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The
grantor shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits required,
providing such grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not
unduly interfere with the use of such streets and that proposed construction
shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the ordinances of
the grantor.
      3.   All transmission lines, equipment and structure shall be so
installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and
maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and
repair. The grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances
to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices
shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the
safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any
public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere
with the usual travel on such public way.
      4.   Grantee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the
grantor, restore to grantor standards and specifications any damage or
disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operations or
construction on its behalf.
      5.   Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in
the judgment of the grantor to remove any of the grantee's facilities, no
charge shall be made by the grantee against the grantor for restoration and
repair.
      6.   Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at
its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities,
subject to the supervision and direction of the grantor.
      7.   Upon receipt of thirty (30) days' written notice, the grantee at its
expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any
property of grantee when, in the opinion of the grantor the same is required by
reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street
grade, separation or realignment, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types
of structure or improvements by governmental agencies whether acting in a
governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public
improvement, including, but not limited to, movement of buildings,
redevelopment, or any general program under which the grantor shall undertake
to cause any such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground.
Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of grantee and
grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder.
      8.   After receipt of thirty (30) days' written notice, upon failure of
grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the
provisions of this Chapter to be done in any street, within the time prescribed
and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may, at its option, cause
such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the grantor the cost thereof
in the itemized amounts reported by the grantor to grantee within thirty (30)
days after receipt of such itemized report.
      9.   The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely
necessary, and only after written permission has been given by the grantor.
      10.   Grantor reserves the right to require conduit for underground
cabling in special areas.
   K.   Construction And Technical Standards:
      1.   Construction Standards:
         a.   Grantor Codes And Permits: Grantee shall comply with all
applicable grantor construction codes and permits procedures. Grantor shall be
entitled to charge reasonable permit and inspection fees to recover the special
nonrecurring inspection costs imposed by the construction of the cable system.
         b.   Compliance With Safety Codes: All construction practices shall be
in accordance with all applicable sections of Federal and State occupational
safety and health acts and any amendments thereto as well as all State and
local codes where applicable.
         c.   Compliance With Electrical Codes: All installation of electronic
equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance
with the provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, and all
applicable State and local codes.
         d.   Antennas And Towers: Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall
be designed for the proper loading as specified in Electronics Industry
Association's R.S.222-A specifications, and provisions of the Uniform Building
Code, as modified.
         e.   Compliance With Aviation Requirements: Antenna supporting
structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in
accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration and all other applicable State or local codes and regulations.
         f.   Construction Standards And Requirements: All of the grantee's
plant and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, headend
and distribution system towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire,
cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained
and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by
experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or
interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to hinder or
obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
         g.   Safety, Nuisance, Requirements: The grantee shall at all times
employ professional care and shall install and maintain in use commonly
accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely
to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
      2.   Technical Standards: The cable communications system shall meet all
technical and performance standards contained in the franchise agreement.
      3.   Test And Compliance Procedure: The grantee shall submit, within
sixty (60) days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, a detailed
test plan describing the methods and schedules for testing the cable
communications system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the
provisions of the franchise agreement. The tests for basic cable services shall
be performed at intervals no greater than twelve (12) months. The tests may be
witnessed by representatives of the grantor, and written test reports shall be
submitted to the grantor. If more than ten percent (10%) of the locations
tested fail to meet the performance standards, the grantee shall be required to
indicate what corrective measures have been taken, and the entire test shall be
repeated. A second failure of more than ten percent (10%) may result, at the
grantor's option, in appropriate remedies.
      4.   Special Tests: At any time after commencement of service to
subscribers, the grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat
tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's
terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
significant noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to the particular
matter in controversy. The grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests
for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee
or to the subscriber.
      5.   Cost Of Tests: The cost of all tests required by subsections K3 and
K4 of this Section and retesting as necessary, shall be borne by the grantee.
   L.   Areawide Interconnection:
      1.   Interconnection: The grantor may request grantee to interconnect
public usage channels of the cable communications system with any or all other
cable systems in adjacent areas. Interconnection of systems shall permit
interactive transmission and reception of program material, and may be done by
direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate
method.
      2.   Interconnection Procedure: Upon receiving the request of the grantor
to interconnect, the grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the
other affected system or systems, and shall report to the grantor the results
of such negotiation no later than sixty (60) days after initiation.
      3.   Relief: The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect or the grantor may rescind its request to interconnect upon
petition by the grantee to the grantor, if the grantor finds that the grantee
has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the
system or systems of the proposed interconnection, or that the cost of the
interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in
subscriber rates.
      4.   Cooperation Required: The grantee shall cooperate with any
interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or City,
County, State or Federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established
for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the
interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the franchise area.
      5.   Initial Technical Requirements To Assure Future Interconnection
Capability:
         a.   Every grantee receiving a franchise to operate a cable
communications system within the franchise area shall use the same frequency
allocations for commonly provided television signals so far as is technically
and economically feasible.
         b.   Grantee shall make a reasonable effort to provide local
origination and access equipment that is compatible throughout the area served
by the cable system. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-16: SERVICE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Services To Be Provided: The grantee shall initially provide, as a
minimum, the services listed in the franchise agreement. Services shall not be
reduced without at least thirty (30) days' prior notification to grantor and
subscribers.
   B.   Basic Cable Service: The basic cable service shall include any service
tier which includes the retransmission of local television signals. This
service shall be provided to all subscribers at the established monthly
subscription rates.
   C.   Local Origination Channel: If local origination programming is
provided, the grantee shall operate any cablecasting studios on a high-quality,
professional basis for the purpose of providing cablecast programming
responsive to local needs and interests.
   D.   Public, Educational And Government (PEG) Access Facilities: The grantee
shall provide the PEG access facilities including channel capacity, necessary
interface equipment and cabling to permit operation as specified in the
franchise agreement.
   E.   Cable Channels For Commercial Use: The grantee shall designate channel
capacity for commercial use as required by applicable law. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-
1991)
9-6-17: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Open Books And Records:
      1.   The grantor, upon reasonable notice, shall have the right to inspect
at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans,
service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of
the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise and are maintained
at the local office required by Chapter 5 of this Title; provided, that the
grantor shall maintain the confidentiality of any trade secrets or other
proprietary information in the possession of the grantee; and provided further,
that records shall be exempt from inspection pursuant to this subsection to the
extent required by applicable law regarding subscriber privacy and to the
extent such records are protected by law regarding subscriber privacy and to
the extent such records are protected by law against discovery in civil
litigation.
      2.   If any of such books or records are not kept in the local office, or
upon reasonable request made available to the grantor, and if the grantor shall
determine that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate to
the performance of any of grantor's duties, then all travel and maintenance
expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by
grantee.
   B.   Records Required: In any event, the grantee shall at all times
maintain:
      1.   The complaint file required by Chapter 5 of this Title.
      2.   A full and complete set of plans, records and as-built maps showing
the exact location of all cable communications system equipment installed or in
use in the franchise area, exclusive of subscriber service drops. (Ord. 1165,
6-4-1991)
9-6-18: RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR:
   A.   Right Of Inspection Of Construction: The grantor shall have the right
to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the
provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary
to ensure compliance with the terms of this franchise and other pertinent
provisions of law.
   B.   Right Of Intervention: The grantor shall have the right of intervention
in any suit or proceeding involving the cable system franchise to which the
grantee is party, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the
grantor. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-19: RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTEE:
In the event of any dispute between grantee and grantor over this Chapter or
the franchise agreement, or with respect to any rights or obligations arising
therefrom, grantee shall first pursue and exhaust any available administrative
remedies. Thereafter grantee may pursue any appropriate legal action. (Ord.
1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-20: FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Remedies For Franchise Violations: If the grantee fails to perform any
material obligation under the franchise, or fails to do so in a timely manner,
the grantor may at its option, and in its sole discretion:
      1.   Assess against the grantee monetary damages up to the limits
established in the franchise agreement for material franchise violations, said
assessment to be levied against the security fund, hereinabove provided, and
collected by grantor after completion of the procedures specified in subsection
B of this Section. The amount of such assessment shall be deemed to represent
liquidation of damages actually sustained by grantor by reason of grantee's
failure to perform. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the
grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or under
applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee
such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney
fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising
out of such breach of the franchise. This provision for assessment of damages
is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from grantor's right to
enforce the provisions of the construction and performance bonds provided for
in Section
9-6-14 of this Chapter and is intended to provide compensation to grantor for
actual damages.
      2.   Terminate the franchise, for any of the causes stated in Sections
9-6-4 through
9-6-12 of this Chapter.
      3.   No remedy shall be imposed by grantor against grantee for any
violation of the franchise without grantee being afforded due process of law,
as provided for in subsection B of this Section. Grantor may impose any or all
of the above enumerated measures against grantee, which shall be in addition to
any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or
under any applicable law.
   B.   Procedure For Remedying Franchise Violations: In the event that the
grantor determines that the grantee has violated any material provision of the
franchise, the grantor may make a written demand on the grantee that it remedy
such violation. If the violation is not remedied, or in the process of being
remedied, to the satisfaction of the grantor within thirty (30) days following
such demand, the grantor shall determine whether or not such violation by the
grantee was excusable or inexcusable, in accordance with the following
procedure:
      1.   An administrative hearing shall be held to review the alleged
violation. If this hearing does not result in a satisfactory resolution, and/or
the grantee requests a public hearing, then a public hearing shall be held, and
the grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon thirty (30)
days' written notice to the grantee of the time and the place of the hearing
provided and the allegations of franchise violations.
      2.   If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full
public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation by the
grantee was excusable as provided in subsection C of this Section, the grantor
shall direct the grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional
time, in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the grantor may
reasonably direct.
      3.   If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full
public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation was
inexcusable, then the grantor may impose a remedy in accordance with subsection
A of this Section.
   C.   Force Majeure; Grantee's Inability To Perform:
      1.   In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions,
obligations, or requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to
any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such
inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or
sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided grantee has notified
grantor in writing within thirty (30) days of its discovery of the occurrence
of such an event. Such causes beyond grantee's reasonable control or not
reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts of God
and civil emergencies.
      2.   Grantor and grantee, in the franchise agreement, may mutually define
those conditions deemed subject to force majeure application. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-
1991)
9-6-21: REPORTS:
   A.   Annual Reports: Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of
grantee's fiscal year, the grantee may be required to submit a written annual
report, in a form requested by the grantor, including, but not limited to, the
following information:
      1.   A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial
report year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system,
including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the
reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of service.
      2.   A revenue statement, audited by an independent certified public
accountant, or certified by an officer of the grantee.
      3.   A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two (2)
years.
      4.   A list of grantee's officers, members of its boards of directors,
and other principals of grantee.
      5.   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five
percent (5%) or more of the voting interest in the grantee and its parent,
subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, if any, unless the
parent is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly available.
      6.   To the extent that money, other than profits, is paid to a parent,
subsidiary, or other person affiliated with the grantee, the amounts of such
payments and the basis for computation of such amounts (e.g., the basis for
computing any management fees or share of "home office" overhead).
   B.   Plant Survey Report: At the grantor's request, grantee shall submit to
the grantor an annual plant survey report which shall be a complete survey of
the grantee's plans and a full report thereon. Said report shall include, but
not be limited to, a description and as-built maps of the portions of the
franchise area that have been cabled and have all services available, an
appropriate engineering evaluation including suitable electronic measurements
conducted in conformity with such requirements, including supervision, as the
grantor may prescribe. Said report shall be in sufficient detail to enable the
grantor to ascertain that the service requirements and technical standards of
the franchise are achieved and maintained. If grantor has reason to believe
that portions or all of the system do not meet the technical standards
incorporated into the franchise agreement, at grantor's request, but no more
often than once per three (3) years, the grantee and the grantor shall agree
upon the appointment of a qualified independent engineer to evaluate and verify
the technical performance of the cable system. The cost of such evaluation
shall be borne equally by the grantee and the grantor.
   C.   Copies Of Federal And State Reports: The grantee, upon request, may be
required to submit to the grantor copies of all pleadings, applications,
notifications, communications and documents of any kind, submitted by the
grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by,
any Federal, State and local courts, regulatory agencies and other government
bodies relating to its cable television operations within the franchise area.
Grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor no later than thirty (30)
days after receipt of a grantor request. The grantee hereby waives any right to
claim confidential, privileged or proprietary rights to such documents unless
such confidential rights are determined to be confidential by law or by the
practices of Federal or State agencies. Such confidential data exempt from
public disclosure shall be retained in confidence by the grantor and its
authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection.
   D.   Public Reports: A copy of each of grantee's annual and other periodic
public financial reports and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated
corporation and other entities, as the grantor requests, shall be submitted to
the grantor within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request.
   E.   Complaint File And Reports: An accurate and comprehensive file shall be
kept by the grantee of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. A
procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of
the cable system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the
satisfaction of the grantor. Complete records of grantee's actions in response
to all complaints shall be kept. These files and records shall remain open to
the public during normal business hours, so that individuals are able to
inspect their own files.
      1.   A summary of service requests, identifying the number and nature of
the requests and their disposition, upon grantor request, shall be completed
for each month and submitted to the grantor by the tenth day of the succeeding
month.
      2.   A log and summary of all service interruptions.
      3.   If requested by the grantor, the results of an annual opinion survey
report which identifies satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with
cable communications services offered by the grantee shall be submitted to the
grantor no later than two (2) months after the end of grantee's fiscal year.
The surveys required to make said report shall be in a form that can be
transmitted to subscribers with one or more bills for service, such as postage-
paid self-addressed post cards. At the grantor's option, the grantor may
prepare the survey form and request its inclusion with a monthly bill to
subscribers.
   F.   Miscellaneous Reports: Grantee shall submit to the grantor such other
information or reports in such forms and at such times as the grantor may
reasonably request or require.
   G.   Inspection Of Facilities: The grantee shall allow the grantor to make
inspections of any of the grantee's facilities and equipment at any time upon
at least ten (10) days' notice, or, in case of emergency, upon demand without
prior notice, to allow grantor to verify the accuracy of any submitted report.
   H.   Public Inspection: All reports subject to public disclosure shall be
available for public inspection at a designated grantor office during normal
business hours.
   I.   Failure To Report: The wilful refusal, failure, or neglect of the
grantee to file any of the reports reasonably required, or such other reports
as the grantor reasonably may request, may be deemed a material breach of the
franchise, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable,
which are available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
   J.   False Statements: Any materially false or misleading statement or
representation made knowingly and wilfully by the grantee in any report
required under the franchise may be deemed a material breach of the franchise
and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are
available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
   K.   Cost Of Reports: One copy of all reports and records required under
this or any other Section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the
grantee. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-22: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary, the
grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the State
and Federal Government or any administrative agencies thereof. Provided,
however, if any such State or Federal law or regulation shall require the
grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to perform any
service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict
with the terms of the franchise or any law or regulation of the grantor, then
as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the
grantor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or
law and the laws or regulations of the grantor or the franchise. (Ord. 1165, 6-
4-1991)
9-6-23: SEPARABILITY:
   A.   Nonmaterial Provisions: If any provision of this Chapter or any related
agreements is held by any court or by any Federal, State, or local agency of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal, State or
local law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such
court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the
requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, and if said provision is
considered nonmaterial by the grantor, said provision shall be considered a
separate, distinct and independent part of this Chapter, and such holding shall
not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In
the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed,
rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof or
thereof which has been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with
the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon
return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding on the parties
hereto; provided, that the grantor shall give the grantee thirty (30) days'
written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision.
   B.   Material Provisions: If any material section of this Chapter, as
determined by the grantor and the grantee, is held to be invalid or preempted
by Federal, State or County regulations or laws, resulting in a material
adverse consequence to either party, the grantor and grantee shall attempt to
negotiate appropriate modifications to the franchise to provide reasonable
relief to the grantor or grantee from such invalidity or preemption, including
the payment of damages. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on such
modifications, then the dispute shall be submitted to a mutually agreeable
arbitrator, in accordance with state law, who shall determine what
modifications and/or liquidated damages are appropriate. The arbitrator's
decision shall be binding on the parties; provided, that no decision of the
arbitrator shall require the grantor or grantee to be in violation of any
federal or state law or regulation. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-24: NOTICES:
Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise a local address for
service of notices by mail. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-25: CAPTIONS:
The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to
facilitate reading and reference. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-26: ENFORCEMENT OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   No Recourse Against Grantor: The grantee shall have no recourse
whatsoever against the grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents,
or employees for any loss, costs, expenses, or damage arising out of any
provision or requirement of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the
franchise.
   B.   Nonenforcement By Grantor: The grantee shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of
any failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-27: STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES:
   A.   PEG Fee Established: In accord with Public Utilities Code section 5870
(n), any grantee of a franchise, or state franchisee, must pay the city a fee
for the support of PEG channel facilities.
      1.   The amount of the PEG fee established by this section is two percent
(2%) of gross revenues, as defined in this code, the applicable city issued
franchise, or Public Utilities Code section 5860(d).
   B.   Franchise Fee Established: For any state franchisee, the amount of the
franchise fee imposed by Public Utilities Code section 5840(q) is five percent
(5%) of gross revenues, as defined in Public Utilities Code section 5860(d).
      1.   In accord with Public Utilities Code section 5860(a), the city
manager, or designee, will prepare and provide to state franchisees all
necessary documentation supporting the percentage franchise fee paid by the
incumbent cable operator serving the city.
   C.   Notices From State Franchisees: Any notice a state franchisee is
required to deliver to the city by Public Utilities Code section 5840(m) must
be delivered to the city manager, or designee.
   D.   No Intention To Limit Or Restrict Tax, Fee, Or Charge: Nothing in this
chapter is intended to limit or restrict in any way the imposition of any
existing or future generally applicable, nondiscriminatory, competitively
neutral tax, fee, or charge to a state franchisee, city franchisee or the
services the franchisees provide.
   E.   Customer Service Provisions For State Franchisees:
      1.   All state franchisees must comply with all applicable state and
federal laws and regulations regarding customer service and customer
protection.
      2.   The city manager, or designee, may review the performance of state
franchisees for compliance with the customer service requirements specified in
Public Utilities Code section 5900 (the "customer service standards").
      3.   If the city believes a material breach of the customer service
standards has occurred, the city manager must give the state franchisee written
notice of any alleged material breach(es). The state franchisee must remedy the
specified material breach(es) not later than thirty (30) days from receipt of
the notice.
      4.   If the state franchisee fails to remedy the specified material
breach(es) within thirty (30) days, the city manager, or designee, may impose
monetary penalties as set forth in this section.
   F.   Monetary Penalties: The city manager, or designee, may impose monetary
penalties as provided by this section as follows:
      1.   Up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material
breach, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each
occurrence of a material breach.
      2.   For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve (12)
months, up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material
breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of
the material breach.
      3.   For a third or further material breach of the same nature within
twelve (12) months, up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each
material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each
occurrence of the material breach.
      4.   Any monetary penalty imposed under this section may be appealed by
the state franchisee to the city council. Appeals must be received in writing
by the city clerk within sixty (60) days of imposition of the penalty. The
state franchisee may present any relevant written or oral evidence of its
choice. The city council may uphold or reverse, in whole or in part, the
imposition of the monetary penalties.
   G.   Compatible Format: The city manager, or designee, must ensure PEG
transmissions, content, and programming provided by the city to a state
franchisee is in a format compatible with the state franchisee's system. In the
alternative, the transmissions, content, and programming may be provided in an
industry standard format, in accord with Public Utilities Code section 5870(g)
(1).
   H.   Unsatisfied Obligations: For the duration of any city issued franchise,
if that franchisee has existing unsatisfied obligations under the franchise to
pay to the city any cash payments for the ongoing costs of public, educational,
and government access channel facilities or institutional networks, the fee
payable by each city and state franchisee is the franchisee's pro rata per
subscriber share of the cash payment required to be paid by the city franchisee
to the city for the costs of PEG channel facilities.
      1.   Within forty five (45) days after receiving notice required by
Public Utilities Code section 5840(n), each city and state franchisee must
provide to the city manager, or designee, a written statement of the number of
its subscribers within the franchisee's service area in the city.
      2.   Within forty five (45) days after receiving all franchisee
subscriber number statements, the city manager, or designee, must calculate the
division of the cash payments among all city and state franchisees, and provide
written notice to each franchisee of the franchisee's share of the cash
payment. This amount may be expressed as a percentage of gross revenue or as an
amount per subscriber, per month, or otherwise.
   I.   Interconnection: To properly serve the city's interest in PEG
programming, each state franchisee and city franchisee must comply with the PEG
system interconnection requirements of Public Utilities Code section 5870. The
city manager, or his or her designee, may make any interconnection
determinations of the city under Public Utilities Code section 5870, including
requiring interconnection where the city franchisee and state franchisee fail
to reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement. (Ord. 1418, 4-1-2008)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-7-1: City Hall
9-7-2: Public Library
9-7-1: CITY HALL:
   A.   Designation: That certain one story brick building located upon the
following described real property situated within the City:
Lots 1 to 5, both inclusive, Block 42, El Segundo Sheet No. 3, as per map
recorded in Book 20, Pages 22 and 23 of Maps, on file in the office of the
County Recorder of Los Angeles County, is hereby named and designated as the
City Hall in and for the City.
   B.   Main Entrance: The main entrance to the City Hall designated by the
preceding subsection is hereby fixed and designated as 350 Main Street in the
City.
   C.   Council Chamber: That certain room in the extreme west side of the City
Hall designated in subsection A of this Section is hereby named and designated
as the chamber of the City Council. (Ord. 472, 12-21-1955)
9-7-2: PUBLIC LIBRARY:
   A.   There is hereby established in and for the City, a public library to be
known as the “El Segundo Public Library”.
   B.   The El Segundo Board of Library Trustees is authorized and directed to
adopt El Segundo Library Rules of Conduct, which are incorporated by reference
into this code. The Rules of Conduct will be subject to enforcement as
authorized under applicable laws, including without limitation this code and
the terms of the Rules of Conduct. (Ord. 660, 3-13-1967; amd. Ord. 1664, 9-17-
2024)
CHAPTER 8
PERMITS AUTHORIZING EVENTS CONDUCTED IN CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-8-1: Purpose
9-8-2: Definitions
9-8-3: Administration By Director Of Recreation, Parks, And Library
9-8-4: Permit Required
9-8-5: Notices
9-8-6: Establishing Fees
9-8-7: Application Fee
9-8-8: Free Speech Event Fee
9-8-9: Basic Rate
9-8-10: Additional Use Fee
9-8-11: Time For Depositing Fees
9-8-12: Refunds
9-8-13: Application Time Requirements
9-8-14: Free Speech Event Application Time Requirements
9-8-15: Application Form And Content
9-8-16: Supplemental Information Required By The Director
9-8-17: Permit Application Review By City Officers
9-8-18: Permit Issuance
9-8-19: Permit Denial
9-8-20: Alternative Time, Place, Or Manner
9-8-21: Notice Of Denial
9-8-22: Indemnification Agreement
9-8-23: Liability Insurance
9-8-24: Waiver Of Insurance Requirements
9-8-25: Special Permit Conditions
9-8-26: Subsequent Conditions
9-8-27: Right Of Administrative Review
9-8-28: Time For Administrative Review
9-8-29: Commencement Of Administrative Review
9-8-30: Administrative Review
9-8-31: City Council Appeal
9-8-32: Free Speech Events
9-8-33: Permit Revocation
9-8-34: Emergency Suspension Of Event
9-8-35: Cordoning Off The Site Of An Event
9-8-36: Public Conduct During Events
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating public events conducted
in city parks and facilities that are operated and maintained by the city
recreation, parks, and library department. This chapter is intended to ensure
that such events are safe, do not unreasonably interfere with the general
public’s use of parks and park facilities, and do not damage public property
beyond ordinary wear and tear. In addition, this chapter is intended to require
any person or organization sponsoring or conducting an event to compensate the
general public for all costs incurred in connection with operating and
maintaining the parks or park facilities reasonably attributable to that event.
(Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter:
   BASIC RATE: The fee established by city council resolution for using park
property or facilities. The basic rate is based on a fair share of that part of
the overall cost of operating and maintaining the city's parks and facilities
reasonably attributable to a permittee's use of city park facilities.
   CITY MANAGER: The city manager or designee.
   DIRECTOR: The director of recreation, parks, and library, or designee.
   EVENT: Any of the following:
   A.   Any activity in a park that is planned for, or carried out in a manner
to attract, more than one hundred (100) people to attend or participate in the
activity;
   B.   Any activity in which the persons participating in or viewing the
activity are charged a fee or solicited for donations;
   C.   Any activity which includes the sale of food, beverages or merchandise,
and/or the rental of equipment or other things; and
   D.   Any activity where the nature of the activity necessitates reservation
of a park, or portion thereof, before the activity for the applicant's
exclusive use or where a permit applicant otherwise seeks to reserve a park, or
portion thereof, before the activity for the applicant's exclusive use.
"Event" does not mean any of the following:
   A.   Any activity conducted in a park or portion of such park that is
sponsored or carried out by another public agency, a private organization, or
an individual pursuant to a lease or other agreement between the city and such
public agency, private organization, or individual;
   B.   Filming at a park where the person filming possesses a filming permit
issued pursuant to this code; and
   C.   Special events that use a park where the person conducting or
sponsoring the special event possesses a special event permit issued pursuant
to this code.
   FREE SPEECH: Activity protected by the first amendment of the United States
constitution and/or article 1, section 2 of the California constitution
provided that such activity is a significant part of the event.
IN WRITING: A telegram, facsimile, or any other written document.
   PARK: Any city park or park facility operated or maintained by the
recreation, parks, and library department including, without limitation,
baseball fields and playgrounds, but does not include golf courses.
   PERMITTEE: A person or entity to which the city issues a permit pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022)
9-8-3: ADMINISTRATION BY DIRECTOR OF RECREATION, PARKS, AND LIBRARY:
The city’s director of recreation, parks, and library is authorized to receive
applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise implement this chapter.
(Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
9-8-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to sponsor or
conduct an event in a park unless authorized by a permit issued by the director
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-5: NOTICES:
   A.   Where the provisions of this chapter require that an applicant/
permittee be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when personally
delivered to the applicant/permittee; when deposited in first class U.S. mail,
addressed to the applicant/permittee's last known address; or when sent via
facsimile to the applicant/permittee's last known facsimile number.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a permittee/
applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the basis for such
decision. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-6: ESTABLISHING FEES:
All fees applicable to this chapter including, without limitation, the basic
rate, are established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-7: APPLICATION FEE:
Applications for a permit authorizing an event in a park must be accompanied by
an application fee based on the estimated administrative costs incurred by the
city for processing applications and issuing permits. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-8: FREE SPEECH EVENT FEE:
The director must waive any fee required by this chapter for any permit
authorizing a free speech event upon proof of the applicant's inability to pay,
which must be supported by a financial declaration. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-9: BASIC RATE:
A condition of issuing a permit is that the permittee pay the city the basic
rate as follows:
   A.   Category 1 permittees do not pay the basic rate. Permittees in this
category are individuals who reside within the city using parks for personal
use (but not for profit) or nonprofit organizations with a primary place of
business within the city's jurisdiction. Nonprofit organizations must provide
evidence of their status to the director's satisfaction. Examples of such
evidence include, without limitation, articles of incorporation, bylaws, or
proof of internal revenue code section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(6) status. Nonprofit
organizations may use parks for fundraising activities which will not be
considered a for profit event.
   B.   Category 2 permittees pay the basic rate. Permittees in this category
are commercial businesses with a primary place of business within the city's
jurisdiction.
   C.   Category 3 permittees pay the basic rate plus ten dollars ($10.00) or
such other amount as may be determined by the director as authorized by council
resolution. Permittees in this category include nonresident individuals and
nonprofit organizations with a primary place of business outside the city's
jurisdiction.
   D.   Category 4 permittees pay the basic rate plus an amount determined by
the director as authorized by council resolution. Permittees in this category
are commercial businesses with a primary place of business outside the city's
jurisdiction.
   E.   Category 5 permittees pay the full basic rate plus twenty five percent
(25%) of gross receipts or a negotiated flat fee. Included in this category are
permittees, whether located inside or outside the city's jurisdiction, using
parks commercially and for financial gain. In determining whether an event is
commercial and for financial gain, the director may rely upon any reasonable
evidence including, without limitation, advertisements, documentation of
entrance fees, or requests to restrict public access to the event. (Ord. 1363,
6-3-2003)
9-8-10: ADDITIONAL USE FEE:
A condition of issuing a permit is that the permittee must pay the city
additional park use fees equal to the city's total estimated cost for providing
city personnel and/or equipment, if any, needed to monitor an event or
otherwise provide city services for, or in connection with, the event. These
fees will be determined by the director based on the estimate of the police
chief, fire chief, and/or director as to the number and hours of employment of
city personnel necessary to control the event or otherwise provide city
services for or in connection with such event. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-11: TIME FOR DEPOSITING FEES:
A permit is not valid unless, in addition to the other conditions contained in
this chapter, the permittee pays all additional use fees to the city within
five (5) business days after a permit is issued. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-12: REFUNDS:
   A.   The director will refund all fees submitted pursuant to this chapter,
except for the application fee, if a permittee cancels a permit more than ten
(10) business days before the date of an event.
   B.   If a permittee cancels a permit less than ten (10) business days before
the event, the director will refund fifty percent (50%) of the basic rate fees
and all other fees excluding the initial application fee and any fees for
canceled services such as security, police or insurance incurred by the city.
(Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-13: APPLICATION TIME REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for a permit
authorizing an event must be filed in the director's office at least:
      1.   Fifty (50) days before the date of such event to ensure
administrative review and city council appeal;
      2.   Twenty (20) business days before the date of such event, in which
case the opportunity for a city council appeal is deemed waived; or
      3.   A lesser time period approved by the director provided that there is
sufficient time to process the application pursuant to this chapter. Any
applicant submitting an application pursuant to this section less than twenty
(20) days before an event is deemed to have waived the administrative review
and city council appeal.
   B.   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for a permit
authorizing an event will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the
director within seven (7) business days after receiving the completed
application. Following his/her decision, the director must promptly attempt to
notify the applicant orally, and will provide written notification to the
applicant.
   C.   Unless otherwise provided, the director must receive the applicant's
acceptance of the approval or conditional approval within five (5) business
days after the applicant was served with notification of the decision. Failure
to receive actual notice does not invalidate the permit. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-14: FREE SPEECH EVENT APPLICATION TIME REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Completed applications for a permit authorizing a free speech event
must be filed in the director's office at least:
      1.   Thirty five (35) days before the date of such event to ensure
administrative review and city council appeal;
      2.   Two (2) business days before the date of such event in which case
the opportunity for a city council appeal is deemed waived; or
      3.   A time period less than two (2) business days before the date of
such event upon good cause shown. Applications will not be accepted less than
twenty four (24) hours before an event.
   B.   Completed applications will be denied, approved, or conditionally
approved by the director within one business day after receiving the
application. The director must promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally,
and provide written notification to the applicant and director. Such notice
must provide detailed facts and reasons for any denial or conditional approval.
The director must consult with the city attorney before denying, or specially
conditioning, a permit for a free speech event.
   C.   The director must receive applicant's acceptance of the approval or
conditional approval at least forty eight (48) hours before the event. Failure
to accept the director's decision or to timely file an administrative review
request is deemed a withdrawal of the application. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-15: APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENT:
Permit applications will be in a form prescribed by the director and contain
all of the following information:
   A.   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers of
the person filing the application;
   B.   If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the name, mailing
address, and daytime telephone number of the organization; and, if requested by
the director, written documentation of the authority under which the applicant
is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;
   C.   The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the person
who will be present during, and responsible for, the event;
   D.   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone number of
an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and the applicant is
unavailable;
   E.   The nature of the event;
   F.   The estimated duration of the event;
   G.   The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of the event,
including assembly and removal;
   H.   The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries and
activity locations;
   I.   The estimated number of participants in the event;
   J.   Unless the use is prohibited by this code, the type and estimated
number of vehicles, animals and/or structures that will be used in the event;
   K.   A description of any sound amplification equipment to be employed at
the event;
   L.   The number, size, and material of construction of any signs or banners
to be used in the event;
   M.   The event's parking requirements;
   N.   The location of any water, first aid, or comfort stations to be
provided at the event;
   O.   The type and number of any vendors who will sell or prepare food,
beverages or other goods or services at the event for which a business license
is required by this code;
   P.   Whether alcohol will be served at the event; and
   Q.   The type of entertainment. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-16: SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIRECTOR:
In addition to the information required in this chapter, applications for all
permits authorizing an event must include such supplemental information which
the director may find reasonably necessary, given the nature of the event, in
order to determine whether to approve or deny a permit. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-17: PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS:
   A.   After an event permit application is filed, the director will promptly
forward the application to directors, or designees (collectively "reviewing
officers"), whose departments are affected by the proposed event for their
recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without limitation:
      1.   The fire chief;
      2.   The police chief; and/or
      3.   The public works director.
   B.   Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers will consider the
application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide the director with
written recommendations regarding:
      1.   Any special conditions for a permit;
      2.   Whether, based on the scope of the proposed event, a pre-event
operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be necessary, the
director will notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting within
a reasonable time before the event; and
      3.   Any additional recommendations.
   C.   The reviewing officers should complete their review before when the
director must make a decision on the application. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-18: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   The director must issue a permit if:
      1.   The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
      2.   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
      3.   The applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional approval in
writing.
   B.   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform to the
general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special permit
conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the director to protect public
safety, and/or welfare. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-19: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit may be denied for the following reasons:
   A.   The application is incomplete;
   B.   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application
information requested by the director;
   C.   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
   D.   The event's time and/or method will unreasonably interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site of the event;
   E.   The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles at the event
prevents public safety and/or emergency services from reaching areas at or
contiguous to the event;
   F.   The size of the event will overextend public safety and/or emergency
services to the extent that the safety of event participants, attendees, and/or
the remainder of the city will be seriously jeopardized; provided, however,
that this does not authorize denying a permit because of the need to protect
participants from the conduct of others;
   G.   The location of the event will substantially interfere with previously
scheduled construction or maintenance work at the event site;
   H.   The application was not timely submitted and there is insufficient time
to investigate and process the application pursuant to the timelines herein;
   I.   The proposed event conflicts or interferes with an event previously
permitted, or about to be permitted, for the same location, date, and time; or
   J.   The nature or size of the event threatens to cause significant damage
to a park or park property, including, without limitation, landscaping or
natural vegetation; provided, however, this does not authorize denying a permit
because of threatened damage to a park or park property caused by the actions
of persons not conducting such event. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-20: ALTERNATIVE TIME, PLACE, OR MANNER:
If the director denies a permit for an event that would be acceptable by
changing the event's time, place, or manner, then the director will inform the
applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the alternative
time, place, or manner then the director will issue a permit in accordance with
this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-21: NOTICE OF DENIAL:
Where the director denies a permit, the director will serve notice to the
applicant and provide copies to the city attorney. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-22: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement, in a form approved by the
city attorney, with the city which will, in part, indemnify city, its officers,
employees, and agents, from any liability arising from permittee's event. Such
an agreement will be filed with the director before a permit is issued. (Ord.
1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-23: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   Insurance Requirements: Except as otherwise provided by this chapter,
permittees must obtain public liability insurance from an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state of California and having a financial
rating in "Best's Insurance Guide" of not less than "A:VII". Such insurance
must provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for death, personal
injury or property damage arising out of or in any way connected with such
event. The amount of such insurance will be based upon the city's insurance
guidelines and reflect the size and nature of the event and the risks
foreseeably involved. Such insurance will name the city and the city's
officers, employees, and agents as additional insureds under the coverage
afforded. In addition, such insurance must be primary and noncontributing with
respect to any other insurance available to the city and will include a
severability of interest (cross liability) clause. If alcoholic beverages are
sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for
liquor liability in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
   B.   Certificates Of Insurance: A copy of the policy or a certificate of
insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form approved by the
city's risk manager, must be filed with the director not less than ten (10)
business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before the date of
the event unless the director for good cause waives the filing deadline. (Ord.
1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-24: WAIVER OF INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
The insurance required by this section must be waived by the director for a
free speech permit. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-25: SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS:
   A.   The director may condition a permit with reasonable requirements
concerning the time, place, or manner of holding such event as necessary to
protect the safety of persons and property or to control vehicular and
pedestrian traffic in and around the site of the event, provided that these
requirements are not imposed in a manner that will unreasonably restrict the
exercise of free speech rights.
   B.   Conditions may include, without limitation:
      1.   Accommodating an event's pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including
restriction of events to a particular park;
      2.   Avoiding substantial interference with public safety and/or
emergency service access;
      3.   Limiting the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures to
be displayed or used in the event;
      4.   Having city personnel inspecting and approving stages, booths, and
other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the event, in order to
ensure that such structures or vehicles are safely constructed and can be
safely operated;
      5.   Providing the city a security deposit for repair and/or additional
maintenance if the event uses structures, displays or uses large animals,
operates water stations, food sales, beverage sales, and/or sales of other
goods or services;
      6.   Providing and using traffic cones and barricades;
      7.   Providing and operating first aid stations or sanitary facilities,
including sanitary facilities accessible to the disabled;
      8.   Providing and using garbage containers, and cleaning and restoring
the event site upon termination of the event;
      9.   Using sound amplification equipment, and restricting the amount of
noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the course of the event;
      10.   The manner for providing notice of permit conditions to event
participants;
      11.   Providing and using emergency services;
      12.   Obtaining any and all licenses or permits required by this code or
California law for the sale or distribution of food, beverages, or other goods
or services at the event, including, without limitation, a valid health permit
as required by California Health and Safety Code section 113920, and any
successor statute or regulation, if food is distributed to the public more than
three (3) days in any ninety (90) day period;
      13.   Providing electricity, gas, and water for the event;
      14.   Providing signage and barricades that may be necessary to avoid
conflicts between persons participating in the event and other persons using
the park in and around the site of the event or which may be necessary to
protect the park, landscaping, or natural vegetation in and around site of the
event;
      15.   Providing monitors and security personnel that may be necessary to
safely carry out the event;
      16.   Permitting access to the site of the event through park gates at
times when gates are normally closed in order to prepare for an event or to
clean up and remove equipment and structures at the conclusion of the event;
      17.   Permitting overnight camping by persons engaged in preparing for
the event or providing overnight security for equipment and structures utilized
in such event; and
      18.   Providing for the manner in which alcohol sales and service, if
any, are conducted. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-26: SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS:
   A.   The director may add additional conditions to previously issued permits
upon learning or discovering facts not previously disclosed or reasonably
discoverable.
   B.   Should subsequent conditions be required, the director must serve
written notice on the permittee of this decision. When acting upon information
obtained twenty four (24) hours before an event, the director may orally inform
the permittee, and city personnel overseeing the event, of the new conditions.
   C.   Except where otherwise provided, a permittee may seek review of
imposition of subsequent conditions to the director as provided in this
chapter. The city manager's decision is a final determination. There is no
right of city council appeal.
   D.   Except where otherwise provided, an applicant conducting a free speech
event may appeal the decision to impose subsequent conditions through a hearing
before the city manager. The city manager's decision is a final determination.
There is no right of city council appeal.
      1.   An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing provided the
applicant appeals the director's decision within twenty four (24) hours of
receiving notice of such conditions and the event's purpose is for free speech.
      2.   The hearing will be at the city manager's office at four o'clock (4:
00) P.M. the next business day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise
agreed upon. The city manager must issue a decision orally at the conclusion of
the hearing and also notify the applicant and the director in writing of the
city manager's decision. Any notification will describe, with particularity,
the facts and reasons supporting the decision. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-27: RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative review of
the director's decision pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-28: TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be commenced
within five (5) days from the date on which written notice of the director's
decision is served on the applicant/permittee.
   B.   If the request is untimely, the director may, nevertheless, extend the
time for commencing such review for good cause shown. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-29: COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A request for administrative review must be on a form provided by the director
and contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the person making the
request;
   B.   A description of the decision, determination or order which is the
subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was
made or issued;
   C.   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and
   D.   Such other information as may be required by the director. (Ord. 1363,
6-3-2003)
9-8-30: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the director must
promptly provide a copy of the notice to the city manager.
   B.   Upon receiving a request for review from the director, the city manager
must review the request and, within ten (10) days of receiving the request
notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:
      1.   The director's decision is affirmed;
      2.   The director's decision is modified;
      3.   The director's decision is reversed and a permit is issued or issued
without special conditions.
   C.   The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a
time and place mutually agreeable to the parties. If the parties cannot agree
on the time or place, then it will be held the next business day at four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. at the city manager's office.
   D.   In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any notification to
the requester must set forth any modifications of the director's decision.
(Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-31: CITY COUNCIL APPEAL:
Unless otherwise provided, an applicant may appeal the city manager's decision
to the city council within ten (10) days of that decision as provided elsewhere
in this code or by city policy and procedure. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-32: FREE SPEECH EVENTS:
   A.   The applicant may seek, in writing, administrative review by the city
manager within one business day of the director's oral or written notification,
whichever is first, of a denial, revocation, or subsequent conditioning. An
administrative hearing will be held at a time and place mutually agreeable to
the parties. If the parties cannot agree on the time or place, then it will be
held the next business day after the director's decision at four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. in the city manager's office. The city manager may issue a decision orally
at the conclusion of the hearing, but must notify the applicant and the
director in writing of the city manager's decision. Any notification will
describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons supporting the decision.
   B.   The city manager's decision:
      1.   Is a final determination without right to city council appeal if
applicant waived the applicant's right to city council appeal as provided in
this chapter;
      2.   If the right to city council appeal is not waived, may be appealed
to the city council in writing within two (2) business days of either oral or
written notification of the city manager's decision, whichever is first.
   C.   Applicant will be deemed to have waived administrative review rights
should the applicant fail to:
      1.   File a completed application at least two (2) days before an event;
      2.   Seek review of the director's decision; or
      3.   Attend the administrative hearing personally or through an
authorized representative. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-33: PERMIT REVOCATION:
   A.   The director may revoke a permit upon learning or discovering facts
requiring permit denial not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
   B.   The director may revoke an event permit when the permittee and/or event
violates the permit's terms and conditions, or when event participants violate
applicable laws or regulations; provided, however, that this subsection will
not authorize revoking a permit because of the need to protect participants
from the conduct of others; and, provided further, that the director will not
revoke a permit without warning the permittee and allowing him/her to correct
the violation(s) within a reasonable time.
   C.   If the director revokes a permit before the date of the event, the
director must immediately serve written notice of revocation on the permittee
and provide copies of the notice to all city personnel charged with carrying
out any responsibility under this chapter. If the director revokes a permit on
the day of the event after learning of facts justifying revocation less than
twenty four (24) hours before the event commences, the director must announce
such action to the event participants, to those city officers and employees
monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the person in charge
of the event, if such person can be located at the site of the event. Written
notice must be delivered after such action to the permittee and director.
   D.   An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing before the city manager
provided:
      1.   The applicant appeals the director's decision within forty eight
(48) hours of receiving notice of such conditions; and
      2.   The event is scheduled at least forty eight (48) hours after the
hearing time.
      3.   The hearing will be at the city manager's office at four o'clock (4:
00) P.M. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed upon.
The city manager must issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing
and also notify the applicant, and the director in writing of the city
manager's decision.
   E.   The city manager's decision is a final determination. There is no right
of city council appeal.
   F.   The director or city manager can only revoke a permit for a free speech
event after consulting with the city attorney. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-34: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF EVENT:
The city manager and any sworn public safety officer may temporarily suspend an
event whenever there is an emergency that requires such action to protect
public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and event participants must
immediately comply with the suspending officer's instructions. The director
will immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and will notify the
applicant and the city manager in writing, within twenty four (24) hours after
the suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the
suspension. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-35: CORDONING OFF THE SITE OF AN EVENT:
The city manager, or designee, is authorized and directed to establish traffic
and/or crowd control devices on or within the city's streets, parking
facilities, sidewalks, or other public rights of way, and to undertake other
actions necessary to cordon off the site of an event. In addition, the city
manager, or director, will, when appropriate, cause the route or site of such
event to be posted as a no parking zone for the duration of the event and
sufficiently in advance thereof as may be necessary to prevent vehicles from
parking along the site of the event. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-36: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING EVENTS:
   A.   Interference With Event: It is unlawful to physically obstruct, impede,
hamper or otherwise interfere with any event authorized by a permit or with any
person, animal, or vehicle participating or used in such event.
   B.   Prohibited Parking: It is unlawful to park vehicles along or within any
portion of the site of an event authorized by a permit, when the route or site
had been posted as a no parking zone by the director in the manner authorized
by this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
CHAPTER 9
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
SECTION:
9-9-1: Purpose And Applicability
9-9-2: Definitions
9-9-3: Permit Review Processes
9-9-4: Location Restrictions
9-9-5: Exceptions
9-9-6: Application Requirements
9-9-7: Design And Development Standards
9-9-8: Findings
9-9-9: Conditions Of Approval
9-9-10: Operation, And Maintenance Standards
9-9-11: Removal And Restoration Upon Revocation Or Abandonment
9-9-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and
comprehensive set of regulations and standards for permitting, development,
siting, installation, design, operation and maintenance of wireless
communications facilities in the city’s public right-of-ways (PROW). These
regulations are intended to prescribe clear and reasonable criteria to assess
and process applications in a consistent and expeditious manner, while reducing
the impacts associated with wireless telecommunications facilities. This
chapter provides standards necessary (1) for the preservation of the public
right-of-ways in the city for the maximum benefit and use of the public, (2) to
promote and protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual
resources and the aesthetic quality of the city consistent with the goals,
objectives and policies of the general plan, and (3) to provide
for the orderly, managed and efficient development of wireless communications
facilities in accordance with the state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
This chapter applies to the siting, construction, collocation, or modification
of all wireless communication facilities in the public right-of-way (PROW).
Siting and construction of wireless communication facilities on all other
property are subject to the provisions in ESMC 15-19.
   A.   All facilities within the PROW permitted by the city after the
effective date of this ordinance will be required to comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   All facilities within the PROW permitted by the city which obtained
encroachment permits prior to the effective date of this ordinance will not be
subject to all of the provisions of this chapter, or required to obtain a new
permit, and will be deemed a nonconforming use subject to the provisions of
Section 9-9-12 (Nonconforming Facilities).
   C.   All PROW facilities, notwithstanding the date approved, shall be
subject immediately to the provisions of this chapter governing operation and
maintenance standards (Section
9-9-10) and removal and restoration upon revocation or abandonment (Section
9-9-11); provided, however, that in the event a condition of approval conflicts
with a provision of this chapter, the condition of approval shall control until
the permit is amended or revoked.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to facilities owned and operated by the
city for its use or to any entity legally entitled to an exemption pursuant to
state or federal law or governing franchise agreement.
   E.   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter does not relieve a
person from compliance with any other applicable provision of this code. In the
event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and other sections of
this code, this chapter shall control.
   F.   If the City Attorney determines that state or federal law prohibits
discretionary permitting requirements for certain wireless communications
facilities, such requirement is deemed severable and all remaining regulations
shall remain in full force and effect. For such facilities, a ministerial
permit is required prior to the installation or modification of a wireless
communications facility in lieu of a major wireless communications permit (and
exception, if applicable). All otherwise applicable conditions of approval and
requirements regarding the time, place and manner of access and operation shall
apply to the extent permitted by state and federal law. Any determination by
the City Attorney pursuant to this section shall be in writing. (Ord. 1618, 6-
16-2020)
9-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT: Any equipment associated with the installation of a
wireless communications facility, including but not limited to cabling,
generators, fans, air conditioning units, electrical panels, equipment
shelters, equipment cabinets, equipment
buildings, pedestals, meters, vaults, splice boxes, and surface location
markers.
ANTENNA: That part of a wireless communications facility designed to radiate or
receive radio frequency signals.
ANTENNA EQUIPMENT: Equipment, switches, wiring, cabling, power sources,
shelters or cabinets associated with an antenna, located at the same fixed
location as the antenna, and, when collocated on a structure, is mounted or
installed at the same time as such antenna.
ANTENNA FACILITY: An antenna and associated antenna equipment.
CELLULAR: An analog or digital wireless communications technology that is based
on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites.
CODE: The El Segundo Municipal Code.
COLLOCATION: For purposes of an eligible facilities request, means the mounting
or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for
the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signal for
communication purposes. For all other purposes, collocation means mounting or
installing an antenna facility on a pre-existing structure; and/or modifying a
structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that
structure.
COW: A “cell on wheels,” which is a wireless communications facility
temporarily rolled in or temporarily installed.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works, or his or her designee.
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST: Has the meaning set forth in 47 USC § 1455(a) and
47 CFR § 1.6100, as may be amended from time to time.
ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Has the meaning set forth in 47 CFR § 1.6100, as
may be amended from time to time.
FACILITY: Wireless communications facility.
GROUND-MOUNTED: Equipment mounted on the ground.
LOCATED WITHIN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Includes any facility which in whole or
in part, itself or as part of another structure, rests upon, in, over or under
the public right-of-way.
MODIFICATION: A change to an existing wireless communications facility that
involves any of the following: collocation, expansion, alteration, enlargement,
intensification, reduction, or augmentation, including, but not limited to,
changes in size, shape, color, visual design, or exterior material.
“Modification” does not include repair, replacement or maintenance if those
actions do not involve a change to the existing facility involving any of the
following: collocation, expansion, alteration, enlargement, intensification,
reduction, or augmentation.
MOUNTED: Attached or supported.
PERMITTEE: Includes the applicant and all successors and assigns.
POLE: A single shaft of wood, steel, concrete or other material capable of
supporting the equipment therein and/or mounted thereon in a safe and adequate
manner and as required by provisions of this code.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY and PROW: Any street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path
or any “public way” as defined in Streets and Highways Code section 18609 and
any successor statute.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY or SWF: Has the meaning set forth in 47 CFR § 1.6002,
as may be amended or superseded.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE or STRUCTURE: A freestanding mast, pole, monopole,
guyed tower, lattice tower, free standing tower or other structure designed and
primarily used to support wireless communications facility antennas.
UTILITY POLE: Any pole owned by any utility company that is primarily used to
support wires or cables necessary to the provision of electrical or other
utility services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, FACILITY or FACILITIES: Any facility that
transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves. It includes, but is not
limited to, antennas and/or other types of equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such signals, telecommunications towers or similar structures
supporting such equipment, related accessory equipment, equipment buildings,
parking areas, and other accessory development. The term “wireless
telecommunications facility” does not apply to the following:
   1.   Government owned and operated communications facilities.
   2.   Emergency medical care provider-owned and operated communications
facilities.
   3.   Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of
a temporary nature.
   4.   Any wireless communications facilities exempted from this code by
federal law or state law.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES: The provision of services using a wireless
communications facility or a wireless communications collocation facility, and
shall include, but not limited to, the following services: personal wireless
services as defined in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 at 47 U.S.C.
§ 332(c)(7)(C) or its successor statute, cellular service, personal
communication service, and/or data radio telecommunications. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-
2020)
9-9-3: PERMIT REVIEW PROCESSES:
   A.   Special Provisions for SWFs; SWF Regulations. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, all SWFs are subject to an administrative permit as
specified in the SWF Regulations adopted by resolution of the City Council and
as amended from time to time.
   B.   Major Wireless Communications Facilities Permit (“Major WCFP”). All new
wireless facilities or collocations or modifications to existing wireless
facilities shall require a major wireless communications facilities permit
subject to planning commission approval unless otherwise provided for in this
chapter.
   C.   Administrative Wireless Communications Facilities Permit.
      1.   An administrative wireless communications facilities permit, subject
to the director’s approval, may be issued for new facilities or collocations or
modifications to existing facilities that meet all the following criteria:
         a.   The proposed facility is located in any area identified in
Section
9-9-4 (Location Restrictions) for administrative permitting;
         b.   The proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions in
this chapter without need for an exception pursuant to Section
9-9-5 (Exceptions);
         c.   The proposed facility is on a new pole that replaces an existing
utility pole and is located within 10 feet of the utility pole being replaced.
The diameter of the replacement pole may not be more than 20% larger than the
utility pole it replaces at any point along the pole; and
         d.   If the proposed facility is a new facility that includes a new
communications structure and the proposed communications structure is no taller
50 feet or 10% taller than the existing adjacent poles, whichever is greater;
         e.   If the City Attorney determines that state or federal law
prohibits or otherwise limits the height restrictions in this subparagraph, the
director may approve the facility notwithstanding the height restriction,
provided the height of proposed communication tower is restricted to the
maximum extent practicable and to the maximum extent allowed by law, and
further provided the facility meets all other applicable criteria.
      2.   In the event that the director determines that an application for an
administrative wireless communications facilities permit does not meet the
criteria set forth in this subparagraph, the director shall convert the
application to a major wireless communications facilities permit application
and refer it to the planning commission. The applicant must pay any additional
applicable fees associated with a major wireless permit application within 10
business days of the director giving notice of the conversion of the
application.
   D.   Ministerial Permit.
      1.   Eligible Facilities.
         a.   Eligible facilities requests require a ministerial permit issued
by the director in lieu of a discretionary permit, and will be processed
pursuant to the requirements of 47 USC § 1455(a) and 47 CFR § 1.6100, as may be
amended from time to time.
         b.   The applicant bears the burden of asserting rights under 47 USC §
1455(a) and 47 CFR § 1.6100 and any application filed for an eligible
facilities request must prominently state that the application is for an
“Eligible Facilities Request” and must include all facts and information
necessary for the director to ensure that the proposed facility qualifies as an
eligible facility.
         c.   All conditions of approval set forth in section
9-9-9 will apply to eligible facilities unless, in the opinion of the City
Attorney, state or federal law precludes imposition of the condition.
      2.   Specified Collocation Facilities.
         a.   A collocation facility that meets the requirements of Government
Code section 65850.6, as amended from time to time, requires a ministerial
permit issued by the director, in lieu of discretionary permit.
         b.   For purposes of this subsection, “collocation facility” has the
meaning set forth in Government Code section 65850.6, as may be amended from
time to time.
         c.   The applicant bears the burden of establishing that the proposed
facility qualifies as a collocation facility subject to nondiscretionary
approval under Government Code section 65850.6 and any application filed for a
Section 65850.6 collocation facility must prominently state that the
application is for a “Section 65860.6 Collocation Facility” and must include
all facts and information necessary for the director to ensure that the
proposed facility qualifies as a Section 65850.6 collocation facility.
         d.   All conditions of approval set forth in section
9-9-9 will apply to collocation facilities unless, in the opinion of the City
Attorney, state or federal law precludes imposition of the condition.
   E.   Notice; Decisions. The provisions in this subsection describe the
procedures for approval and any required notice and public hearings for an
application.
      1.   Planning Commission Hearings. Any permit application under this
chapter subject to planning commission approval shall require notice and a
public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in accordance with
Title 15, Chapter 27. The planning commission may approve, or conditionally
approve, an application only after it makes the findings required in Section
9-9-8 (Findings).
      2.   Director’s Decision Notice. The director may approve, or
conditionally approve, an application only after he or she makes the findings
required in Section
9-9-8 (Findings). The director’s determination must be in writing.
      3.   Written Decision Required. All final decisions made pursuant to this
chapter shall be in writing and based on substantial evidence in the written
administrative record. The written decision shall include the reasons for the
decision.
      4.   Appeals. Any aggrieved person or entity may appeal a decision by the
director or the planning commission as provided in accordance with the
provisions in Title 15, Chapter 25. Appeals are reviewed de novo.
      5.   Administrative WCFP Appeals. Any aggrieved person or entity may
appeal the director’s decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an
Administrative WCFP. The appeal will be considered by the City Council. Appeals
are reviewed de novo and the decision of the City Council will be the final
decision of the City. An appeal by a wireless infrastructure provider must be
taken jointly with the wireless service provider that intends to use the
wireless facility. Because federal law preempts local decisions premised on the
environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions, appeals of the
administrative decision premised on the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions will not be considered.
         a.    Appeals must be in writing, filed with the director, and must
detail all of the reasons for the appeal. Emailed appeals are not acceptable.
The appeal must be accompanied by payment of the applicable appeal fee as
established by resolution of the City Council.
         b.   An appeal of an Administrative WCFP must be filed within four
business days of notice of the administrative decision. Any appeal must be
conducted so that a timely written decision may be issued in accordance with
applicable law.
   F.   Other Permits Required. In addition to any permit that may be required
under this chapter, the applicant must obtain an encroachment permit and all
other permits or approvals required by other city departments, or state or
federal agencies. Any permit granted under this chapter is subject to the
conditions and/or requirements of other required permits or other approvals
from other city departments, and state or federal agencies.
   G.   Eligible Applicants. Only applicants who have been granted the right to
enter the public right-of-way pursuant to state or federal law, or who have
entered into a franchise or other agreement with the city permitting them to
use the public right-of-way, are eligible for a permit to install or modify a
wireless communications facility or a wireless communications collocation
facility in the public right-of-way.
   H.   Speculative Equipment Prohibited. The city finds that the practice of
“pre-approving” wireless equipment or other improvements that an applicant does
not presently intend to install but may wish to install at some undetermined
future time does not serve the public’s best interest. The city cannot approve
any equipment or other improvements in connection with a wireless
telecommunications facility permit when the applicant does not actually and
presently intend to install such equipment or construct such improvements.
   I.   A COW shall be permitted for the duration of an emergency declared by
the city, county or state, when a wireless facility is being moved due to
redevelopment of an existing site, or at the discretion of the director. (Ord.
1618, 6-16-2020)
9-9-4: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Facilities in the following locations require a major wireless
communications permit, excepting SWF subject to design standards in the SWF
Regulations:
      1.   Located along the following street segments:
         a.   Pacific Coast Highway (PCH), entire length;
         b.   Imperial Highway, PCH to Aviation Boulevard;
         c.   El Segundo Boulevard, Illinois Street to Aviation Boulevard;
         d.   Rosecrans Avenue, PCH to Aviation;
         e.   Main Street, El Segundo Boulevard to Oak Avenue;
         f.   Richmond Street, El Segundo Boulevard to Holly Avenue;
         g.   Grand Avenue, Richmond Street to Standard Street.
      2.   Adjacent to city parks or designated open space.
      3.   Anywhere within the coastal zone.
      4.   Anywhere within the city when an administrative wireless permit is
not allowed due to not satisfying the design criteria of section
9-9-7 or the conditions set forth in section
9-9-9.
   B.   Facilities requiring an administrative wireless communications permit.
Anywhere within the city, except as described in section A above, when the
criteria in section
9-9-7 are met. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
9-9-5: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The city council recognizes that federal law prohibits a permit denial
when it would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services
(as defined in 47 USC § 332(c)(7)(C)(i)) and the applicant proposes the least
intrusive means of remedying a service gap. The city council finds that, due to
wide variation among wireless facilities, technical service objectives and
changed circumstances over time, a limited exemption for proposals in which
strict compliance with this chapter would effectively prohibit personal
wireless services serves the public interest. The city council further finds
that circumstances in which an effective prohibition may occur are extremely
difficult to discern, and that specified findings to guide the analysis
promotes clarity and the city’s legitimate interest in well-planned wireless
facilities deployment in the public right-of-way. Therefore, in the event that
any applicant asserts that strict compliance with any provision in this
chapter, as applied to a specific proposed personal wireless services facility,
would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, the
planning commission may grant a limited exemption from strict compliance
subject to the provisions in this section.
   B.   SWF exception procedures are pursuant to the SWF Regulations.
   C.   Required Findings. The planning commission cannot grant any exception
unless the applicant demonstrates all the following:
      1.   The proposed wireless facility qualifies as a “personal wireless
services facility” as defined in United States Code, Title 47, section 332(c)
(7)(C)(ii);
      2.   The applicant has provided the city with a clearly defined technical
service objective and a clearly defined potential site search area;
      3.   An applicant may obtain an exception from these design standards if
compliance with the standard: (a) is not technically feasible; (b) impedes the
effective operation of the wireless facility; or (c) otherwise materially
inhibits or limits the provision of wireless service.
      4.   The City may also provide an exception from these standards when it
finds the applicant’s proposed design provides equivalent or superior aesthetic
value when compared to strict compliance with these standards.
      5.   Requests for exceptions must be narrowly tailored to minimize
deviation from the requirements of these design standards.
   D.   Scope. An exemption may be allowed only to the extent necessary for the
applicant to reasonably achieve its technical service objectives. The planning
commission may impose conditions of approval as necessary to promote the
purposes in this chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   E.   Independent Consultant. The city shall have the right to hire, at the
applicant’s expense, an independent consultant to evaluate issues raised by the
proposed exception and to submit recommendations and evidence in response to
the application. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
9-9-6: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All Applications. In addition to the information required of an
applicant for an encroachment permit or any other permit required by this code,
each applicant requesting approval of the installation or modification of a
wireless communications facility in the public right-of-way shall fully and
completely submit to the city a written application on a form prepared by the
director.
   B.   Application Contents. The director shall develop an application form
and make it available upon request. The application form for a new wireless
communications facility installation in the public right-of-way shall require
the following information, in addition to all other information determined
necessary by the director:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner and
the operator of the proposed facility.
      2.   If the applicant is an agent, the applicant must provide a duly
executed letter of authorization from the owner of the facility. If the owner
will not directly provide wireless communications services, the applicant must
provide a duly executed letter of authorization from the person or entity that
will provide those services.
      3.   If the facility will be located on or in the property of someone
other than the owner of the facility (such as a street light pole, street
signal pole, utility pole, utility cabinet, vault, or cable conduit), the
applicant must provide a duly executed written authorization from the property
owner(s) authorizing the placement of the facility on or in the property
owner’s property.
      4.   A written description of the proposed facility and its purpose.
      5.   Detailed engineering plans of the proposed facility and related
report prepared by a professional structural engineer registered in California
evidencing the structural integrity of the pole or other supporting structure.
      6.   For applications seeking a new pole, a justification statement of
why existing structures and poles evaluated for potential installation of the
proposed facility are not viable options.
      7.   Site plan to scale, specifying and depicting the exact proposed
location of the pole, pole diameter, antennas, accessory equipment, access or
utility easements, landscaped areas, existing utilities, and adjacent land
uses.
      8.   Scaled elevation plans of proposed poles, antennas, accessory
equipment, and related landscaping.
      9.   If applicable, a completed environmental assessment application.
      10.   If the applicant requests an exception to the requirements of this
chapter (in accordance with Section
9-9-5 (Exceptions)), the applicant must provide all information and studies
necessary for the city to evaluate the request.
      11.   For a facility that is not categorically excluded under the FCC
regulations for RF emissions, the applicant must submit an RF exposure
compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer acceptable to the
city that certifies that the proposed facility will comply with applicable
federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include
the actual frequency and power levels (in watts effective radio power ERP) for
all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits that show the
location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of
areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit
(as that term is defined by the FCC) and also the boundaries of areas with RF
exposures in excess of the controlled/occupational limit (as that term is
defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified
for every transmitting antenna at the project site. The RF report must also
indicate whether the facility will be categorically excluded, as that term is
used by the FCC, using the radio frequency (RF) emissions exposure guidelines
checklist contained in Appendix A to the Federal Communications Commission’s
(FCC) “A Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission
Safety.”
      12.   A traffic control plan when the proposed installation will involve
the placement of equipment within any street.
      13.   Certification that applicant is a telephone corporation or a
statement providing the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way.
If the applicant has a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN)
issued by the California Public Utilities Commission, it must provide a copy of
its CPCN.
      14.   An application fee, and a deposit for a consultant’s review, if
applicable, as set forth in paragraph G of this section in an amount set by
resolution by the city council.
      15.   If the application is for a SWF, the application must so state and
must detail why the proposed facility meets the definition of a SWF. The
application also must contain all additional information required by the SWF
Regulations.
      16.   Any other information and/or studies determined necessary by the
director may be required.
   C.   Application Contents-Modification of Existing Facility. The content of
the application form for a modification to an existing facility that does not
qualify as an eligible facilities request shall be determined by the director.
   D.   Application Contents-Eligible Facilities Requests. When an applicant
asserts in writing that a request for modification qualifies as an eligible
facilities request for modification of an eligible support structure that does
not substantially change the physical dimensions of such structure, the
applicant need only provide documentation or information reasonably necessary
for the director to determine whether the request is a qualifying eligible
facilities request. The content of the application form for an eligible
facilities request shall be determined by the director.
   E.   SWF applications will be governed by any additional terms set forth in
the SWF Regulations, and in the event of an inconsistency between the
provisions of this section and the terms of the SWF Regulations, the SWF
Regulations will control.
   F.   Effect of State or Federal Law Change. In the event a subsequent state
or federal law prohibits the collection of any information required by 9-9-6,
the director is authorized to omit, modify or add to that request from the
city’s application form after consultation with the City Attorney.
   G.   Independent Expert. The director is authorized to retain on behalf of
the city an independent, qualified consultant to review any application for a
permit for a wireless communications facility. The review is intended to be a
review of technical aspects of the proposed wireless communications facility
and may address any or all of the following:
      1.   Compliance with applicable radio frequency emission standards;
      2.   The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;
      3.   Any other specific technical issues identified by the consultant or
designated by the city.
      The cost of this review must be paid by the applicant through a deposit
pursuant to an adopted fee schedule. No permit can be issued to any applicant
that has not fully reimbursed the city for the cost of the consultant.
   H.   A permit or approval granted pursuant to this chapter does not confer
any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the
public right-of-way of the city for any purpose whatsoever. Furthermore, no
permit or approval granted pursuant to this chapter shall be construed as a
guarantee or warranty of title. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
9-9-7: DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise specified, all wireless communications facilities located
within the public right-of-way must be planned, designed, located, and erected
in accordance with the following:
   A.   All small wireless facilities (SWF) must be designed and built in
accordance with the SWF Regulations adopted by resolution of the City Council.
All other wireless communications facilities are subject to these general
guidelines.
   B.   General Guidelines.
      1.   Within or adjacent to areas zoned R-1 and R-2, and the Downtown
Specific Plan:
         a.   The applicant must employ techniques, such as screening,
undergrounding and camouflage, in the design and placement of wireless
communications facilities in order to ensure that the facility is as visually
screened as possible.
         b.   Screening must be designed to be compatible with surrounding
structures using appropriate techniques to camouflage, disguise, and/or blend
into the environment, including landscaping, color, and other techniques to
minimize the facility’s visual impact in terms of size, proportion, style, and
quality.
      2.   All other areas. The applicant must employ techniques in the design
and placement of wireless communications facilities in order to ensure that the
facility is as visually compatible with surroundings.
   C.   Traffic Safety. All facilities must be designed and located in such a
manner as to avoid adverse impacts on traffic safety.
   D.   Blending Methods. All facilities must have appropriate colors and non-
reflective materials that blend with or complement the materials and colors of
the surrounding area and structures.
   E.   Equipment. The applicant must use the least visible equipment possible.
When practicable, antenna mounts must be designed so as not to preclude
possible future collocation by the same or other operators or carriers.
   F.   Poles.
      1.   Facilities shall be located consistent with Section
9-9-4 (Location Restrictions) unless an exception pursuant to Section
9-9-5 (Exceptions) is granted.
      2.   Only pole-mounted antennas are permitted in the right-of-way; all
other communications towers are prohibited. No new wireless communication poles
are permitted in the public right-of-way unless the pole is replacing an
existing pole or an exception is granted pursuant to the SWF Regulations,
Section
9-9-5 (Exceptions) or Section
9-9-1(F)(State or Federal Restrictions on Discretionary Authority).
      3.   Utility Poles. The maximum height of any antenna must not exceed
four feet above an existing utility pole or the minimum height needed to meet
required clearances above energized lines, nor may any portion of the antenna
or equipment mounted on a pole be less than 21 feet above any drivable road
surface. All installations on utility poles must fully comply with the
California Public Utilities Commission general orders, including, but not
limited to, General Order 95, as may be revised or superseded.
      4.   Light Poles. The maximum height of any antenna must not exceed the
minimum needed to meet the network objective above the existing height of a
light pole. No portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole shall be
less than 16 and 1/2 feet above any drivable road surface.
      5.   Replacement Poles. If an applicant proposes to replace a pole in
order to accommodate a proposed facility, the pole must be designed to resemble
the appearance and dimensions of existing poles near the proposed location,
including size, height, color, materials and style to the maximum extent
practicable. Alternatively, the director may require the pole to be designed to
achieve a look or character specified by the director.
      6.   Pole-mounted equipment, exclusive of antennas, may not exceed eight
cubic feet in dimension.
      7.   Unless otherwise allowed pursuant to this chapter, an exception is
required to place a new pole in the public right-of-way. If an exception is
granted for placement of new poles in the right-of-way:
         a.   New poles must be designed to resemble existing poles in the
right-of-way near that location, including size, height, color, materials and
style, with the exception of any existing pole designs that are scheduled to be
removed and not replaced. Alternatively, the director may require the pole to
be designed to achieve a look or character specified by the director.
         b.   To the extent feasible, new wireless communication poles that are
not replacement poles must be located at least 100 feet from any other wireless
communication pole located along the same side of the public right-of-way. This
minimum spacing requirement will not apply if the applicant demonstrates that
compliance with the requirement would have the effect of materially inhibiting
wireless service.
         c.   A new pole justification analysis shall be submitted to
demonstrate why existing infrastructure cannot be utilized and demonstrating
the new pole is the least intrusive means possible including a demonstration
that the new pole is designed to be the minimum functional height and width
required to support the proposed facility.
      8.   All cables, including, without limitation, electrical and utility
cables, must be run inside the pole and hidden to the fullest extent feasible.
For all wooden poles wherein interior installation is infeasible, conduit and
cables attached to the exterior of the pole must be mounted as close to the
pole as possible while meeting electric safety codes and pole owner
requirements.
   G.   Space. Each facility must be designed to occupy the least amount of
space practicable in the right-of-way.
   H.   Wind Loads. Each facility must be properly engineered to withstand wind
loads as required by this code or any duly adopted or incorporated code. An
evaluation of high wind load capacity must include the impact of modifications
to an existing facility.
   I.   Obstructions. Each component part of a facility shall be located so as
not to (1) cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, (2) interfere with any ADA accessibility standards, or (3) incommode
the public’s use of the right-of-way.
   J.   Public Facilities. No facility in the public right-of-way may be
located or operated in a manner that interferes with access to a fire hydrant,
fire station, fire escape, water valve, underground vault, valve housing
structure, or any other public health or safety facility.
   K.   Screening. All ground-mounted facilities, pole-mounted equipment, and
any screening must be installed at least 18 inches from the curb and gutter
flow line.
   L.   Accessory Equipment. Not including the electric meter, all accessory
equipment must be located within the pole or underground unless the director
determines that there is no room in the public right-of-way for undergrounding,
or that undergrounding is not feasible. An exception is required to place
accessory equipment above ground in the public right-of-way.
   M.   Landscaping. Unless otherwise expressly authorized in a permit, each
facility must be installed so as to maintain existing landscaping on the site,
including trees, foliage and shrubs. Any landscaping that is removed or damaged
during the construction of the facility must be replaced to the satisfaction of
the director.
   N.   Noise. Backup generators may only be operated during periods of power
outages, and may not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   O.   Security. Each facility shall be designed to be resistant to, and
minimize opportunities for, unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti
and other conditions that would result in hazardous situations, visual blight
or attractive nuisances.
   P.   The installation and construction approved by a wireless communications
facility permit must begin within one year after its approval or the permit
will expire without further action by the city. Additional time may be
requested if the delay is related to bringing power or fiber to the pole.
   Q.   SWF Design and Development Standards. SWFs are subject to those design
and development standards and conditions of approval set forth in the SWF
Regulations. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
9-9-8: FINDINGS:
No permit can be granted for a new wireless communications facility unless all
of the following findings are made by the decision-making authority:
   A.   All notices, if applicable, required for the proposed installation have
been given.
   B.   The proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   If applicable, the applicant has demonstrated its inability to locate
on existing infrastructure.
   D.   The applicant has provided sufficient evidence supporting the
applicant’s claim that it has the right to enter the public right-of-way
pursuant to state or federal law, or the applicant has entered into a franchise
or other agreement with the city permitting it to use the public right-of-way.
   E.   The proposed installation will not interfere with the use of the public
right-of-way, existing subterranean infrastructure, or the City’s plans for
modification or use of such location and infrastructure. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
9-9-9: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
In addition to compliance with the design and development standards outlined in
this chapter, all facilities are subject to the following conditions of
approval (even in those cases where approval occurs by operation of law), as
well as any modification of these conditions or additional conditions of
approval deemed necessary by the director at the time of the approval:
   A.   The permittee must submit contact information on a form to be supplied
by the city. The permittee must notify the city of any changes to the contact
information within seven days of any change, including a change of the name or
legal status of the owner or operator. This information must include, but is
not limited to, the following: Identity, including the 24-hour local or toll
free contact phone number of the permittee, the owner, the operator, or the
agent or person responsible for the maintenance of the facility.
   B.   The permittee must notify the city in writing at least 90 days prior to
any transfer or assignment of the permit. The written notice required in this
section must include: (1) the transferee’s legal name; (2) the transferee’s
full contact information, including a primary contact person, mailing address,
telephone number and email address; and (3) a statement signed by the
transferee that the transferee accepts all permit terms and conditions. The
director may require the transferor and/or the transferee to submit any
materials or documentation necessary to determine that the proposed transfer
complies with the existing permit and all its conditions of approval. Such
materials or documentation may include, without limitation: federal, state and/
or local approvals, licenses, certificates or franchise agreements; statements;
photographs; site plans and/or as-built drawings; and/or an analysis by a
qualified radio frequency engineer demonstrating compliance with all applicable
regulations and standards of the Federal Communications Commission.
Noncompliance with the permit and all its conditions of approval, or the
failure to submit the materials required by the director shall be a cause for
the city to revoke the applicable permits pursuant to and following the
procedure set on in Section
9-9-11 (Removal and Restoration Upon Revocation or Abandonment).
   C.   At all times, all required notices and/or signs must be posted on the
site as required by the Federal Communications Commission, California Public
Utilities Commission, any applicable licenses or laws. The location and
dimensions of a sign bearing the emergency contact name and telephone number
must be posted pursuant to the approved plans.
   D.   Permittee must furnish a performance bond or other form of security
approved by the City Attorney’s office, which must be in effect until the
facilities are fully and completely removed and the site returned to its
original condition, to guarantee permittee’s obligations under these conditions
of approval and this code. The security instrument’s coverage must include
removal of the facility. The amount of the security instrument shall be
calculated by the applicant in its submittal documents in an amount sufficient
to guarantee the obligations covered by the bond. The security instrument must
be submitted to the city before issuance of any building permit.
   E.   The wireless communications facility shall be subject to such
conditions, changes or limitations as are from time to time deemed necessary by
the director for the purpose of: (a) protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare; (b) preventing interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
and/or (c) preventing damage to the public right-of-way or any adjacent
property. The city may modify the permit to reflect such conditions, changes or
limitations by following the same notice and public hearing procedures as are
applicable to the underlying permit for similarly located facilities, except
the permittee shall be given notice by personal service or by registered or
certified mail at the last address provided to the city by the permittee.
   F.   The permittee shall not transfer the permit to any person prior to the
completion of the construction of the facility covered by the permit, unless
and until the transferee of the permit has submitted the security instrument
required by Section
9-9-9(D).
   G.   The permittee must not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change, or
interfere with any existing structure, improvement or property without the
prior consent of the owner of that structure, improvement or property. No
structure, improvement or property owned by the city shall be moved to
accommodate a wireless communications facility unless the city, in its sole
discretion, determines that such movement will not adversely affect the city or
any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all costs and
expenses related to the relocation of the city’s structure, improvement or
property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to an encroachment permit
issued for any facility within the public right-of-way, the permittee must
provide the city with documentation establishing to the city’s satisfaction
that the permittee has the legal right to use or interfere with any other
structure, improvement or property within the public right-of-way to be
affected by applicant’s facilities.
   H.   The permittee must assume full liability for damage or injury caused to
any property or person by the facility.
   I.   The permittee must repair, at its sole cost and expense, any damage
including, but not limited to subsidence, cracking, erosion, collapse,
weakening, or loss of lateral support to city streets, sidewalks, walks, curbs,
gutters, trees, parkways, street lights, traffic signals, improvements of any
kind or nature, or utility lines and systems, underground utility line and
systems, or sewer systems and sewer lines that result from any activities
performed in connection with the installation and/or maintenance of a wireless
communications facility in the public right-of-way. The permittee must restore
such areas, structures and systems to the condition in which they existed prior
to the installation or maintenance activity that necessitated the repairs. The
permittee must complete such repair within the number of days stated on a
written notice by the city engineer. The time allotted for corrective action
will be based on the facts and circumstances, danger to the community and
severity of the disrepair, as determined by the city engineer in his/her sole
discretion. Should the permittee not complete the corrective action within the
time period allotted the city engineer, the city may cause such repair to be
completed at permittee’s sole cost and expense.
   J.   No facility can be permitted to be installed in the drip line of any
tree in the public right-of-way.
   K.   Insurance and Indemnity. The permittee must obtain and maintain in full
force and effect, until the facility approved by the permit is removed in its
entirety from the public right-of-way, an insurance policy or policies of
public liability insurance, with minimum limits of $2,000,000 for each
occurrence and $4,000,000 in the aggregate, that fully protects the city from
claims and suits for bodily injury and property damage. The insurance must name
the city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, agents,
consultants, and employees as additional named insureds, be issued by an
insurer admitted in the State of California with a rating of at least a A:VII
in the latest edition of A.M. Best’s Insurance Guide, and include an
endorsement providing that the policies cannot be canceled or reduced except
with thirty (30) days prior written notice to the city. The insurance provided
by permittee must be primary to any coverage available to the city, and any
insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city shall be in excess of
permittee’s insurance and shall not contribute with it. The policies of
insurance required by this permit must include provisions for waiver of
subrogation. In accepting the benefits of this permit, permittee hereby waives
all rights of subrogation against the city and its elected and appointed
officials, officers, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers. The
insurance must afford coverage for the permittee’s and the wireless provider’s
use, operation and activity, vehicles, equipment, facility, representatives,
agents and employees, as determined by the city’s risk manager. Before issuance
of any building permit for the facility, the permittee shall furnish the city’s
risk manager with certificates of insurance and endorsements, in the form
satisfactory to the City Attorney or the risk manager, evidencing the coverage
required by the city or self insurance that provides equivalent protection to
the city.
   L.   Permittee must defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless city, its
elected and appointed officials, officers, agents, consultants, and employees
from and against any and all claims, actions, or proceeding against the city,
and/or its elected and appointed officials, officers, agents, consultants,
employees, and volunteers to attack, set aside, void or annul, an approval of
the city, planning commission or city council concerning this permit and/or the
project. Such indemnification shall include damages of any type, judgments,
settlements, penalties, fines, defensive costs or expenses, including, without
limitation, interest, attorneys’ fees and expert witness fees, or liability of
any kind related to or arising from such claim, action, or proceeding. The city
shall promptly notify the permittee of any claim, action, or proceeding.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit city from participating in a defense of
any claim, action or proceeding. The city shall have the option of coordinating
the defense, including, without limitation, choosing its counsel after
consulting with permittee and at permittee’s expense.
   M.   Additionally, to the fullest extent permitted by law, the permittee,
and every permittee and person in a shared permit, jointly and severally, must
defend, indemnify, protect and hold the city and its elected and appointed
officials, officers, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers harmless
from and against all claims, suits, demands, actions, losses, liabilities,
judgments, settlements, costs (including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees,
interest and expert witness fees), or damages claimed by third parties against
the city for any injury claim, and for property damage sustained by any person,
arising out of, resulting from, or are in any way related to the wireless
communications facility, or to any work done by, or use of the public right-of-
way by, the permittee, owner or operator of the wireless communications
facility, or their agents, excepting only liability arising out of the sole
negligence or willful misconduct of the city and its elected and appointed
officials, officers, agents, consultants, and employees. The City Attorney and/
or Rick Manager shall have the authority to agree to alternative terms for
indemnity that provide equivalent protection to the City.
   N.   Should the utility company servicing the facility have the ability to
offer electrical service that does not require the use of an above-ground meter
cabinet, the permittee must, at its sole cost and expense, remove the meter
cabinet and any related foundation within 90 days of such service being offered
and restore the area to its prior condition. An extension may be granted by the
director if he or she finds good cause therefor.
   O.   Relocation. The permittee must modify, remove, or relocate its
facility, or portion thereof, without cost or expense to city, if and when made
necessary by (i) any public improvement project, including, but not limited to,
the construction, maintenance, or operation of any underground or above-ground
facilities including, without limitation, sewers, storm drains, conduits, gas,
water, electric or other utility systems, or pipes owned by city or any other
public agency, (ii) any abandonment of any street, sidewalk or other public
right-of-way, or (iii) any change of grade, alignment or width of any street,
sidewalk or other public right-of-way. Such modification, removal, or
relocation of the facility must be completed within 90 days of notification by
city unless, in the opinion of the director, exigent circumstances dictate a
shorter period for removal or relocation. Modification or relocation of the
facility shall require submittal, review and approval of a modified permit
pursuant to the code including applicable notice and hearing procedures. The
permittee shall be entitled, on permittee’s election, to either a pro-rata
refund of fees paid for the original permit or to a new permit, without
additional fee, at a location as close to the original location as the
standards set forth in the code allow. In the event the facility is not
modified, removed, or relocated within the prescribed period of time, city may
cause the same to be done at the sole cost and expense of permittee. Further,
if exigent circumstances so require, including those of immediate or imminent
threat to the public’s health and safety, the city may modify, remove, or
relocate wireless communications facilities without prior notice to permittee
provided permittee is notified within a reasonable period thereafter.
   P.   Permittee must agree in writing that the permittee is aware of, and
agrees to abide by, all conditions of approval imposed by the wireless
communications facility permit. No building permit for a wireless
communications facility can be issued until a signed affidavit of acceptance of
conditions is filed with the city.
   Q.   Prior to the issuance of any encroachment permit, permittee may be
required to enter into a right-of-way agreement with the city in accordance
with the city’s past practice. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
9-9-10: OPERATION, AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   All wireless communications facilities must comply with the following
operation and maintenance standards at all times:
   B.   Unless otherwise provided herein, all necessary repairs and restoration
must be completed by the permittee, owner, operator or any designated
maintenance agent within 48 hours:
      1.   After discovery of the need by the permittee, owner, operator or any
designated maintenance agent; or
      2.   After permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent
receives notification from the city.
   C.   All facilities, including, but not limited to, communication towers,
poles, accessory equipment, cabinets and the facility site must be maintained
in good condition, including ensuring the facilities are reasonably free of:
      1.   General dirt and grease;
      2.   Chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint;
      3.   Rust and corrosion;
      4.   Cracks, dents, and discoloration;
      5.   Graffiti, bills, stickers, advertisements, litter and debris;
      6.   Broken and misshapen structural parts; and
      7.   Any visible damage from any cause.
   D.   Each facility must be operated and maintained in compliance with all
conditions of approval.
   E.   No person shall install, operate or maintain any facility which in
whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way when such
installation, operation or maintenance endangers or is reasonably likely to
endanger the safety of persons or property. No facility located in or over the
public right-of-way may be installed, operated, or maintained in a manner that
interferes with a public utility, public transportation, a governmental use,
ingress/egress to any residence or place of business, or any traffic sign or
signal, fire hydrant, mailbox, permitted sidewalk use (e.g., outdoor dining),
or permitted street furniture. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
9-9-11: REMOVAL AND RESTORATION UPON REVOCATION OR ABANDONMENT:
   A.   Cessation of use or Abandonment: A permittee must notify the director
of the intent to vacate a site at least 30 days prior to the vacation. The
permit for any facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 180
days shall be deemed lapsed and the facility considered abandoned unless (1)
the city has received a notice of the intent to transfer the permit to another
service provider; and (2) the transferee has resumed operation of the facility
within 90 days of the city’s receipt of the transfer notice.
   B.   Upon revocation of a permit or abandonment of a facility, the
permittee, owner or operator must remove its wireless communications facility
and restore the site to its original condition, except for retaining the
landscaping and any other improvements at the discretion of the city. Removal
must be completed in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. The
facility must be removed at no cost or expense to the city.
   C.   Failure of the permittee, owner or operator to promptly remove its
facility and restore the property within 180 days after expiration, earlier
termination or revocation of the permit, or abandonment of the facility, is a
violation of this code. Upon a showing of good cause, an extension may be
granted by the director where circumstances are beyond the control of the
permittee after expiration. The unexcused failure to abide by the timeline
provided in this section shall be grounds for:
      1.   Prosecution;
      2.   Acting on any security instrument required by this chapter or
conditions of approval of permit;
      3.   Removal of the facilities by the city in accordance with the
procedures established under this code for abatement of a public nuisance at
the owner’s expense; and/or
      4.   Any other remedies provided by law.
   D.   Summary Removal. In the event the director or city engineer determines
that the condition or placement of a wireless communications facility located
in the public right-of-way constitutes a dangerous condition, obstruction of
the public right-of-way, or an imminent threat to public safety, or determines
other exigent circumstances require immediate corrective action (collectively,
“exigent circumstances”), the director or city engineer may cause the facility
to be removed summarily and immediately without advance notice or a hearing.
Written notice of the removal shall include the basis for the removal and shall
be served upon the permittee and person who owns the facility within five
business days of removal and the property removed shall be preserved for the
owner’s pick-up if it is feasible for the city to do so. If the owner cannot be
identified following reasonable effort or if the owner fails to pick-up the
property within 30 days, the facility will be considered abandoned property and
the city may dispose of it as it sees fit.
   E.   Removal of Facilities by city. In the event the city removes a facility
in accordance with nuisance abatement procedures or summary removal, any such
removal shall be without any liability to the city for any damage to such
facility that may result from removal. In addition to the procedures for
recovering costs of nuisance abatement, the city may collect such costs from
the performance bond posted and to the extent such costs exceed the amount of
the performance bond, collect those excess costs in accordance with this code
or other applicable law. Unless otherwise provided herein, the city has no
obligation to store any portion of a removed facility. Neither the permittee,
owner nor operator shall have any claim if the city destroys any portion of the
facility not timely removed by the permittee, owner or operator after notice,
or removed by the city due to exigent circumstances. (Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
TITLE 10
PARKS AND RECREATION
Park Rules And Regulations   1
Water Conservation In Landscaping 1 (Rep. by Ord. 1514, 12-1-2015)   2
Beach Regulations   3
Skateboard Parks   4
Water Conservation   5
 
Notes
1 1. See title 15, chapter 15A of this code.
CHAPTER 1
PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Definition
10-1-2: Compliance Required
10-1-3: Application For Reservation
10-1-4: Rules And Regulations
10-1-1: DEFINITION:
"Public park" means and includes public parks, public playgrounds, public
recreation centers or areas and other public areas created, established,
designated, maintained, provided or set aside by the City for the purposes of
public rest, play, recreation, enjoyment or assembly, and shall include all
buildings and structures located thereon or therein. (Ord. 279, 7-19-1944)
10-1-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person to comply with and observe each and all of
the following rules and regulations relating to public parks within the City,
which are hereby promulgated, designated, fixed and established in this
Chapter. (Ord. 279, 7-19-1944)
10-1-3: APPLICATION FOR RESERVATION:
   A.   Contents Of Application: Reservations for tables, space or facilities
in public parks may be obtained on written application to the Director of
Recreation, Parks, and Library or his authorized representative, stating or
showing:
      1.   The purpose for which the permit is requested;
      2.   The day and the hours between which the use for which permit is
sought, will be made; and
      3.   A truthful estimate of the number of persons anticipated to be
present and the name of the person, company, society, organization, gathering
or group to whom the permit is to be issued, if granted.
   B.   Grant Or Denial: Permits or reservations applied for may be granted or
withheld by the Director of Recreation, Parks, and Library or his authorized
representative in his discretion, and may contain such terms or conditions as
the Director of Recreation, Parks, and Library or his authorized representative
may impose with reference thereto, and no permit or reservation shall be valid
unless the same is applied for and granted as contemplated in this Section. All
reservations shall be subject to cancellation as provided in this Chapter.
(Ord. 766, 6-28-1971; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
10-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Park Rule One; Animals And Fowl: No person within any public park shall
hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal or fowl of any kind;
provided, that this shall not apply to dogs when led by a cord or chain not
more than six feet (6') long.
   B.   Park Rule Two; Riding Or Driving Animals Or Vehicles: No person within
any public park shall ride or drive any horse or other animal, or propel any
vehicle, cycle or automobile, except in designated areas.
   C.   Park Rule Three; Consumption Or Possession Of Intoxicating Liquor: No
person shall drink any intoxicating liquor or possess an open container of an
alcoholic beverage upon any street, sidewalk or parkway, park, playground, or
in any public place, or in any place open to the patronage of the public, which
premises are not licensed for the consumption of liquor on the premises.
   D.   Park Rule Four; Injuring Structures, Vegetation: No person within any
public park shall cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant,
rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sidewalk, paved area, fence, bench or
other structure, apparatus or property; or, pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove
any shrub, bush, plant or flower; or, mark or write upon, paint or deface in
any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench, sidewalk, paved area or other
structure.
   E.   Park Rule Five; Removing Vegetation, Gravel: No person within any
public park shall cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel
or fertilizer.
   F.   Park Rule Six; Water Restrictions: No person within any public park
shall swim, fish in, bathe, wade in or pollute the water of any fountain, pond,
lake or stream; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed as prohibiting the use for the purpose intended of any casting pool,
wading pool or bathing pool, specially provided for the particular use.
   G.   Park Rule Seven; Use Of Fires: No person within any public park shall
make or kindle a fire except in picnic stoves or fireplaces provided for that
purpose.
   H.   Park Rule Eight; Camping: No person within any public park shall camp
or lodge therein in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8, Title 7 of
this Code, except by permission in writing from the City Council.
   I.   Park Rule Nine; Cooking: No person within any public park shall cook,
prepare, or sell any food except at the places provided, or unless the City has
issued a sidewalk vending permit or otherwise approved of such activities.
   J.   Park Rule Ten; Waste Liquid Disposal: No person within any public park
shall wash dishes or empty salt water or other waste liquids elsewhere than in
the sinks provided for such purposes.
   K.   Park Rule Eleven; Refuse Disposal: No person within any public park
shall leave any garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere than
in the receptacles provided therefor.
   L.   Park Rule Twelve; Playing Games: No person within any public park shall
play or engage in any baseball, softball, football, soccer ball, volley ball or
other game excepting at such places as shall be especially designated or set
apart for that purpose.
   M.   Park Rule Thirteen; Gambling: No person within any public park shall
play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried
on with cards, dice or other device for money, chips, shells, credit or any
other representative of value, or maintain or exhibit any gambling table or
other instrument of gambling or gaming.
   N.   Park Rule Fourteen; Indecent Conduct; Disturbing Peace: No person
within any public park shall indulge in riotous, indecent conduct, or abusive,
threatening, profane or indecent language or operate any radio or musical
instrument in such a manner as to disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting,
services, concert, exercise or exhibition.
   O.   Park Rule Fifteen; Disturbing Concerts, Meetings: No person within any
public park shall disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, services, concert,
exercise or exhibition.
   P.   Park Rule Sixteen; Distribution Of Handbills, Matter: No person within
any public park shall distribute any handbills or circulars, or post, place or
erect any bills, notice, paper or advertising device or matter of any kind.
   Q.   Park Rule Seventeen; Hours Of Operation: No person shall remain, stay
or loiter in any public park between the period commencing at ten o’clock (10:
00) P.M. on any day and ending one hour before sunrise of the following day,
except by special written permission of either the City Council or the Director
of Recreation, Parks, and Library.
   R.   Park Rule Eighteen; Permission To Hold Meetings, Concerts: No person
within any public park shall hold any meeting, service, concert, exercise or
exhibition without first obtaining written permission from the City Council to
do so.
   S.   Park Rule Nineteen; Permission For Certain Groups: No person, company,
society, organization, gathering or group of more than twenty five (25) persons
shall hold or conduct any picnic, celebration, parade, service, exercise,
gathering, assembly or meeting in any public park within the City without first
obtaining a written permit to do so from the Recreation, Parks, and Library
Department, and no person shall attend, take part in or be a participant in any
such picnic, celebration, service, exercise, gathering, assembly or meeting in
the public park, unless such permission has been first obtained.
   T.   Park Rule Twenty; Women’s Restroom Restricted: No male person over
eight (8) years of age shall enter or use any toilet or restroom for women in
any public park.
   U.   Park Rule Twenty Two; Reserved Signs, Removal: No person within any
public park shall remove from any park equipment any sign indicating that the
equipment is reserved.
   V.   Park Rule Twenty Two; Reserved Tables, Space Or Facility: No person
within any public park shall use or attempt to use or interfere with the use of
any table, space or facility in the park which at the time is reserved by
written reservation then in effect issued to or for any other person; provided,
however, that all the reservations shall specify the period covered by same and
shall be subject to cancellation by the Recreation, Parks, and Library
Department. Unless the actual use of the table, space or facility referred to
in any reservation is commenced within thirty (30) minutes after the period
covered by the reservation begins, the reservation shall thereupon be void and
all rights under the reservation may be cancelled by the Recreation, Parks, and
Library Department. (Ord. 279, 7-19-1944; amd. Ord. 700, 7-22-1968; 1969 Code;
Ord. 766, 6-28-1971; Ord. 1593, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord.1664, 9-
17-2024)
CHAPTER 2
WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING 1
(Rep. by Ord. 1514, 12-1-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 15, chapter 15A of this code.
CHAPTER 3
BEACH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Scope
10-3-2: Definitions
10-3-3: Compliance Required
10-3-4: Exercise Of Power By Officials
10-3-5: Enforcement
10-3-6: Nonliability Of County Or City
10-3-7: Exceptions
10-3-8: Hazardous Areas
10-3-9: Measurements From Shore
10-3-10: Motor Vehicles
10-3-11: Rules And Regulations
10-3-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all ocean beaches in the city as
defined in section
10-3-2 of this chapter, which are maintained for the use of the general public
by the state, the county, and the city, or by any department thereof, or by any
other public body. This chapter does not apply to any parks. (Ord. 803, 3-12-
1973)
10-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the
words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every
liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by
volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted,
mixed, or combined with other substances.
   BEACH: All that area lying adjacent to the Pacific Ocean within the city of
El Segundo, described as follows:
      A strip of land of variable width lying westerly of the westerly line of
Lot 1, Tract 1314, recorded in Map Book 20, Page 161 in the office of the
County Recorder of the County of Los Angeles, and lying westerly of the
westerly line of Lot 22, Tract 2356, recorded in Map Book 28, Page 42, in the
office of said County Recorder; extending from the northerly City boundary line
(said line also being the westerly prolongation of the northerly line of said
Lot 1, Tract 1314) to the southerly City boundary line (said line also being
the westerly prolongation of the southerly line of property described by deed
recorded August 10, 1954, in Map Book 45398, Page 396, of said County
Recorder).
   CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city of El Segundo and his duly
authorized officers.
   LOITERING: To idle, to loaf, to stand idly by, or to walk, drive or ride
about aimlessly without lawful purpose.
   VESSEL: Includes every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on
the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.
"Vessel" includes a raft, but does not include a surfboard, paddleboard, or a
standard surf mat. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A person shall not enter, be, or remain on any beach unless he complies with
all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such beach, and
with all other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-4: EXERCISE OF POWER BY OFFICIALS:
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, the chief of police,
or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by a
deputy of the officer or by a lifeguard or other person authorized, pursuant to
law, by the chief of police, or other public officer, unless this chapter
expressly provides otherwise. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. In order to
protect public beach areas bordering the Pacific Ocean from damage and in order
to preserve the peace therein, the chief of police may issue citations in
accordance with section 853.6 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd.
2000 Code)
10-3-6: NONLIABILITY OF COUNTY OR CITY:
A person exercising any of the privileges authorized by this chapter does so at
his own risk without liability on the part of the county or city for any injury
to person or property resulting therefrom. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to acts performed:
   A.   In an emergency, for the purpose of protecting life or property;
   B.   By employees of the city, county or by employees of the state or other
public body maintaining a beach, for the purpose of performing their duties;
(Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
   C.   For the purpose of giving instruction, training or exhibitions, when
specific permission to give such has been received from the chief of police;
   D.   When special permit has been issued by the city council. (Ord. 803, 3-
12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-8: HAZARDOUS AREAS:
Whenever any county lifeguard finds that because of extra high surf, riptide,
or other hazardous conditions, it is unsafe for the average person to swim or
bathe within a certain area of the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any
beach regulated by this chapter, during the time such hazardous conditions
exist such lifeguard may instruct all persons not to swim or bathe in such
area. All persons shall comply with such instructions. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-9: MEASUREMENTS FROM SHORE:
In subsections
10-3-11D, E and T of this chapter, and whenever elsewhere, a distance from
shore is specified, it means the distance measured at right angles to the
tangent of the actual line between the water and the unsubmerged beach as it
exists at the time of measurement. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-10: MOTOR VEHICLES:
If the chief of police finds that at certain times, or under specified
restrictions, or at designated places a person can so operate a motor vehicle
so as not to interfere in any way with the use of any beach, he may grant such
person permission so to operate such motor vehicle. No person shall bring to,
or operate on, any beach any motor vehicle except as permitted by the Chief of
Police and subject to all of the conditions which are a part of such
permission. If permission to operate a motor vehicle is granted, a person shall
park such motor vehicle only in those areas designated by the Chief of Police
for parking. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverages; Intoxication:
      1.   Possession Or Consumption Prohibited: No person shall enter, be or
remain on any beach while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling,
giving away or consuming any alcoholic beverage.
      2.   Intoxicated Persons: An intoxicated person in an intoxicated
condition shall not enter, remain on, or be on any beach.
   B.   Animals:
      1.   Bringing To Beach Prohibited: No person shall maintain or bring on
any beach nor bring into the waters of the Pacific Ocean adjacent to any beach,
any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, dog, cat or other animal of any
kind, whether such animal is leashed or unleashed.
      2.   Riding Horses, Other Animals: No person shall ride a horse, mule,
burro, or donkey, or other similar animal, or lead such animal on, upon, along
any beach or in or along the waters of the Pacific Ocean adjacent to any beach.
   C.   Ball Regulations: No person shall cast, toss, throw, kick, or roll any
ball, tube or any light object other than inflated rubber balls not less than
ten inches (10") in diameter upon or over any beach regulated by this Chapter
or upon or over any waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite such beach.
   D.   Bathing, Swimming: No person shall swim, bathe, or immerse himself in
the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter
more than two hundred (200) yards from shore except:
      1.   A person who is the owner of a vessel, or who acts at the request of
such owner while engaged in servicing or repairing such vessel, and then only
in the immediate area of such vessel.
      2.   A person engaged in the sport commonly known as aquaplaning, water
skiing, or any derivations thereof; provided, that such person is at all times
wearing a safety belt approved by the Director.
      3.   A skin diver equipped with swim fins and a face plate if at all
times he maintains within fifty (50) yards of himself a boat or a surf mat,
paddleboard or surfboard upon which there is a rectangular flag twelve inches
by fifteen inches (12" x 15"), orange-red in color with a white diagonal stripe
three inches (3") wide running from one corner to the diagonally opposite
corner. The flag shall be flown high enough so as not to touch the water.
      4.   No person shall surf more than fifty (50) yards beyond the farthest
breaking wave when such farthest breaking wave is more than one hundred fifty
(150) yards from shore.
   E.   Boating: No person shall operate any vessel within three hundred (300)
yards of the shoreline of any beach regulated by this Chapter except when
necessary in taking it to or from its lawful mooring place or when necessary in
the case of emergency, or upon special permit issued by the City Council.
   F.   Disturbance: No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of any beach
by:
      1.   Any unduly loud or unusual noise; or
      2.   By tooting, blowing, or sounding any automobile siren, horn, signal
or noise-making device; or
      3.   By any tumultuous conduct; or
      4.   By the use of any vulgar, profane or indecent language.
   G.   Fires: No person shall light or maintain any fire on any beach.
   H.   Flora And Turf: No person shall dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate,
or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion thereof, growing
on the beach. No person shall remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or
gravel from the beach.
   I.   Glass, Bottles: No person shall place, throw, leave, keep or maintain
any bottle, glass, crockery, sharp or pointed article or thing in such a manner
that any person on a beach is or may be cut, pricked, or in any way injured
thereby.
   J.   Guy Wires: No person shall fasten or maintain any guy wire, guy rope or
exterior bracing or support of any tent, lodge, shelter or structure between it
or any portion thereof, and any structure, stake, rock or thing outside of such
tent, lodge, shelter or structure.
   K.   Inflated Equipment: No person shall use in the Pacific Ocean opposite
any beach regulated by this Chapter, any inflated equipment of any kind except
a standard surf mat which is:
      1.   Constructed of a durable material with a nonslippery surface;
      2.   So constructed that, when inflated for use, it will not fold in any
direction;
      3.   Not smaller than twenty four inches by forty inches (24" x 40");
      4.   Not larger than thirty inches by sixty inches (30" x 60");
      5.   Equipped with a safety rope.
   L.   Loitering: No person shall loiter on any beach at any time between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   M.   Overnight Use And Camping: No person shall camp on or use for overnight
sleeping purposes any beach or bring a house-trailer or similar vehicle onto
any beach in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8, Title 7 of this Code.
   N.   Pollution:
      1.   Oil:
         a.   No person shall deposit, place, throw, divert, or in any manner
dispose of, or cause or permit to be deposited, placed, thrown, diverted, or in
any manner disposed of, any crude petroleum, refined petroleum, engine oil, or
any oily byproduct thereof or any tar or any product containing tar, or any
oily substance into the waters of the Pacific Ocean, or into or upon the waters
of any lagoon, bay, inlet, or tributary thereof; or deposit, place, throw,
divert, or in any manner dispose of any crude petroleum, refined petroleum,
engine oil, or any oily byproduct thereof, or any tar, or any product
containing tar, or any oily substance upon any beach, tideland, or submerged
land, or any portion thereof.
         b.   No person shall deposit, place, throw, divert, keep, maintain, or
in any manner dispose of, or cause or permit to be deposited, placed, thrown,
diverted, kept, maintained, or in any manner disposed of any crude petroleum,
refined petroleum, engine oil, or any oily byproduct thereof, or any tar, or
any product containing tar or any oily substance into, along, or upon any land,
premises, or place in such a manner that the same, or any portion thereof, may
run or be transferred or carried to, or be in any manner deposited upon or
conveyed to any beach, tideland or submerged land, or any portion thereof, or
into or upon the waters of the Pacific Ocean, or into or upon the waters of any
lagoon, bay, inlet, or tributary thereof.
      2.   Other: No person shall deposit, place, throw, or in any manner
dispose of any dead animal or any portion thereof, or any vegetable or animal
matter, or any offal, night soil, manure, rubbish, trash, garbage, or any
decaying or putrid matter, material or substance which might decay or become
putrid, or any matter, material or substance which is or might become injurious
to health or which is or might become a nuisance or offensive to the senses of
any person coming in proximity thereto, into the waters of the Pacific Ocean,
or into the waters of any lagoon, bay, inlet or tributary thereof, of, in,
upon, or along any beach, tideland, or submerged land, or any portion thereof,
or keep or maintain or cause or permit to be kept or maintained upon any
premises or in or at any place, any article, substance, or thing hereinabove in
this Section enumerated, in such manner that any such article, substance or
thing, or any portion thereof may be transferred or carried to, or be in any
manner deposited upon or conveyed to any beach, tideland, or submerged land, or
any portion thereof, or into or upon the waters of the Pacific Ocean, or into
or upon the waters of any lagoon, bay, inlet or tributary thereof. (Ord. 803,
3-12-1973)
   O.   Buildings And Structures:
      1.   Recreation Building: No person shall use any recreation building at
any time except between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight of any day except upon written permit from the Chief
of Police.
      2.   Structures And Facilities: No person, other than a duly authorized
employee of the City, in the performance of his duties shall:
         a.   Cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any rock, building, cage
pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment or property
on a beach, or any portion thereof;
         b.   Mark or place thereon or on any portion thereof, any mark,
writing, or printing;
         c.   Attach thereto any sign, card, display or other similar device.
   P.   Rubbish: No person shall throw, place or dispose of any garbage refuse,
or can in any place on a beach or into or upon the waters of the Pacific Ocean
other than into a garbage can or other receptacle maintained there for that
purpose. No person shall throw, place or dispose of, any waste paper or
combustible refuse in any place on a beach or into or upon the waters of the
Pacific Ocean other than into a receptacle maintained for that purpose.
   Q.   Shelters: No person shall erect, maintain, use or occupy on a beach any
tent, lodge, shelter or structure unless such tent, lodge, shelter or structure
shall have two (2) sides thereof entirely open, and unless there shall be an
unobstructed view into such tent, lodge, shelter, or structure from the outside
thereof on at least two (2) sides thereof.
   R.   Shooting: No person shall discharge or shoot any firearms, air gun,
slingshot or bow and arrow anywhere on a beach.
   S.   Solicitation: No person shall solicit in any manner or for any purpose,
or sell or offer for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise, or distribute or
pass out any handbills, advertising matter or literature on a beach.
   T.   Surfboards, Surf Mats, Paddleboards:
      1.   Waters Restricted:
         a.   No person shall use, possess or operate in the waters of the
Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter any object commonly
known as a surfboard, paddleboard or similar device (but not including surf
mats and belly boards) at such times when said waters are restricted for
swimming and bathing only.
         b.   Such restrictions shall be effective when a yellow flag having
dimensions of not less than two feet by two feet (2' x 2') and having a solid
black circle in the center (commonly known as a "blackball flag") is
prominently displayed from a lifeguard tower, lifeguard station, pier or
similar structure under the control of the City. At such times as the blackball
flag is displayed, swimming and bathing only shall be permitted in the waters
of the Pacific Ocean opposite those areas of the beach within two hundred (200)
yards of the point of display of said blackball flag; provided, however, that
where said blackball flag is displayed from consecutive operational lifeguard
towers, lifeguard stations and similar structures under the control of the City
along a beach regulated by this Chapter, then all waters of the Pacific Ocean
opposite said beach shall be restricted to swimming and bathing only.
         c.   Such restrictions shall also be indicated by pairs of red flags
put in place by the chief of police. At such times as said red flags are
displayed, swimming and bathing only shall be permitted in the waters of the
Pacific Ocean opposite those areas of the beach lying between a given pair of
such red flags.
      2.   Distances From Shore: No person shall use, possess or operate in the
waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this chapter any
object commonly known as a surf mat, paddleboard, belly board, surfboard, or
similar device except within two hundred (200) yards from shore or seventy five
(75) yards seaward of the point at which the average wave is breaking,
whichever distance is greater, or when used by a skin diver to hold a flag
required by subsection D of this section.
      3.   Near Other Persons: No person shall bring or permit or allow in the
waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this chapter any
object commonly known as, or used as, a paddleboard or surfboard, within one
hundred feet (100') of any person in the waters thereof who was not at the time
using or possessing a similar object.
      4.   Area For Exclusive Use: Notwithstanding any provision of this
section, the chief of police may from time to time designate certain areas to
be used exclusively by persons using surfboards and paddleboards. Such
designation may be revoked at any time and the area covered by any such
designation may be enlarged or reduced at any time. No person shall swim or
bathe in the waters of the Pacific Ocean included in an area so designated
except while using a surfboard or paddleboard or as is necessary in order to
use a surfboard or paddleboard.
      5.   Leaving Area During Restriction: A person in violation of the
restrictions set forth in this subsection shall not fail, refuse or neglect to
leave the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this
chapter when such restrictions are in force. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000
Code)
   U.   Nudity And Disrobing:
      1.   No person shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk, change clothes,
disrobe or be on any beach in such manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis,
pubic symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region
or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below
the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public
view, except in those portions of a comfort station, if any, expressly set
aside for such purpose.
      2.   This subsection shall not apply to persons under the age of ten (10)
years, provided such children are sufficiently clothed to conform to accepted
community standards.
      3.   This subsection shall not apply to persons engaged in a live
theatrical performance in a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment
which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. (Ord. 1047, 2-15-1983)
   V.   Smoking Prohibited: It is unlawful to smoke on any public beach within
the city of El Segundo. For the purpose of this section, "smoking" means
inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe.
For the purpose of this section, “beach” does not include parking lots or
roadways. (Ord. 1385, 8-2-2005; amd. Ord. 1664, 9-17-2024)
CHAPTER 4
SKATEBOARD PARKS 1
SECTION:
10-4-1: Purpose
10-4-2: Definitions
10-4-3: Protective Gear Required
10-4-4: Signs
10-4-5: Violations
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 8-4-24 of this code for provisions relative to restricted
  use.
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California
Health & Safety Code section 115800, and any succeeding or related statutes,
for the purpose of protecting the city from claims arising from use of public
skateboard parks. Skateboarding is an inherently dangerous recreational
activity and persons using skateboards should do so at their own risk. (Ord.
1372, 6-15-2004)
10-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
DIRECTOR: The city of El Segundo’s director of recreation, parks, and library,
or designee.
SKATEBOARD PARK: City owned and operated property designated by the city
council to be used for skateboarding purposes. (Ord. 1372, 6-15-2004; amd. Ord.
1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
10-4-3: PROTECTIVE GEAR REQUIRED:
Any person skateboarding at a skateboard park must wear protective equipment
consisting of, at a minimum, a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads. (Ord. 1372, 6-
15-2004)
10-4-4: SIGNS:
   A.   The director will provide notice regarding the requirements of this
chapter to individuals using the skateboard park by use of signs that state the
following:
THIS SKATEBOARD PARK IS NOT SUPERVISED. SKATEBOARDING IS HAZARDOUS. THE EL
SEGUNDO MUNICIPAL CODE REQUIRES PERSONS USING THIS SKATEBOARD PARK TO WEAR A
HELMET, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEEPADS. FAILURE TO COMPLY IS UNLAWFUL.
   B.   These signs must be posted in at least one conspicuous location, be
made of a durable material, and posted in a permanent manner. (Ord. 1372, 6-15-
2004)
10-4-5: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of section
10-4-3 of this chapter will be prosecuted as infractions in accord with section
1-2-1 of this code. (Ord. 1372, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 5
WATER CONSERVATION
SECTION:
10-5-1: Purpose
10-5-2: Definitions
10-5-3: Water Conservation Program
10-5-4: Repair Of Plumbing, Sprinkler And Irrigation System
10-5-5: Watering; Irrigation
10-5-6: Miscellaneous Restrictions
10-5-7: Commercial Car Washes
10-5-8: Washing Of Equipment And Machinery
10-5-9: Cleaning Of Structures
10-5-10: Cleaning Of Surfaces
10-5-11: Water Spillage
10-5-12: Swimming Pools And Spas
10-5-13: Fountains, Decorative Basins, Ponds, Waterways
10-5-14: Cooling Systems
10-5-15: Commercial Laundry Facilities
10-5-16: Visitor Serving Facilities
10-5-17: Restaurants And Other Eating Or Drinking Establishments
10-5-18: Construction
10-5-19: Use Of Hydrants
10-5-20: Indiscriminate Use
10-5-21: Public Health And Safety
10-5-22: Water Shortage Contingency Measures
10-5-23: Relief From Compliance
10-5-24: Enforcement
10-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Water Code section 375 for the purpose of
establishing permanent water conservation requirements. In the event of water
shortages, this chapter also establishes contingency measures in the event of
water shortages. The provisions of this chapter are mandatory unless it is
found that the use of water is necessary to comply with a term or condition in
a permit issued by a state or federal agency, or is otherwise exempt by this
chapter. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter:
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A constructed or modified surface that cannot
effectively percolate water. The term includes, without limitation, sidewalks,
driveways, gutters, and roads.
   PERSON: A natural or corporate person who receives potable water service
from the city.
   PROGRAMMED: A weather based or sensor based irrigation controller that was
programmed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and site specific
conditions.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person responsible for daily operations of each
residential or commercial premises located within the city's jurisdiction
including, without limitation, the property owner.
   SENSOR BASED IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: An irrigation controller that operates
based upon input received from any combination of sensors such as rain, light,
and soil moisture, installed within or around an irrigated landscape area.
   WEATHER BASED IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: An irrigation controller that operates
based on evapotranspiration rates and historic or real time weather data. (Ord.
1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-3: WATER CONSERVATION PROGRAM:
All water customers are required to adopt and put into use at the earliest
possible date drought water conservation programs. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
10-5-4: REPAIR OF PLUMBING, SPRINKLER AND IRRIGATION SYSTEM:
Responsible persons must, as soon as practicable, but not later than forty
eight (48) hours after such person first discovers water leaks, commence repair
of any leaking pipes, faucets, plumbing fixtures, other water service
appliances, sprinklers, watering or irrigation systems, or distribution systems
and promptly complete such repair work, unless a waiver is obtained from the
city. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-5: WATERING; IRRIGATION:
Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is unlawful for any person to
water their lawn or landscaping or permit their lawn or landscaping to be
watered between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. It is unlawful for any person to water their lawn or landscaping or permit
their lawn or landscaping to be watered for a period longer than fifteen (15)
minutes per station each day. Notwithstanding these prohibitions, the following
is permitted:
   A.   Persons may operate an irrigation system between nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. for the purpose of installing, repairing or
routine maintenance of the same;
   B.   Persons may water between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. using any of the following methods:
      1.   Properly programmed weather based and/or sensor based irrigation
controllers;
      2.   Drip irrigation;
      3.   By hand, using a bucket; or
      4.   By hand, using a hose with an automatic shutoff nozzle.
   C.   Commercial nurseries and commercial grower's products may irrigate
before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. only.
Watering is permitted at any time with a handheld hose equipped with a positive
shutoff nozzle, a bucket, or when a drip/micro-irrigation system/equipment is
used. Irrigation of nursery propagation beds is permitted at any time. Watering
of livestock is permitted at any time. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-6: MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS:
The following are unlawful for any person:
   A.   Allowing grass, lawns, ground cover, shrubbery, and open ground to be
watered at any time while it is raining or within forty eight (48) hours after
measurable rainfall.
   B.   Operating landscape irrigation system(s) that allow overspray or excess
runoff onto impervious surfaces (such as sidewalks, driveways, V-ditches,
gutters and roadways).
   C.   To use a water hose to wash any vehicle including, without limitation,
cars, trucks, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, or campers, or any other
aircraft, tractor, or any other vehicle, or any portion thereof, unless the
hose is equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle. Except for individual
residential vehicle washing, all wash water from vehicle washing/cleaning
activity must be prevented from discharging to the stormwater drainage system.
(Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-7: COMMERCIAL CAR WASHES:
   A.   It is unlawful for commercial car wash facilities to permit the washing
of any boat or vehicle in such facility or on its premises, other than by the
following methods:
      1.   Use of mechanical automatic car wash facilities utilizing water
recycling equipment or utilizing recycled water;
      2.   Use of a hose that operates on a timer for limited time periods and
shuts off automatically at the expiration of the time period;
      3.   Use of a hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle; or
      4.   Use of bucket and hand washing.
   B.   All wash/rinse water must be captured and recycled or discharged into
the sanitary sewer system.
   C.   All new commercial conveyor car wash facilities must be equipped with a
water recycling system. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-8: WASHING OF EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY:
It is unlawful for any person to use a water hose to wash any type of equipment
or machinery, or any portion thereof, unless the hose is equipped with an
automatic shutoff nozzle. All wash water from such washing/cleaning activity
must be prevented from discharging to the stormwater drainage system. (Ord.
1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-9: CLEANING OF STRUCTURES:
It is unlawful for any person to use water through a hose to clean the exterior
of any building or structure unless such hose is equipped with a shutoff
nozzle. All wash water from such activity must be prevented from discharging to
the stormwater drainage system. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-10: CLEANING OF SURFACES:
It is unlawful for any person to use water through a hose to clean any
sidewalk, driveway, roadway, parking lot, or any other outdoor paved or hard
surfaced area. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-11: WATER SPILLAGE:
Every person must minimize water spillage into streets, curbs, or gutters and
minimize runoff beyond the immediate area of use. Every person is deemed to
have under his/her control at all times his/her water distribution lines and
facilities, and to know the manner and extent of his/her water use and excess
runoff. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-12: SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS:
It is unlawful for any person to empty and refill a swimming pool or spa except
to prevent or repair structural damage or to comply with public health
regulations. Discharge of pool water, other than directly to the sanitary sewer
system, must be consistent with this code with regard to stormwater. Discharge
of pool filter backwash water to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited.
All pools and spas must be equipped with a water recirculation device. The use
of a pool/spa cover is encouraged to prevent evaporative water loss. (Ord.
1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-13: FOUNTAINS, DECORATIVE BASINS, PONDS, WATERWAYS:
It is unlawful for any person to use water to operate or maintain levels in
decorative fountains, basins, ponds, and waterways unless a recirculation
device is in use. Discharge of water, other than directly to the sanitary sewer
system, must be consistent with this code with regard to stormwater. Discharge
of filter backwash water to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited. (Ord.
1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-14: COOLING SYSTEMS:
No single pass cooling systems are permitted in new connections. (Ord. 1433,
11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-15: COMMERCIAL LAUNDRY FACILITIES:
New commercial laundry facilities must be equipped with a water reclamation
system for rinse water. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-16: VISITOR SERVING FACILITIES:
The owner and manager of each hotel, motel, restaurant, and other visitor
serving facility must ensure that such facility displays, in places visible to
all customers, placards or decals approved by the city, promoting public
awareness of the need for water conservation and/or advising the public that
waste of water is prohibited. Hotels, motels and other similar visitor serving
facilities must provide guests the option to not have towels and linens
laundered daily and prominently display this option in each guestroom in easy
to understand language. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-17: RESTAURANTS AND OTHER EATING OR DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS:
Restaurants and any other eating and/or drinking establishments in the city
cannot serve water to restaurant customers, except upon request of the
customer. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-18: CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   It is unlawful to use potable water for compacting or dust control
purposes in construction activities where there is a reasonably available
source of recycled or other nonpotable water approved by the California state
department of health services and appropriate for such use.
   B.   All water hoses used in connection with any construction activities
must be equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle when an automatic shutoff
nozzle can be purchased or otherwise obtained for the size or type of hose in
use.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, use of potable water
for irrigation and other outdoor use is prohibited outside of newly constructed
homes and buildings unless delivered by drip or microspray systems. (Ord. 1509,
7-21-2015)
10-5-19: USE OF HYDRANTS:
It is unlawful for any person to utilize any fire hydrant for any purpose other
than fire suppression or emergency aid, without first obtaining written
approval from the city manager, or designee. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
10-5-20: INDISCRIMINATE USE:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the indiscriminate running of
water not otherwise prohibited by this chapter which is wasteful and without
reasonable purpose. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-21: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
These regulations cannot be construed to limit water use which is immediately
necessary to protect public health or safety. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
10-5-22: WATER SHORTAGE CONTINGENCY MEASURES:
The city council by resolution is authorized to require or impose reductions in
the use of water if such reductions are necessary in order for the city to
comply with water use restrictions imposed by federal, state or regional water
agencies or to respond to emergency water shortage conditions. Depending on the
expected duration and severity of the shortage, the city council may consider
declaring a level 1, level 2, level 3 or level 4 drought response by
resolution.
   A.   Level 1 Drought Response: Declaring a level 1 drought response
condition demonstrates the need to reduce the city's water demand by a maximum
of ten percent (10%). During a level 1 drought response condition, the city
will increase its public education and outreach efforts to raise public
awareness of the need to implement the permanent water conservation practices
established in sections
10-5-1 through
10-5-21 of this chapter.
   B.   Level 2 Drought Response: Declaring a level 2 drought response
condition demonstrates the need to reduce the city's water demand between ten
percent (10%) and twenty percent (20%). During a level 2 drought response
condition, all persons using city water must comply with the level 1 drought
response conditions, and must also comply with the following additional
mandatory conservation measures:
      1.   Limit residential and commercial landscape irrigation to no more
than two (2) days per week. The city council may assign the days by resolution
and the assigned days shall be posted by the city. This subsection shall not
apply to commercial growers or nurseries.
      2.   Cease watering landscaped public street medians with ornamental turf
unless using recycled water. Potable water may be used to ensure the health of
trees and shrubs.
      3.   Cease washing down any sidewalks and driveways, or other outdoor
surfaces such as buildings, with potable water.
      4.   Cease allowing runoff when irrigating with potable water.
      5.   Any additional or innovative actions to increase the supply of water
available to the city and to conserve the city's existing water supply.
   C.   Level 3 Drought Response: Declaring a level 3 drought response
condition demonstrates the need to reduce the city's water demand between
twenty percent (20%) and thirty five percent (35%). During a level 3 drought
response condition, all persons using city water must comply with the level 1
and level 2 drought response conditions, and must also comply with the
following additional mandatory conservation measures:
      1.   Limit residential and commercial landscape irrigation to no more
than one day per week. The city council may assign the day by resolution and
the assigned day shall be posted by the city. This subsection shall not apply
to commercial growers or nurseries.
      2.   Stop filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds, except to the
extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of
significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior
to declaration of a drought response level under this section.
      3.   Limit filling swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, jacuzzis, or
children's wading pools to not more than one day per week. The city council may
assign the day by resolution and the assigned day shall be posted by the city.
      4.   Any additional or innovative actions to increase the supply of water
available to the city and to conserve the city's existing water supply.
   D.   Level 4 Drought Response: Declaring a level 4 drought response
condition demonstrates the need to reduce the city's water demand by thirty
five percent (35%) or more. During a level 4 drought response condition, all
persons using city water must comply with the level 1, level 2 and level 3
drought response conditions, and must also comply with the following additional
mandatory conservation measures:
      1.   All watering without a drip irrigation or microspray system is
prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to the following categories of use
unless the city has determined that recycled water is available and may be
lawfully applied to the use:
         a.   Maintenance of trees and shrubs that are watered on the same
schedule set forth in subsection B of this section by using a bucket, handheld
hose with a positive shutoff nozzle, or low volume nonspray irrigation;
         b.   Maintenance of existing landscaping necessary for fire protection
as specified by the fire marshal of the local fire protection agency having
jurisdiction over the property to be irrigated;
         c.   Maintenance of existing landscaping for erosion control;
         d.   Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential
to the well being of rare animals;
         e.   Maintenance of landscaping within active public parks and playing
fields, daycare centers, school grounds, cemeteries, and golf course greens,
provided that such irrigation does not exceed two (2) days per week according
to the schedule established under subsection B of this section;
         f.   Watering of livestock; and
         g.   Public works projects and actively irrigated environmental
mitigation projects.
      2.   Repair all water leaks within twenty four (24) hours of notification
by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city manager.
      3.   Stop filling swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, and/or jacuzzis of any
kind whether inground or aboveground structures, including children's wading
pools.
      4.   Stop washing vehicles except at commercial car washes that
recirculate water, or by high pressure/low volume wash systems.
      5.   Additionally, no new potable water service shall be provided, no new
temporary meters or permanent meters shall be provided, and no statements of
immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as, will
serve letters, certificates or letters of availability) shall be issued, except
under the following circumstances:
         a.   A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the
project; or
         b.   The project is necessary to protect the public's health, safety,
and welfare; or
         c.   The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable
commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the
provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of city.
This provision shall not be construed to preclude the resetting or turn on of
meters to provide continuation of water service or to restore service that has
been interrupted for a period of one year or less.
      6.   Any additional or innovative actions to increase the supply of water
available to the city and to conserve the city's existing water supply.
In addition, the resolution declaring a level 4 drought response may direct the
city manager not to issue new water utility service connections for any
development. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-23: RELIEF FROM COMPLIANCE:
The city manager, or designee, may grant written waivers to persons who apply
on forms supplied by the city for:
   A.   Prohibited uses of water if it is found that a waiver is necessary to
prevent an emergency condition relating to health and safety, and if the person
seeking a waiver demonstrates that he or she implemented water conservation
measures in some other manner that achieves the objectives of this chapter. No
waiver can be granted for the filling of any decorative fountain, basin, pond,
hot tub, spa or permanent swimming or wading pool, unless the filling occurs as
the result of performing necessary leak repairs and unless the other provisions
of this section are met.
   B.   No waiver can be granted unless the person demonstrates that he or she
has already achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption as
can be achieved by the affected property or business. Any waiver granted must
be based upon the water consumption rates of similar water users, properties or
businesses. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-24: ENFORCEMENT:
Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by up to thirty (30)
days in county jail and/or a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). At
least one written warning must be provided to persons upon the first violation
of this chapter. Second and subsequent violations may be enforced in accordance
with applicable law. It is the code enforcement officer's responsibility to
enforce this chapter. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
TITLE 11
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Water Services   1
Cross-Connection Control   2
Underground Or Overhead Utilities   3
CHAPTER 1
WATER SERVICES
SECTION:
11-1-1: Rules And Regulations Established
11-1-2: Installation Of Service
11-1-3: Meter Installation Charges
11-1-4: Meter Requirements
11-1-5: Water Rates
11-1-6: Presumption Of Continued Use
11-1-7: Delinquencies
11-1-8: Rebates Prohibited
11-1-9: Meter Damage Resulting From Carelessness
11-1-10: Discontinuation For Non-Payment
11-1-11: Billings Credit For Prompt Repair Of On-Site Leaks
11-1-12: Penalty For Unauthorized Service
11-1-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
The rules and regulations hereinafter set forth in this Chapter, are hereby
fixed, adopted and established, as the rules and regulations for and governing
the service of water from the waterworks system of the City; and the service
shall be rendered subject to each and all of the rules, regulations and rates
and in conformity therewith.
(Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 1595, 11-19-2019)
11-1-2: INSTALLATION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Application For Service: Before service is delivered, a written
application therefor, on a form furnished by the Public Works Department of the
City must be signed by the person desiring the service, giving in addition to
such information as the Department may require, his status as owner, agent or
tenant.
   B.   Deposits: Deposits are required as a condition of service in the
amounts and under the conditions set forth hereunder:
      1.   Where service is to be delivered to other than a bona fide owner of
the property, a cash deposit must be made to cover the Department's estimate of
the average bill for two (2) months' service to the subject property, and in no
case shall the deposit be less than ten dollars ($10.00). The deposit will be
refunded at the time the service is discontinued and all bills for water
furnished the service are paid.
      2.   Each application for a new service installation (as differentiated
from an order to turn on an existing service connection) shall be accompanied
by a cash deposit of ten dollars ($10.00). The deposit shall be held by the
Department for a period of six (6) months from the date the new service is
installed and turned on. At the end of this six (6) months' period the deposit
shall be credited to the account of the subject service to apply on subsequent
billings until depleted. In the event that service is discontinued prior to the
time that the credit is consumed, the balance of the deposit on hand in the
Department will be refunded after all bills for water furnished the service are
paid.
   C.   Temporary Service: Connection for temporary use will be made upon a
deposit equal to the Department's estimate of the total cost of labor,
materials and overhead necessary to make the installation. This amount shall
remain on deposit with the Public Works Department until the termination of the
use, during which time regular rates will be charged for water used, when the
deposit will be returned to the depositor, less ten percent (10%) per year
depreciation on material and labor, etc., costs.
   D.   Relocation Of Service: Services will be relocated at the request of the
owner of the premises being served at such time as the owner pays to the Public
Works Department a sum equal to the Department's estimate of the cost of moving
the service.
   E.   Refunds In Certain Cases: In the event any deposit has been made for
the installation of any service as set forth in this Section, and for any
reason the installation of the meter and service for which the deposit was
deposited is not made, the Chief Financial Officer may order refund of the
deposit at any time. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 1620, 11-17-
2020)
11-1-3: METER INSTALLATION CHARGES:
   A.   For every meter installation or upgrade requested from and granted by
the City of El Segundo, the City shall charge a fee prescribed by the City's
Master Fee Schedule. The City may also request a deposit for each meter
installation or upgrade and the amount of the deposit taken shall be determined
by the City's Master Fee Schedule.
   B.   Meters Property Of City: All meters installed shall be and remain the
property of the City.
(Ord. 924, 1977; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 1595, 11-19-2019)
11-1-4: METER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All Services Metered: All services shall be metered; provided, however,
nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring more than one metered
service to a hotel or apartment house where the halls and reception rooms are
used in common by all families occupying the same; nor as requiring more than
one metered service to any store or office building for services to the
respective stores or offices actually contained in and made a part of the store
or office building.
   B.   Meter Size For Single Or Multiple Units On Single Meter:
      1.   Two (2) or more units may be connected to one meter; provided,
however, that all units are on the same premises and that only one address
shall be recognized for billing and collecting purposes.
      2.   The minimum size of meter to be installed shall be determined by the
number of fixture units in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Plumbing Code of the City. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967)
      3.   The total number of fixture units shall be computed by the Building
Department at the time a plumbing permit is issued and the applicants are
hereby required to submit the computation to the Public Works Department with
his application for water service.
      4.   The monthly minimum charges and method of billing recommended by the
Water Superintendent shall then be applied to existing meters; not in
accordance with the size of the existing meters; but in accordance with what
that size should be, computed by the total number of fixture units served.
      5.   No change shall be made in the size of the existing meters unless
the changes are requested and paid for by the owner or applicant. (Ord. 663, 5-
8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-5: WATER RATES:
Rates and charges for water service and the effective date of the rates and
charges for water service from the Municipal waterworks system shall be fixed
and established from time to time by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 744,
8-24-1970; amd. Ord. 1622, 3-2-2021)
11-1-6: PRESUMPTION OF CONTINUED USE:
All services on any premises, whether used or not, shall be considered as used
and shall be charged for so long as the same remain connected. (Ord. 663, 5-8-
1967)
11-1-7: DELINQUENCIES:
Bills will be considered delinquent twenty two (22) days after the date the
bill is generated and provided to the customer. The City may impose, and
customers of delinquent accounts must pay to the City, an initial late fee
after the account becomes delinquent. The fees described in this section are
set pursuant to the City's Master Fee Schedule unless limited by California
State Law. None of the penalty fees described in this section are to be
construed or interpreted as interest.
(Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. Ord. 1595, 11-19-2019)
11-1-8: REBATES PROHIBITED:
No allowance or rebate shall be made in water rates charged against any
property or premises so long as the water remains connected therewith, and full
rates shall be charged against any and all property or premises as hereinbefore
specified until the Public Works Department has been notified in writing to
shut off or disconnect the water therefrom. Any complaint in regard to the
rating of property must be made at the office of the Public Works Department
and the adjustor will properly rate premises. Collectors shall not make rebates
or adjust rates. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-9: METER DAMAGE RESULTING FROM CARELESSNESS:
Any damage to meters or appurtenances resulting from carelessness, wilfulness
or neglect, or any of them, as well as any damage which may result from hot
water or steam from a boiler, or otherwise, shall be paid for to the Public
Works Department on presentation of bill and in case the bill is not paid, the
water may be shut off from the premises without further notice and not turned
on until all charges are paid. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-10: DISCONTINUATION FOR NON-PAYMENT:
   A.   The City may discontinue water service for non-payment if a customer
account has been delinquent for sixty (60) days. No less than seven (7)
business days before service is disconnected, the City must attempt to contact
the customer of record by telephone or by written notice addressed and mailed
to the customer of the residence to which the residential service is provided.
If such customer does not respond to the City's attempts to contact, the City
must post an imminent shutoff notice in a conspicuous place on the property
before taking such action. If an adult at the residence properly and timely
appeals the water bill, the City shall not discontinue residential service
while such appeal is pending.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may not discontinue residential
water service for non-payment if all of the conditions described in Health and
Safety Code section 116910 are met.
   C.   If an imminent shutoff notice is issued and residential water service
is terminated, the City may impose, and the customer must pay to the City, a
red tag fee for the posting of an imminent shutoff notice and a shutoff fee
upon the termination of service. If residential water service is restored, the
City may impose, and the customer must pay to the City, a re-connection fee to
restore service. The fees described in this section are set pursuant to the
City's Master Fee Schedule unless limited by California State Law. None of the
penalty fees expressed in this section are to be construed or interpreted as
interest.
   D.   In the event service is discontinued for non-payment, the City shall
provide the customer with information on how to restore residential service.
   E.   The City shall adopt a written policy relating to discontinuation of
residential service for non-payment, as required by state law, and such policy
shall be posted on the City's website. The City shall report the number of
annual discontinuations of residential service for inability to pay on the
City's website and to the State Water Resources Control Board.
(Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 1595, 11-19-2019)
11-1-11: BILLINGS CREDIT FOR PROMPT REPAIR OF ON-SITE LEAKS:
   A.   Water Service Billing Credit:
      1.   Procedure: The Director of the Department of Finance may grant a
credit allowance to a customer’s water service bill if the customer makes a
written request to the Chief Financial Officer for a credit allowance and
presents evidence to establish all of the following facts to the satisfaction
of the Chief Financial Officer and the Director of Public Works: a) a leakage
on the customer’s property caused a high consumption of water for the property;
b) the customer did not have any knowledge or reason to know of the leakage
prior to receiving water/sewer service bill indicating an unusually high water
consumption; and c) prompt repairs of the leak were performed upon the customer
becoming aware of the leakage.
      2.   Amount Of Credit Allowance:
         a.   The amount of credit allowance may be up to one-half (1/2) of the
amount of the water consumption billing in excess of the billing for
consumption in a comparable billing period for which there was no known or
apparent leak.
         b.   The credit allowance is limited to the consumption of two (2)
billing periods.
         c.   Once the allowance for the excess consumption is granted, no
further allowance will be made for a period of twelve (12) months for such
reason.
   B.   Sewer Service Billing Credit:
      1.   Procedure: The Chief Financial Officer may grant a credit allowance
to a customer’s sewer service charges on the water/sewer service bill if the
customer makes a written request to the Chief Financial Officer for a credit
allowance and if: a) the customer’s sewer service charges are calculated based
on the customer’s water consumption; b) the Chief Financial Officer has granted
the customer a credit allowance to water service billing pursuant to subsection
A of this Section; and c) the customer presents evidence to establish to the
satisfaction of the Chief Financial Officer that the water leakage did not
enter the property’s sewer connection and result in an increased flow to the
sewer as determined by the Director of Public Works.
      2.   Amount Of Credit Allowance: The amount of the credit allowance for
the sewer service charge may be up to one-half (1/2) of the amount of the
excess sewer service charges related to the excess water billing determined
pursuant to subsection A of this Section.
   C.   Credit Allowances Applied To Subsequent Bills: All such allowances
provided to the customer as a result of the leakage shall be applied as credits
to the customer’s subsequent water/sewer service bill.
   D.   Director’s Decision Final: The decision of the Chief Financial Officer
on the herein described credit allowances for water and/or sewer services is
final except as given in subsection E of this Section.
   E.   Administrative Limit On Allowance: Upon the Chief Financial Officer
determining the possible allowance credits to the original water service
billing and the original sewer service billing and that the total allowance
could exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), the allowance must be submitted to
the City Council for review and possible approval. (Ord. 1191, 1-19-1993; amd.
Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
11-1-12: PENALTY FOR UNAUTHORIZED SERVICE:
Any owner or occupant of a premises which accesses water service or assists in
providing water service from the City that is unauthorized will have their
water service shut off with twenty four (24) hours posted notice. The owner or
occupant will be charged a disconnection fee and re-connection fee determined
by the City's Master Fee Schedule. Before water service can be resumed, all
outstanding charges must be paid in addition to satisfying any other
corrections determined by the City for unauthorized access.
(Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 1595, 11-19-2019)
CHAPTER 2
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
11-2-1: Purpose
11-2-2: Definitions
11-2-3: Cross-Connection Protection Requirements
11-2-4: Backflow Prevention Devices
11-2-5: User Supervisor
11-2-6: Administrative Procedures
11-2-7: Water Service Termination
11-2-8: Backflow Prevention Device Tester; Certification
11-2-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply against actual or potential
cross-connection by isolating within the premises contamination that may occur
because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises.
      2.   To eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and
other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human
consumption.
      3.   To eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and
sources of contamination.
      4.   To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future. (Ord.
1110, 5-3-1988)
   B.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person at any time to make or
maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any
period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water
fixtures being served with water by the City Public Works Department and any
other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other
appurtenances or fixtures which by reason of their construction may cause or
allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the
City and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the City.
(Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988; amd. 2000 Code)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
   AWWA STANDARD: An official standard developed and approved by the American
Water Works Association (AWWA).
   AIR-GAP SEPARATION: A physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving
vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe
measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one
inch (1").
   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Devices which have passed laboratory
and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which
has demonstrated its competency to perform such tests to the California
Department of Health Services.
   APPROVED WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply whose potability is regulated by a
State or local health agency.
   AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the approved water supply.
   BACKFLOW: A flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that
causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into
the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources
other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of
backflow. Back pressure is the other cause.
   CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water by any
foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may
impair the usefulness or quality of the water.
   CROSS-CONNECTION: As the term is used in this Chapter, means any unprotected
actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply
water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved
water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and
potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or
changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall
be considered to be a cross-connection.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly of at least two (2) independently
acting check valves including tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of
the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the
watertightness of each check valve and shall be purchased and installed as a
unit.
   DOUBLE CHECK, DETECTOR CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: A specially designed assembly
composed of a line-size approved double check valve assembly with a specific
bypass five-eighths inch (5/8"), five- eighths inch by three-fourths inch (5/8"
x 3/4"), or three-fourths inch (3/4") water meter and a three-fourths inch (3/
4") approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately
for only very low flow and shall show a registration for all rates of flow.
This assembly shall only be used to protect against a nonhealth hazard and
shall be purchased and installed as a unit.
   HEALTH AGENCY: The California Department of Health Services, or the local
health agency with respect to a small water system.
   LOCAL HEALTH AGENCY: The County or City health authority.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, company, association, partnership,
municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution.
   POTABLE WATER: Water that is approved for human consumption and meets the
requirements of the health agency having jurisdiction.
   PREMISES: Any and all areas on a water user's property which are served or
have the potential to be served by the public water system.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A system for the provision of piped water to the public
for human consumption which has five (5) or more service connections or
regularly serves an average of twenty five (25) individuals daily at least
sixty (60) days out of the year.
   RECLAIMED WATER: Wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for
uses other than potable use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device
incorporating two (2) or more check valves and an automatically operating
differential relief valve located between the two (2) + checks, a tightly
closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped
with necessary test cocks for testing; and said device shall be purchased and
installed as a unit.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: Refers to the point of connection of a user's piping to
the water supplier's facilities.
   SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
   WATER SUPPLIER: The person who owns or operates the approved water supply
system.
   WATER USER: Any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system.
(Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-3: CROSS-CONNECTION PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are
prohibited.
      2.   Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the City will
require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device by and
at water user's expense for continued services or before a new service will be
granted.
      3.   Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water
supply line entering a water user's premises, then any and all water supply
lines from the City's mains entering such premises, buildings, or structures
shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The type of
device to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this
Chapter.
   B.   Where Protection Required:
      1.   Each service connection from the City water system for supplying
water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against
backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the
auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the City, and is
approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction.
      2.   Each service connection from the City water system for supplying
water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may
allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of
the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the
handling of process waters and waters originating from the City water system
which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality.
      3.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service
connection to any premises having: a) internal cross-connections that cannot be
permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the State or local
Health Department and the City; or b) intricate plumbing and piping
arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily
accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to
ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.
   C.   Type Of Protection Required:
      1.   The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow
into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard
that exists on the consumer's premises. The type of protective device that may
be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double
check valve assembly (DC), double check-detector check valve assembly (DCDC),
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP), and an air-gap
separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than
required by the City. The minimum types of backflow protection required to
protect the approved water supply, at the user's water connection to premises
with varying degrees of hazard are given in Table 1 in subsection D of this
Section. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a
case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined
by the City or health agency.
      2.   Two (2) or more services supplying water from different street mains
to the same building, structure, or premises through which an interstreet main
flow may occur, shall have at least a double check valve assembly on each water
service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective
meters. Such double check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow
protection is deemed necessary to protect the City's mains from pollution or
contamination. In such cases the installation of approved backflow devices at
such service connections shall be required.
   D.   Table 1:
   TYPE OF BACKFLOW PROTECTION REQUIRED
                              Minimum Type Of
                              Backflow Prevention
Degree Of Hazard
1.   Sewage And Hazardous Substances:
   a.   Premises where the public water system
is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply.               AG
   b.   Premises where there are wastewater pumping
and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable
water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has
a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if
approved by the health agency and the City.                  AG
   c.   Premises where reclaimed water is used and there
is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be
provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the
City.      AG
   d.   Premises where hazardous substances are handled in
any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system.
This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump.
An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency
and the City.                                 AG
   e.   Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers,
herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be, injected.               RP
2.   Auxiliary Water Supplies:
   a.   Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water
supply which is interconnected with the public water system. An RP
or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency
and the City.                                 AG
   b.   Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply
and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may
be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and the
City.      RP
3.   Fire Protection Systems:
   a.   Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the
public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply
on or    to the premises (not interconnected).                  DC
   b.   Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public
water system    and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water
supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the
health agency and the City.                         AG
   c.   Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public
water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps
which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used.          DC
4.   Dockside Watering Points And Marine Facilities:            DC
   a.   Pier hydrants for supplying water to vessel for any purpose.      RP
   b.   Premises where there are marine facilities.            RP
5.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for
cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at
sufficiently short notice to    assure that cross-connections do not
exist.      RP
6.   Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections
being    established or re-established.                     RP
7.   Each service connection, domestic or fire service, that serves
a building of 50 feet or more in height above the service line.            DCDC
(Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-4: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Approved Backflow Prevention Devices:
      1.   Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the
City shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the
City's potable water system.
      2.   The City will provide, upon request, to any affected customer a list
of approved backflow prevention devices.
   B.   Backflow Prevention Device Installation:
      1.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner
prescribed in the California Administrative Code title 17, section 7603.
Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user's
connection. The City shall have the final authority in determining the required
location of a backflow prevention device.
         a.   Air-Gap Separation (AG): The air-gap separation shall be located
on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical.
All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above
grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point
between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet
piping shall terminate a distance of at least two (2) pipe diameters of the
supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch (1") above the overflow rim of
the receiving tank.
         b.   Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP): The
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be
purchased as a unit and installed on the user's side of and as close to the
service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of
twelve inches (12") above grade and not more than thirty six inches (36") above
grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of twelve
inches (12") side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is
readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point
between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner
approved by the City.
         c.   Double Check-Detector Check Valve Assembly (DCDC) And Double
Check Valve Assembly (DC): The approved double check-detector check valve
assembly or the approved double check valve assembly shall be installed above
grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing
and maintenance. The DCDC and the DC shall be purchased and installed as a
unit. If a double check valve assembly is installed below grade, it shall be
installed in a vault approved by the City.
   C.   Backflow Prevention Device Testing And Maintenance:
      1.   The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which,
backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a
person who has demonstrated their competency in testing of these devices to the
City. Backflow prevention devices shall be tested annually and immediately
after installation, relocation or repair. The City may require a more frequent
testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed
back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form
acceptable to the City shall be filed with the City each time a device is
tested, relocated, or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or
replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing,
repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user.
      2.   The City will supply affected water users with a list of persons
acceptable to the City to test backflow prevention devices. The City will
notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and
also supply users with the necessary forms which shall be filled out each time
a device is tested or repaired.
   D.   Backflow Prevention Device Removal:
      1.   Approval shall be obtained from the City before a backflow
prevention device is removed, relocated, or replaced.
         a.   Removal: The use of a device may be discontinued and the device
removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the City to
verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the
future;
         b.   Relocation: A device may be relocated following confirmation by
the City that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection
and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the
relocation of the device;
         c.   Repair: A device may be removed for repair, provided the water
use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned
to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow
protection approved by the City. A retest will be required following the repair
of the device; and
         d.   Replacement: A device may be removed and replaced; provided, the
water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All
replacement devices shall be approved by the City and must be commensurate with
the degree of hazard involved. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-5: USER SUPERVISOR:
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the City, a user
supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This
user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow
prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of
contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-
connection on the premises, the City shall be promptly notified by the user
supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the
contamination. The water user shall inform the City of the user supervisor's
identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. (Ord.
1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Water System Survey:
      1.   The City shall review all requests for new services to determine if
backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to
the City upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a
condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a
backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the
required device shall be installed before service will be granted.
      2.   The City may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-
connection hazards. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises
inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow
prevention device the City considers necessary.
      3.   The City may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-
connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. Any customer which
cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall
be required to install the backflow prevention device the City considers
necessary.
      4.   In administering and enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, the
City, bearing proper credentials and identification, may at any reasonable hour
enter upon any premises, subject to approval of the occupant. If the owner or
occupier refuses to allow entry, the City may do so after obtaining an
appropriate warrant.
      5.   If the City has reasonable cause to believe that there are
violations of this Chapter occurring that are so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous
as to require immediate inspection to protect the public health or safety, the
City shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and
may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such
inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not
permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, he shall
first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining
his reasons therefor and the purpose of his inspection. No person shall fail or
refuse to permit reasonable inspection.
   B.   Customer Notification; Device Installation:
      1.   The City will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing
corrective action to be taken if required. A period of sixty (60) days will be
given to complete all corrective action required including installation of
backflow prevention devices.
      2.   A second notice will be sent to each water user which does not take
the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the sixty
(60) day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two (2)
week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken
within the two (2) week period, the City may terminate water service to the
affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken.
   C.   Customer Notification; Testing and Maintenance:
      1.   The City will notify each affected water user when it is time for
the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be
tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty (30) days to have
the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be
completed and resubmitted to the City.
      2.   A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have
their backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice
within the thirty (30) day period allowed. The second notice will give the
water user a two (2) week period to have their backflow prevention device
tested. If no action is taken within the two (2) week period, the City may
terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is
tested. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-7: WATER SERVICE TERMINATION:
   A.   General: When the City encounters water uses that represent a clear and
immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated,
the City shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the City water
service.
   B.   Basis For Termination: Conditions or water uses that create a basis for
water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following
items:
      1.   Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device.
      2.   Refusal to test a backflow prevention device.
      3.   Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device.
      4.   Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device.
      5.   Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a
sewer line.
      6.   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water
system and a system or equipment containing contaminants.
      7.   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water
system and an auxiliary water system.
      8.   A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public
water system.
   C.   Water Service Termination Procedures:
      1.   For conditions in subsections B1, B2, B3, or B4 of this Section, the
City will terminate service to a customer's premises after two (2) written
notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time
period in which it shall be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time
period, water service may be terminated.
      2.   For conditions in subsections B5, B6, B7, or B8 of this Section, the
City will take the following steps:
         a.   Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to
terminate water service.
         b.   Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service
will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the
City. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTER; CERTIFICATION:
The following are minimum requirements:
   A.   Experience: Applicants shall have had at least two (2) years'
experience in plumbing or pipefitting or equivalent qualifications.
   B.   Certification Or Training: Hold a valid certification from the American
Water Works Association (AWWA) California-Nevada section, from a County
certification program, or have equivalent training in the opinion of the City
and the Health Department.
   C.   Tools And Equipment: Applicants for certification as testers of
backflow prevention devices shall furnish evidence to show that they have
available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test such devices. They
shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports
prepared by them. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
CHAPTER 3
UNDERGROUND OR OVERHEAD UTILITIES
SECTION:
11-3-1: Definitions
11-3-2: Public Hearing By Council
11-3-3: Report By City Engineer
11-3-4: Designation Of Underground Utility Districts
11-3-5: Unlawful Acts
11-3-6: Exceptions
11-3-7: Notice To Property Owners And Utility Companies
11-3-8: Utility Companies, Responsibility
11-3-9: Property Owners, Responsibility
11-3-10: City, Responsibility
11-3-11: Extension Of Time
11-3-12: Overhead Utilities Owned by Public Agencies
11-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases defined in this Section are used,
they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following
definitions:
   COMMISSION: The Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
   PERSON: Means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships,
and their agents and employees.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES: Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT OR DISTRICT: That area in the City within which
poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as
such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter.
   UTILITY: Includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication
or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-2: PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL:
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the
public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of
the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying
electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall
notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment
roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at
least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open
to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all
persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of
the Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-3: REPORT BY CITY ENGINEER:
Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult all
affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing
containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities'
participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected
property owners. Such report shall, where feasible, also contain an estimate of
the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of
overhead facilities. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-4: DESIGNATION OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS:
If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public necessity,
health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such
removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within
which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and
within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground
service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and
equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect,
construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when
said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except
as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or
occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive
utility service as provided in Section
11-3-9 of this Chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove said
facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided
in this Chapter. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-6: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Emergency Or Unusual Circumstances: Notwithstanding the provisions of
this Chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period,
not to exceed thirty (30) days, without authority of the City Engineer in order
to provide emergency service. The City Engineer may grant special permission,
on such terms as the City Engineer may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual
circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect,
construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures.
   B.   Other Exceptions: In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter, the City may authorize any or all of the following
exceptions:
      1.   Any Municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
      2.   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.
      3.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated structures
are not prohibited.
      4.   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for
the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty
four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts.
      5.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by
means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the
building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.
      6.   Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a
utility for furnishing communication services.
      7.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts.
      8.   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 718, 6-23-
1969)
11-3-7: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES:
   A.   Time Limit: Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a
resolution adopted pursuant to Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and
all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution
of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected
property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such
property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location.
   B.   Mailing Notice: Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing
a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter, together with a copy of this Chapter, to affected
property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to
the affected utilities. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-8: UTILITY COMPANIES, RESPONSIBILITY:
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the
conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
Commission. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-9: PROPERTY OWNERS, RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Notice From City: Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or
renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide
that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in Section
11-3-8 of this Chapter and the termination facility on or within said building
or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person
within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter, the City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the
person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner
thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required
underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice.
   B.   Sending Notice; Posting Premises: The notice to provide the required
underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In
case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited
in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed
to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice
must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must
be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last
equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery,
City of El Segundo. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to
have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty eight
(48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the
owner or occupant of such premises, the City Engineer shall, within forty eight
(48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card
not less than eight inches by ten inches (8" x 10") in size, to be posted in a
conspicuous place on said premises.
   C.   Contents Of Notice: The notice given by the City Engineer to provide
the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is
required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within
thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the City Engineer will provide
such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense
thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon
such property.
   D.   Failure To Provide Facilities; City Work, Cost Assessment:
      1.   If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said
required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer shall
forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are
unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished
thereto, the City Engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground
facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any
and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility
service to said property.
      2.   Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a
written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required
underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a
legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed.
      3.   The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing
protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises,
which said time shall not be less than ten (10) days thereafter.
   E.   Notice Of Hearing Against Assessment: The City Engineer shall
forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a
notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in
writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for
the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the
time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear
protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount
of the proposed assessment.
   F.   Council Decision: Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of
protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if
there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
   G.   Unpaid Assessment; Lien: If any assessment is not paid within five (5)
days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall
become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the
City Engineer, and the City Engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor
and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the
assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector shall add the
amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the
premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due
and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if
not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent
(6%) per annum. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-10: CITY, RESPONSIBILITY:
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or
user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-11: EXTENSION OF TIME:
In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted
pursuant to Section
11-3-4 of this Chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account
of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be
extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 718, 6-
23-1969)
11-3-12: OVERHEAD UTILITIES OWNED BY PUBLIC AGENCIES:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this Section to supplement the provisions
of this Chapter by providing for the regulation of overhead utilities owned by
public agencies. The Public Utilities Commission of the State has provided an
orderly manner for the elimination of privately owned overhead installations
belonging to public utilities, and the City has implemented that requirement in
this Chapter. It is the purpose of this Section to provide regulations for
publicly owned utilities not subject to the requirements of the Public
Utilities Commission of the State.
   B.   Definitions: The definitions contained in Section
11-3-1 of this Chapter shall be applicable to this Section. In addition, the
term "public agency" means and includes the State of California and all cities,
counties, agencies, subdivisions, and municipal corporations of the State of
California, including, but not limited to, the County of Los Angeles and the
Cities of Manhattan Beach and Los Angeles.
   C.   Overhead Wires Prohibited: Except as provided in subsections D and E of
this Section and except in the M-1 and M-2 Zones, no public agency shall erect
or install, or place or replace any poles, towers, wires, conduits, cables, or
other structure or device, above the surface of the ground, nor shall any
public agency expand or enlarge or increase any existing installation located
above the surface of the ground except in the M-1 and M-2 Zones.
   D.   Exceptional Or Emergency Circumstances: In exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions, or emergency situations, overhead facilities may
be installed and maintained by a public agency for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days upon the approval of the City Engineer.
   E.   Amortization And Removal: On and after January 1, 1995, no public
agency shall keep or maintain any overhead utility service within the City
except in the M-1 and M-2 Zones and except for emergency installations
authorized by subsection D of this Section. Every public agency shall, on or
before December 31, 1994, remove any overhead installation whether now existing
or hereafter erected or constructed from all portions of the City except the M-
1 and M-2 Zones. (Ord. 730, 1-12-1970)
TITLE 12
PUBLIC SEWER FACILITIES
General Provisions, Policies And Procedures   1
Administration; Rules; Inspections   2
Sewer Connections; Specifications; Manholes   3
Industrial Waste And Disposal   4
Unauthorized Disposal   5
Enforcement   6
Sewer Use Fee   7
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS, POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
12-1-1: Purpose
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: Applicability
12-1-4: Scope
12-1-5: Strict Interpretation
12-1-6: Liquid Waste Disposal Policy
12-1-7: Minimum Standards For Sewage Plants
12-1-8: Maintenance Of Sewers And Appurtenances
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Title is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by providing for beneficial public use of the City sewer system through
regulation of sewer construction, sewer use and industrial wastewater
discharges; to prevent any discharge which may reasonably interfere with the
operation of the system; to provide for equitable distribution of the sewer
system costs; to provide procedures for complying with requirements placed on
the City by State and Federal laws; and to provide funds for the operation and
maintenance of the City sewer system by imposing a service charge upon the
users of these facilities. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, certain words and phrases shall be construed
herein as set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context
that a different meaning is intended:
   AVERAGE DAILY FLOW: The number of gallons of sewage discharged into the
public sewers during a twenty four (24) hour period.
   BOD OR BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The measure of decomposable organic
material in domestic or industrial wastewaters as represented by the oxygen
utilized over a period of five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) and
as determined by the appropriate procedure in "Standard Methods".
   COD OR CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The measure of chemically decomposable
material in domestic or industrial wastewater as represented by the oxygen
utilized as determined by the appropriate procedure described in "Standard
Methods".
   CESSPOOL: Excavation or underground structure which receives any discharge
of a drainage system and is constructed to retain organic matter and solids
discharged therein but which permits the liquids to seep through the bottom and
sides.
   CHIMNEY: A vertical section of a sewer pipe extending either from a tee set
ninety degrees (90°) to the main line or from a wye and a one-quarter bend set
vertically at the curb or property line, and in either case suitably reinforced
with concrete.
   CHLORINE DEMAND: The difference between the amount of chlorine added to a
wastewater sample and the amount remaining at the end of a thirty (30) minute
period as determined by the procedures given in "Standard Methods".
   CLARIFICATION: The process of removal and retention of turbidity, settleable
solids, deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter from wastes by
sedimentation or flotation.
   CLARIFIER OR INTERCEPTOR: A device or structure which separates and retains
suspended solids, settleable solids, deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable
matter from wastes prior to discharge into public sewer.
   COMMERCIAL USE: Any commercial or business establishment, office, hotel,
motel, or hospital.
   CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the underground or surface
waters by sewage or industrial waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the
public health through poisoning or the spread of disease.
   DISCHARGER: Any person who discharges or causes a discharge to a public
sewer.
   DISSOLVED SOLIDS OR DISSOLVED MATTER: The solid matter in solution in
wastewater as obtained by evaporation of a sample from which all suspended
matter has been removed by filtration as determined by the procedures in
"Standard Methods".
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: The water-carried wastes not produced from commercial
or industrial activity and which result from normal human living processes.
   EFFLUENT: The liquid flowing out of any facility operated for treatment of
sewage or industrial waste.
   FACILITY: A pipe or structure constructed for the purpose of collecting,
conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of industrial wastewater and sewage.
   GROSS ANNUAL INCOME OF THE HOUSEHOLD: The income of every member of the
household received during the year for which the refund is claimed and shall
include, but not be limited to, wages, salaries, bonuses, tips, gross amount of
pensions and annuities, retirement benefits, social security payments,
disability payments, life insurance benefits, interest, capital gains and
inheritances.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA: The area included within the exterior of the surrounding
walls of a building or portions thereof, exclusive of courts.
   HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER OR LATERAL: That part of the sewer piping within the
street or public right of way which extends from the house sewer to a
connection with the public sewer.
   HOUSE SEWER: That part of the sewer piping beginning two feet (2') from the
exterior wall of a building, structure or foundation and extending to its
connection with the house connection sewer.
   INDUSTRIAL CONNECTION SEWER: A house connection sewer used primarily for the
discharge of industrial waste.
   INDUSTRIAL USE: Any manufacturing or processing activity, airport or
railroad.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Liquid or solid waste, except domestic sewage, including
radioactive substances and explosives, and noxious or toxic gas in the sewer
system.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT FACILITY: Any works or device for
the treatment of industrial waste, prior to discharge into the public sewer.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: All water-carried wastes and wastewater excluding
domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water, and shall include all wastewater
from commercial, manufacturing, institutional, agricultural, or other
operations where it includes significant quantities of wastes of nonhuman
origin.
   INSPECTOR: A person authorized by the Public Works Director to inspect
wastewater facilities.
   LICENSED: Licensed and registered by the State.
   LOT: Any parcel of land occupied or to be occupied for use permitted by this
Code.
   MANHOLE: An access structure to a public sewer or storm drain, usually
located in a street right of way, covered by a flat metal hatch.
   OTHER USE: Any use not defined, including schools, churches, and the like.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ion in grams per
liter of solution.
   PARKWAY: That portion of a public street which is not improved, designed,
and ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   PEAK FLOW OR PEAK FLOW RATE: The maximum thirty (30) minute rate of sewage
flow to be generated from the premises as estimated by the Public Works
Director.
   PERSON: Every owner, tenant, occupant or person having the care or control
of any premises in the City and shall include the Federal, State and County
Government and all cities and districts except the City of El Segundo.
   POLLUTION: An impairment in the quality of the underground or surface water
by sewage or industrial waste which adversely affects the use of such waters
for domestic, industrial, agricultural, or other beneficial purposes.
   PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT FACILITY: See definition of Industrial Waste
Pretreatment or Treatment Facility.
   PUBLIC SEWER: A main line sanitary sewer, dedicated to public use and owned
by the City.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works of the City or his duly
authorized representative.
   RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL: Material containing chemical elements that
spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays or
energy forms.
   RESIDENTIAL USE: Any single- or multiple-family dwelling.
   SEEPAGE PIT: An excavation in the ground which receives the effluent from a
septic tank and permits the effluent to seep through the ground.
   SEPTIC TANK: A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge from a
sewer system, which retains solids, digests organic matter, and permits the
liquids to discharge into the soil through a cesspool, leach field or other
method.
   SEWAGE: The wastewater of the community received by the sewer system
consisting of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
and industrial buildings, and institutions, and of such a character as to
permit satisfactory disposal without special treatment into the public sewer
system.
   SEWER: The conduit that carries sewage in the sewer system.
   SEWER SYSTEM: All of the property involved in the collection, treatment and
disposal of sewage of the community including land, sewers and appurtenances,
pumping stations, treatment works and equipment.
   SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
   SOLID WASTES: Wastes that are not water-carried and that are suitable for
disposal with refuse at sanitary landfill refuse disposal sites.
   STANDARD METHODS: The current edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association.
   STORM DRAIN: A conduit or channel which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage other than polluted wastewaters.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR SUSPENDED MATTER: The insoluble solid matter suspended
in wastewater that is separable by filtration in accordance with the procedure
described in "Standard Methods".
   TAPPING: The forming of a connection to a public sewer after the sewer is in
place.
   TEE SADDLE: A short pipe fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the
application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the public sewer forming a
ninety degree (90°) angle to the public sewer pipe.
   TOXIC OR POISONOUS SUBSTANCE: Any solid, liquid or gas in sufficient
quantity or concentration, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
which tends to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or
creates any hazard in the receiving waters of a sewage treatment facility.
   TRADE SECRETS: Any formulas, plans, processes, tools, mechanisms,
procedures, compilations of information, or other materials or methods which
are not patented, which are known only to certain individuals within a
commercial concern and are used to fabricate, produce or compound an article of
trade or a service having commercial value, and which provide an opportunity
for a business advantage over competitors.
   UNCONTAMINATED WATER: Any water utilized by the community which is not
contaminated or polluted with wastewater or sewage and which is suitable or
could readily be made suitable for discharge to the storm water drainage
system.
   WASTEWATER: The water-carried wastes of the community derived from human or
industrial sources including domestic and industrial wastewater. Rainwater,
ground water, or drainage of uncontaminated water is not wastewater.
   WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the flow of storm or
surface waters.
   WYE SADDLE: A short pipe fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the
application of a fitting to a hole tapped in the public sewer forming a forty
five degree (45°) angle to the public sewer pipe. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Facilities: This Title shall apply to all sewer facilities in the City,
including house connection sewers, house sewers, industrial connection sewers,
interceptors, sewage and industrial waste treatment plants, sewage pumping
plant, and their appurtenances, except that nonconforming facilities may be
continued in use for one year from the effective date of this Title, or until
such longer time as may be permitted by the Public Works Director, if they
complied with the applicable provisions of law before this Title became
effective.
   B.   Discharges: This Title shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge
of all liquid-carried wastes to the sewer system of the City. This Title shall
also apply to discharges of all liquid wastes into the City's storm drainage
system and all waters of the State. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-4: SCOPE:
This Title provides for the regulation of discharges into the City sewer system
through the issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharge containing
specific discharge requirements, as well as other permits, and through
enforcement of general discharge prohibitions; imposes regulations for waste
pretreatment and for sewer construction within the City; authorizes monitoring
and enforcement activities; imposes reporting requirements on specific permits;
sets the quantity and quality of discharged wastes; establishes penalties for
violation of provisions of this Title; and sets fees for the recovery of
program costs. This Title is applicable to all discharges within the City and
to all persons outside the City who discharge into the City's sewer system.
Except as otherwise provided, the Public Works Director of the City shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-
20-1987)
12-1-5: STRICT INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this Title and of all rules, regulations and permits
promulgated or issued hereunder shall be strictly construed and applied. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-6: LIQUID WASTE DISPOSAL POLICY:
   A.   General: Generally, liquid wastes originating within the City will be
removed by the City sewer system, unless the wastes cause damage to structures,
create nuisances such as odors, menace public health, impose unreasonable
collection, treatment or disposal costs on the City, violate quantity and
quality requirements prescribed by State and Federal laws, interfere with
wastewater treatment processes, violate applicable State and Federal laws, or
detrimentally affect the environment.
   B.   Cesspools And Septic Tanks: The disposal of sewage by means of septic
tanks and cesspools or leach fields is a nonconforming sewer facility in the
City and their use is to be discontinued pursuant to subsection
12-1-3A of this Chapter. If it can be demonstrated to the Public Works Director
that the continued use of such facilities is necessary because of geographical
or other conditions, then such use shall be permitted until public sewers are
installed making it unnecessary to use cesspools and septic tanks.
   C.   Highest And Best Use: The highest and best use of the City sewer system
is the conveyance, treatment and disposal of domestic wastewater. The use of
the City sewer system for the discharge of industrial wastewater is subject to
further regulation by the City.
   D.   Water Reclamation: In compliance with requirements of Federal and State
agencies, the City is or may be committed to a policy of wastewater and reuse
in order to provide an alternate source of water for nondomestic use and to
reduce costs of wastewater treatment and disposal.
   E.   Industrial Wastewater: In conformance with policies of Federal and
State agencies which establish higher standards of treatment plant effluent
quality, provisions are made in this Title for the regulation of industrial
wastewater discharges. This Title establishes quantity and quality limitations
on industrial wastewater discharges which may adversely affect the City sewer
system or effluent quality. Fees to recover costs from industrial wastewater
dischargers are also established where the dischargers impose inequitable
collection, treatment or disposal costs on the City. Optimum use of the City
facilities may require the Public Works Director to limit certain industrial
wastewater discharges to periods of low flow in the sewer system. (Ord. 1093,
1-20-1987)
12-1-7: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SEWAGE PLANTS:
Sewage and industrial waste treatment plants and facilities shall only
discharge effluents to the City sewer system that meet the requirements of the
Public Works Director as described in an industrial wastewater discharge
permit. If the discharge is to a storm drain system, the requirements of the
California Regional Water Quality Control Board must be met. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-1-8: MAINTENANCE OF SEWERS AND APPURTENANCES:
All house connection sewers, house sewers, industrial connection sewers,
clarifiers, sewage and industrial waste treatment facilities, private
pretreatment plants, sewage pumping plants, and their appurtenances shall be
maintained in good operating condition and in conformity with applicable law by
the owner of the property which such facilities serve. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION; RULES; INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Administration By Public Works Director
12-2-2: Rules And Regulations
12-2-3: Records
12-2-4: Trade Secrets
12-2-5: Inspection Authorized
12-2-6: Access For Inspection; Interference Prohibited
12-2-7: Purpose Of Inspection
12-2-8: Maintenance Inspections
12-2-9: Installation Of Control Manhole
12-2-10: Chemical Shut-Off Requirement
12-2-11: Permanent Or Temporary Obstructions
12-2-12: Certificate Of Final Inspection
12-2-13: Sewer Fund
12-2-14: Violations; Notice; Complaint
12-2-1: ADMINISTRATION BY PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
The Public Works Director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
Title and supervise the construction of public sewers in streets and public
sewer easements owned by the City. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Adoption: The Public Works Director may prescribe rules and regulations
not inconsistent with this Title as are reasonably necessary for the lawful and
efficient operation of the City sewer system including, but not limited to,
rules and regulations mandated by State and Federal laws. Such rules and
regulations shall become effective when adopted by resolution of the City
Council. Such rules and regulations shall consider the quantity, quality and
means of disposal of sewage and industrial wastes as well as geographic,
topographic, and physical construction factors and treatment methods in the
sewer system and the beneficial uses of the water in the system or of waters
receiving discharge therefrom.
   B.   Notice: The Public Works Director shall serve on each person holding a
permit under this Title a copy of all rules and regulations adopted by the City
Council that are applicable to said permit. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-3: RECORDS:
The Public Works Director shall keep complete records of all permit
applications and permits issued under this Title including the location; plans
and specific description of the use; the names and addresses of applicants and
permittees; and records of all fees paid pursuant to this Title, with the names
of the persons making payments, dates of payments, purposes and amounts of the
payments. These records shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-2-4: TRADE SECRETS:
To the extent permitted by State law, any record, report, or information that
may become known to the City in the course of implementation or enforcement of
the provisions of this Title which if made public would divulge methods or
processes entitled to protection as trade secrets, shall not be made public by
the City if the person from whom said data is obtained requests in writing that
the City maintain the confidentiality of said data. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-5: INSPECTION AUTHORIZED:
   A.   Entry And Inspection On Private Property: In administering and
enforcing the provisions of this Title, the Public Works Director, bearing
proper credentials and identification, may at any reasonable hour enter upon
any premises, subject to approval of the occupant. If the owner or occupier
refuses to allow entry, the Public Works Director may do so after obtaining an
appropriate warrant.
   B.   Emergency Entry; Denial Constitutes Misdemeanor: Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if the Public Works Director has reasonable cause to believe that
there are violations of this Title occurring that are so hazardous, unsafe or
dangerous as to require immediate inspection to protect the public health or
safety, the Public Works Director shall have the right to immediately enter and
inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such
entry and make such inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied
and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is
occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand
entry, explaining his reasons therefor and the purpose of his inspection. No
person shall fail or refuse to permit reasonable inspection. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-2-6: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Facilities Inspection: Inspection of every facility involved with the
discharge of wastewater to the City sewer system may be made by the Public
Works Director. These facilities shall include, but not be limited to, sewers,
sewage pumping plants, pollution control plants, all industrial processes,
industrial wastewater generation, conveyance and pretreatment facilities, and
similar facilities. Inspections may be made to determine whether such
facilities comply with the provisions of this Title.
   B.   Access: Access to such facilities shall be given to authorized
personnel of the City at all reasonable times and whenever emergency conditions
exist. Any obstruction to access to the sewage facility to be inspected shall
promptly be removed by the facility user or owner at the written or verbal
request of the Public Works Director and shall not be replaced.
   C.   Interference Or Refusal: No person shall interfere with, delay, or
refuse entrance to authorized City personnel attempting to inspect any facility
connected directly or indirectly to the City sewer system. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-2-7: PURPOSE OF INSPECTION:
The Public Works Director may, as herein provided, enter private property to
exercise any power vested in him by this Title, including the power to
determine:
   A.   The size, depth and location of any connection with a public sewer or
storm drain.
   B.   The quantity, quality and nature of industrial waste, sewage, or
surface waters being discharged into a public sewer, storm drain, or
watercourse.
   C.   The effectiveness of any device used to prevent waste prohibited by
this Title from entering any sewer, storm drain or watercourse.
   D.   The location of roof, swimming pool, and surface drains, and whether
they are connected to a street gutter, storm drain, or sewer.
   E.   The nature of liquids and the condition of processing equipment which
are a potential hazard to the City sewer system.
   F.   Whether there is compliance with the provisions of this Title. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-8: MAINTENANCE INSPECTIONS:
The Public Works Director may inspect, as often as he deems necessary, every
public sewer, sewage pumping plant, sewage or industrial waste pretreatment or
treatment facility, industrial connection sewer, clarifier, dilution basin,
neutralization basin, or other similar appurtenance, to ascertain whether such
facilities are maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of
this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-9: INSTALLATION OF CONTROL MANHOLE:
The Public Works Director may require a control manhole of a design he approves
to be furnished and installed by any industrial wastewater discharger to
facilitate inspection and sampling by the City or other governmental agencies.
Such manholes shall be constructed at locations approved by the Public Works
Director and authorized City personnel shall have unrestricted access thereto
at all times consistent with the provisions of subsection
12-2-5B of this Chapter. Access of others to such manholes shall be restricted
by appropriate security measures. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-10: CHEMICAL SHUT-OFF REQUIREMENT:
A means shall be provided to effect immediate cessation of discharge of liquid
chemicals, process solutions, or spent process solutions into the City sewer as
a result of spills, overflows, leaks, failure of containers or inadvertent
discharges. Such means of cessation shall include, but not be limited to,
installation of automatic valves, gates, or bypasses to impervious containers
which when activated will stop water supply to and the discharge from
industrial processes. The discharger shall submit details of the proposed
measures and drawings before installation and obtain approval from the Public
Works Director. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-11: PERMANENT OR TEMPORARY OBSTRUCTIONS:
No person shall install, construct, or place any permanent or temporary object
or structure in a location where it will interfere with ready and easy access
to any pretreatment or treatment facility, sampling compartment, manhole, flow
metering device, or any instrumentality for which a permit is required by this
Title. Any such obstruction shall be removed upon order of the Public Works
Director by the person responsible for it, at no expense to the City. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-12: CERTIFICATE OF FINAL INSPECTION:
When the Public Works Director is satisfied that all work done under a permit
issued pursuant to this Title has been constructed according to and meets the
requirements of this Title and such other applicable provisions of law, and
that all required fees have been paid, he shall, upon request therefor, issue
to the permittee constructing such work a certificate of final inspection,
which shall recite that the work covered by the permit has been constructed
according to this Title and is approved. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-13: SEWER FUND:
All fees received by the City under this Title shall be deposited in a Sewer
Fund maintained by the City Treasurer. The monies received and the interest
thereon shall be used for the operation, maintenance and expansion of the City
sewer system. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-14: VIOLATIONS; NOTICE; COMPLAINT:
   A.   Violations: It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this
Title, the conditions or limitations of any permit issued under this Title, or
any rule or regulation prescribed and adopted pursuant to this Title.
   B.   Notice; Complaint: Before requesting a criminal complaint, the Public
Works Director may notify any person found to be in violation of this Title or
of any limitation or requirement of a permit issued hereunder. (Ord. 1093, 1-
20-1987)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER CONNECTIONS; SPECIFICATIONS; MANHOLES
SECTION:
12-3-1: Permits Required
12-3-2: Easement Required
12-3-3: Excessive Discharge Of Sewage
12-3-4: Environmental Impact Report
12-3-5: Fees
12-3-6: Tapping Public Sewer
12-3-7: Specifications And Grades
12-3-8: House Connection Sewers, Serve One Lot
12-3-9: Connecting Cesspools Or Septic Tanks
12-3-10: Disconnection Of Unlawful Connection
12-3-11: Cost Of Repair To Public Sewer
12-3-12: Discharge Into Manhole; Permit; Fee
12-3-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Sewer Connection: No person shall connect to or tap a public sewer of
the City or maintain a connection or tap to such sewer without obtaining a
permit from the Public Works Director.
   B.   Excavations: No permit to connect to or tap a public sewer shall be
issued unless a permit is also obtained pursuant to
Title 9, Chapter 2 this Code, if applicable. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-2: EASEMENT REQUIRED:
No permit shall be issued to connect a house sewer or house connection sewer to
a public sewer if the connection or any portion thereof is in, under, or on a
lot not owned by the person whose house is to be connected and no recorded
easement exists authorizing the connection of such lot. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-3: EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE:
No permit shall be issued to connect to or tap a public sewer unless said sewer
has sufficient sewage capacity to receive the intended discharge. The Public
Works Director may require the discharger to restrict the discharge until
sufficient capacity is available, or to construct a public sewer to provide
sufficient capacity. The Public Works Director may refuse service to persons
locating facilities in areas where their proposed quantity or quality of sewage
or industrial wastewater is unacceptable to the available treatment facility.
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-4: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT:
No permit to connect to or tap a public sewer shall be issued if the proposed
use of the public sewer may have a significant effect on the environment unless
the environmental review process has been completed pursuant to the
requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act 1 . (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
 
Notes
1 1. Pub.Res.C. § 21000 et seq.
12-3-5: FEES:
   A.   Sewer Connection Fees: Except as otherwise provided in this Title, no
permit to connect to or tap a public sewer shall be issued unless the
prescribed sewer connection fees have been paid to the City. The sewer
connection fee shall be fixed and established from time to time by the City
Council by resolution.
   B.   Increase Or Reduction Of Fee: The City Council may, for good cause,
increase, remit or reduce all or any portion of any fee or charge prescribed by
this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-6: TAPPING PUBLIC SEWER:
   A.   Application For Tap: When, in the opinion of the Public Works Director,
a house connection sewer should be connected to a public sewer at a point where
there is no connection facility, application for a public sewer tap shall be
submitted and a sewer connection fee for each tap shall be paid before the
permit is issued for construction of the house connection sewer.
   B.   Tapping In Presence Of City Employee: All tapping of public sewers
shall be made by a licensed sewer contractor in the presence and to the
satisfaction of an inspector acting under the authority of the Public Works
Director. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-7: SPECIFICATIONS AND GRADES:
Connections to public sewers shall comply with the following:
   A.   Cast Iron Pipe: House connection sewers shall be made with pipe of cast
iron, clay or other material, approved by the Public Works Director.
   B.   City Specifications: The pipe of the house connection sewer shall be
laid in conformity with City specifications for public sewers.
   C.   Alignment: The pipe shall be laid in a straight alignment and at a
uniform slope, and shall have a fall of at least one foot (1') in fifty feet
(50') unless the Public Works Director determines that an exception is
warranted.
   D.   Depth: The pipe must be at least three and one-half feet (31/2') below
an established street or alley grade where it crosses the property line on the
date of installation unless the Public Works Director determines that an
exception is warranted.
   E.   Right Angle From Connection: The alignment of the house connection
sewer must be at right angles from the connection to the public sewer unless
the Public Works Director determines that an exception is warranted.
   F.   Wye Or Tee Saddles: A collar wye or tee saddle shall be installed in
tapped public sewers by cutting a properly proportioned hole in the public
sewer and fitting the saddle tightly in place. Wye saddles shall be placed in
the side of the public sewer with the wye branch so pointed as to direct the
flow from the house connection sewer downstream at approximately a forty five
degree (45°) angle with the public sewer, and tilted upward at approximately
forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal. Tee saddles shall be used for the
construction of chimney pipes and for connections to twelve inch (12") diameter
and larger public sewers and tilted upward at approximately forty five degrees
(45°) from the horizontal or as approved by the Public Works Director.
   G.   Wye Or Tee Connection: No house or industrial waste connection to a
public sewer shall be made, except through a wye or tee branch, without written
permission from the Public Works Director. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-8: HOUSE CONNECTION SEWERS, SERVE ONE LOT:
No more than one lot shall be connected to any one house connection sewer.
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-9: CONNECTING CESSPOOLS OR SEPTIC TANKS:
No person shall connect any cesspool, seepage pit or septic tank to any public
sewer or to any house sewer or house connection sewer. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-10: DISCONNECTION OF UNLAWFUL CONNECTION:
The Public Works Director may disconnect any house connection sewer installed
or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Title. Reconnection of
such a disconnected sewer shall be made only upon issuance of a permit as
provided in this Title. Before such permit is issued or considered, the
applicant shall reimburse the City for all cost resulting from the
disconnection. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-11: COST OF REPAIR TO PUBLIC SEWER:
Any person who unlawfully obstructs, damages, destroys, or removes any public
sewer, or appurtenance thereof, shall reimburse the City for the reasonable
cost of necessary flushing, cleaning, repairing and reconstruction of the sewer
within thirty (30) days after written request from the Public Works Director to
do so. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-12: DISCHARGE INTO MANHOLE; PERMIT; FEE:
   A.   Opening Manhole: No person shall open, enter, or allow to remain open,
any manhole in any public sewer without a permit from the Public Works
Director.
   B.   Disposal Of Cesspool Effluent: No person shall deposit cesspool
effluent or any waste or sewage into a manhole without a permit from the Public
Works Director. The Public Works Director may permit disposal of cesspool
effluent into designated manholes by operators of cesspool pump trucks holding
valid County Health Department certificates of registration upon payment of a
disposal fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each truckload,
provided the effluent contains no substance which he determines to be
deleterious; and further provided, that the cesspool wastes originated from
cesspools within the City.
   C.   Method Of Disposal: Cesspool effluent deposited into a manhole in
accordance with this Section shall be discharged through a pipe or hose in such
a manner that none of the effluent adheres to the sides or shelf of the
manhole. If any effluent adheres to the sides or shelf of the manhole, it shall
be removed by the operator of the cesspool pump truck. Said operator shall
leave the sides and shelf of the manhole clean. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
CHAPTER 4
INDUSTRIAL WASTE AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
12-4-1: Industrial Waste Permit
12-4-2: Review And Action On Applications
12-4-3: Conditions Imposed
12-4-4: Environmental Impact Report
12-4-5: Conditions Changed
12-4-6: Unlawful Discharge Of Industrial Waste
12-4-7: Fees; Exceptions
12-4-8: Annual Inspection Fee
12-4-9: Annual Quality Surcharge Fee
12-4-10: Annual Cost Of Treatment Fee
12-4-11: Due Dates
12-4-12: Delinquency; Additional Charge
12-4-13: Suspension And Revocation Of Permit
12-4-14: Transfer Of Permits
12-4-15: Disclosure And Measurement Of Waste Products
12-4-16: Food Wastes
12-4-17: Temperature Of Waste
12-4-1: INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall discharge any industrial waste into
any City sewer or storm drain without first obtaining an industrial waste
permit from the Public Works Director in the case of discharge to the sewer,
and from the California Regional Water Quality Control Board in the case of
discharge to the storm drain.
   B.   Industrial Waste Disposal By Landfill: If a person chooses to dispose
of industrial waste material by hauling said material to an authorized disposal
site, he shall apply for an industrial waste permit as provided herein.
   C.   Application For Permit: Applications for industrial waste permits shall
be filed in writing with the Public Works Director and shall be supplemented by
such additional information as he may require. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
   D.   Permit Fee: Applications for permits shall be accompanied by an
application fee based on the nature of work required to process the permit,
which shall be fixed and established from time to time by the City Council by
resolution. (Ord. 1268, 3-18-1997)
12-4-2: REVIEW AND ACTION ON APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Review: The Public Works Director shall review all applications for
industrial waste permits to determine that the proposed discharge of waste will
not violate any provision of this Title or State and Federal laws.
   B.   Action: Within thirty (30) days after the Public Works Director
receives an application for an industrial waste permit, he shall, pursuant to
this Title, grant or deny the permit and notify the applicant of the action
taken. Such time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the Public
Works Director and the applicant. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-3: CONDITIONS IMPOSED:
The Public Works Director, in granting a permit, may impose conditions
consistent with the purpose of this Title, including, but not limited to,
pretreatment of wastewater before discharge, restriction of peak flow
discharges or of discharge of certain substances, limitation of discharge to
certain hours, and payment of additional charges to defray increased costs to
the City created by the discharge. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-4: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT:
No industrial waste permit shall be granted if the proposed use of the public
sewer may significantly affect the environment, unless the environmental review
process has been completed pursuant to the requirements of the California
Environmental Quality Act 1 . (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. Pub.Res.C. § 21000 et seq.
12-4-5: CONDITIONS CHANGED:
Whenever the operators of the treatment facilities, through which effluent from
the City's sewerage system is discharged, require any modification of the
conditions or composition of the effluent, the Director of Public Works may
impose conditions upon any industrial waste permit in order to conform with
such requirements or may revoke or suspend any such industrial waste permit.
When possible, the permit holder shall be allowed sixty (60) days after notice
within which to comply with the conditions of the permit. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-4-6: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE:
No person shall directly or indirectly discharge industrial waste into the City
sewer system unless the Public Works Director has determined that the substance
to be discharged will not violate the provisions of this Title or the water
quality standards for receiving waters established by other government
agencies. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-7: FEES; EXCEPTIONS:
The fees established in Sections
12-4-8 and
12-4-9 of this Chapter shall be applicable to all sewer connections within the
City and all sewer connections to the City's system, whether within or without
the City, except that those portions of the City within the Los Angeles County
South Bay Sanitation District or Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 5,
shall not be subject to any of the fees set forth in the foregoing Sections,
where a fee for similar service is imposed by the Los Angeles County South Bay
Sanitation District or Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 5. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-8: ANNUAL INSPECTION FEE:
Every person granted an industrial waste permit under this Title shall pay an
annual fee to the City for inspection and control and such fee shall be fixed
and established from time to time by the City Council by resolution. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-9: ANNUAL QUALITY SURCHARGE FEE:
   A.   Formula: Every person granted an industrial waste permit under this
Title shall pay an annual quality surcharge fee for wastes discharged into the
sanitary sewer system pursuant to the following formula:
      C = V [a(SS-250) + b(BOD - 180)] k
      where "C" is the quality surcharge fee;
      "V" is the average daily volume of waste discharged in gallons, based on:
         1.   The volume of water supplied to the premises less an amount
determined by the Public Works Director to account for water not discharged
into the sanitary sewer system; or
         2.   The metered volume of waste discharged into the sanitary sewer
system according to a measuring device approved by the Public Works Director;
or
         3.   A figure determined by the Public Works Director based on any
other equitable method;
      "SS" is the suspended solids in the waste discharged, expressed in
milligrams per liter;
      "BOD" is the five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand of the waste
discharged, expressed in milligrams per liter;
      "a" is the cost assessed for each pound of suspended solids, and such
cost shall be fixed and established from time to time by the City Council by
resolution; presently $ 0.29/lb.
      "b" is the cost assessed for each pound of biochemical oxygen demand, and
such cost shall be fixed and established from time to time by the City Council
by resolution; presently $0.11/lb.
      "k" 365 x 8.34/1,000,000, a dimensional constant to convert C to dollars.
If the term containing SS or BOD is negative, a value of zero shall be used for
that term.
SS and BOD analyses shall be made in accordance with "Standard Methods". In
determining the annual quality surcharge fee, the Public Works Director may use
industrial averages for SS and BOD values. The Public Works Director may group
permit holders into discharge volume ranges. Where volume measurement at the
premises of a permit holder is impractical for physical, economic or other
reasons, these volume ranges may be used in establishing the quality surcharge
fee. (Ord. 1237, 4-4-1995)
   B.   Appeal From Annual Quality Surcharge Fee: Any permit holder whose
annual quality surcharge fee has been determined in the manner provided and who
believes the discharge volume range applied to his premises is incorrect, may
submit engineering data to the Public Works Director. If the Public Works
Director finds the discharge of the permit holder differs significantly from
the volume range which was applied, he may adjust the fee.
   C.   Review Of Annual Surcharge Fee: The Public Works Director shall
annually review the rates assessed in subsection A of this Section for SS and
BOD and make a written recommendation to the City Council concerning rate
adjustments necessary to recover revenue from industrial waste dischargers to
pay the cost to the City of treating sewer discharge in excess of domestic
quality. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-10: ANNUAL COST OF TREATMENT FEE:
An annual cost of treatment fee of from twenty five dollars ($25.00) to one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a fee per unit of offending constituent as set
by the Public Works Director shall be paid by permit holders who discharge
wastes that impose unusual monitoring, maintenance, or capital costs on the
City which are unrelated to total flow volume, SS or BOD, or peak flow rates.
Such fees shall be calculated to defray costs attributable to such wastes.
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-11: DUE DATES:
The annual inspection fee, quality surcharge fee, and the cost of treatment fee
shall be paid annually in advance of one of four (4) dates as follows:
If The Permit Is Granted Between      The Due Date Of The Annual Fee Shall Be
Jan. 1 and Mar. 31, inclusive      April 1
April 1 and June 30, inclusive      July 1
July 1 and Sept. 30, inclusive      Oct. 1
Oct. 1 and Dec. 31, inclusive      Jan. 1
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-12: DELINQUENCY; ADDITIONAL CHARGE:
If annual fees are not paid on or before the last day of the month in which
they are due, an additional charge of twenty five percent (25%) of the required
fees, but not less than ten dollars ($10.00), shall be imposed and become
payable as part of the annual fees. If said fees and additional charges are not
paid on or before thirty (30) days after the last day of the month in which
said fees were due, the permit shall be revoked pursuant to Section
12-4-13 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-13: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority: The Public Works Director shall suspend the permit of any
permit holder who fails to comply with the conditions of his permit or any
provision, rule, or regulation of this Title. Any person whose permit has been
suspended shall immediately discontinue the discharge of industrial waste, and
shall not resume such discharge or deposit until the permit has been
reinstated. The Public Works Director shall revoke any permit suspended
pursuant to this Section which is not reinstated within one year from the date
of suspension.
   B.   Reinstatement Of Permit: The Public Works Director shall reinstate a
suspended permit when all violations have been corrected and all new conditions
have been met. Before any revoked permit is reissued, all delinquent fees and
additional charges due and owing to the City shall be paid. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-4-14: TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
   A.   Successor In Interest: Permits issued under this Title shall be
transferred to the successor in title or interest of the premises for which the
permit was granted if the same business is continued and the successor files
with the Public Works Director a written statement agreeing to comply with the
conditions of the permit, pays an application fee, and provides satisfactory
evidence of the transfer of title or interest.
   B.   Other Premises: Permits issued under this Title are not transferable
from one location to another. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-15: DISCLOSURE AND MEASUREMENT OF WASTE PRODUCTS:
   A.   Origin Of Waste: The Public Works Director may require any person
discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste in a public sewer to
furnish information respecting the origin and nature of such waste, and to
provide and maintain facilities for sample collection and recording.
   B.   Measurements: Periodic measurements of flow rates, flow volumes, BOD
and SS to determine the annual quality surcharge fee and such measurements of
other constituents as required by the Public Works Director shall be made by
industrial waste dischargers. Such sampling, analyses and flow measurements of
industrial wastes shall be performed by a State certified independent
laboratory; or by a laboratory of an industrial waste discharger approved by
the Public Works Director; or by City personnel, at the discretion of the
Public Works Director, upon written request of the discharger, and on condition
that the discharger shall reimburse the City for all costs incurred by the
City. Data from the laboratory of an industrial waste discharger shall be
submitted only after verification by an administrative official of such
discharger under penalty of perjury.
   C.   Analyses: All wastewater analyses shall be conducted according to the
procedures stated in "Standard Methods". If no procedure is contained therein,
the standard procedure of the industry or a method approved by the Public Works
Director shall be used. Independent laboratories or the discharger performing
tests shall furnish data on test methods or equipment as requested by the
Public Works Director.
   D.   Rate And Volume: Dischargers making periodic measurements shall install
at the control manhole or other location a calibrated fume, weir, flow meter or
similar device approved by the Public Works Director to measure the wastewater
flow rate and volume. A flow indicating and recording register may be required
by the Public Works Director.
   E.   Records Of Water Use: In lieu of wastewater flow measurement, the
Public Works Director may accept records of water use and adjust the flow
volumes by suitable factors to determine peak and average flow rates.
   F.   Inspection: Sampling analysis and flow measurement procedures and
equipment shall be subject at any time to inspection by the Public Works
Director. Industrial plants with large fluctuations in quality and quantity of
wastewater may be required to provide sampling, analysis, and flow measurement
data for each work day.
   G.   Monitor And Alarm System: Industries producing a discharge with a
fluctuating pH shall install a continuous pH monitor and alarm system to alert
the discharger of any discharge with a pH higher than eleven (11) or lower than
five and five-tenths (5.5). The discharger shall maintain the records of the
monitoring system, incidents of discharge contrary to the permissible limits
and corrective and preventive measures implemented. These records shall be
available for inspection by the authorized City representative at all times.
   H.   Chemical Containers Identified: Tanks and containers for chemicals or
other substances that might by process, leakage or spillage reach the City
sewer shall be plainly identified by number and contents.
   I.   Random Measurements: Public Works Director shall make measurements on a
random basis to verify the constituents or quantities of waste flows reported
by industrial dischargers. Additional City costs resulting from violations
shall be paid by the discharger.
   J.   Discharger Report: Dischargers shall furnish a report to the Public
Works Director concerning the disposal of industrial wastes which the Public
Works Director has prohibited from discharge into the City sewer system. The
report shall include the date of the disposal, tanks or containers emptied,
name of the disposal agency, and signed receipt. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-16: FOOD WASTES:
Food wastes processed or ground by grinders with a rated horsepower of one
horsepower or more are industrial wastes and subject to the provisions of this
Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-17: TEMPERATURE OF WASTE:
No person without specific authorization from the Public Works Director shall
discharge into a public sewer any industrial waste having a temperature greater
than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F). (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
CHAPTER 5
UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL
SECTION:
12-5-1: Prohibited Waste
12-5-2: Allowable Concentrations Of Certain Wastes
12-5-3: Swimming Pools
12-5-4: Water On Streets Prohibited; Temporary Permits
12-5-5: Unauthorized Discharge
12-5-6: Unlawful Pollution
12-5-7: Liability For Unlawful Discharge
12-5-1: PROHIBITED WASTE:
No person shall discharge, permit the discharge, cause the discharge, or
contribute to the discharge directly or indirectly into the City sewer system
or storm drain system industrial waste containing hazardous, flammable, toxic
or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to be injurious to humans or animals, or to create a hazard
or public nuisance, or any waste of such a nature or quality as to interfere
with the effective operation of the City sewer system or storm drain system or
with the water quality requirements placed on the City by other governmental
agencies. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-2: ALLOWABLE CONCENTRATIONS OF CERTAIN WASTES:
The Public Works Director shall from time to time prepare a list of allowable
quantities or concentrations of certain constituents in industrial wastewater
flows and shall issue directions for meeting requirements of this Title. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-3: SWIMMING POOLS:
Discharges from swimming pools during maintenance operations may be made into
City sewers, as determined by the Director of Public Works if the discharge is
properly neutralized so as not to have a detrimental effect on the sewer, and
the receiving waters thereof. A permit for the discharge shall be obtained from
the Public Works Director. The fee for such a permit shall be ten dollars
($10.00). (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-4: WATER ON STREETS PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY PERMITS:
No person shall negligently, wilfully or maliciously discharge, throw or
deposit water on any street in such manner as to obstruct or damage the street,
or to create a nuisance or hazard to persons or property, or to prevent or
interfere with the free and uninterrupted use of the street by the public;
provided, however, that the Public Works Director may grant and issue permits
for the temporary discharge of water upon the street, upon such terms and
conditions as he may deem necessary to protect the City and public from damage
and injury. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-5: UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE:
No person shall discharge any waste or sewage into any watercourse, flood
control channel or tributaries or into the ground by percolation or injection
without a permit from the Public Works Director. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-6: UNLAWFUL POLLUTION:
No permit shall be issued for, nor shall any person discharge or deposit waste
or sewage which creates a public nuisance, a menace to the public safety,
pollution or contamination of underground or surface waters, or impairs the use
of any public sewer, storm drain channel, or public or private property. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-7: LIABILITY FOR UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE:
Any person who unlawfully discharges or causes wastewater to be discharged into
the public sewer system or storm drain systems is in violation of this Chapter
and is therefore liable for all damages, costs, fines or charges incurred.
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
CHAPTER 6
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-6-1: Suspension Of Industrial Wastewater Permit
12-6-2: Revocation Of Industrial Wastewater Permit
12-6-3: Additional Emergency Remedial Measures
12-6-4: City Council Hearing; Hearing Examiners
12-6-5: Notice Of Hearing
12-6-6: Additional Legal Remedies; Attempt
12-6-7: Conflicting Provisions
12-6-1: SUSPENSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PERMIT:
   A.   Authority: The Public Works Director may suspend an industrial
wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop a
discharge which presents an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare, to the local environment, or which either singly or by interaction
with other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the sewer system, the storm
drain system, or the waters of the State, or places the City in violation of
its NPDES permit.
   B.   Cease Discharge Upon Notice: Any discharger notified of a suspension of
that discharger's industrial wastewater permit shall immediately cease and
desist the discharge of all industrial wastewater to the sewer system.
   C.   Failure Of Discharge To Comply: In the event of a failure of the
discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Public Works
Director may take such steps as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance.
These include, but are not limited to, immediate blockage or disconnection of
the discharger's connection to the sewer system.
   D.   Notice Of Intended Order Of Suspension: In addition, the Public Works
Director, in the event of violation of this Chapter, may serve the discharger
with a notice of an intended order of suspension, stating the reasons therefor,
the opportunity for a hearing with respect thereto, and the proposed effective
date of the intended order.
   E.   Request For Hearing; Council Determination: Any discharger suspended or
served with a notice of an intended order of suspension may file with the City
Clerk a request for a City Council hearing with respect thereto. Filing of such
a request shall not stay a suspension. In the event of a suspension of a permit
due to imminent hazard related to continued discharge, the discharger may
request a hearing, and the City Council or a hearing examiner designated by the
City Council for that purpose shall conduct a hearing within three (3) days of
receipt of the request. In the event of hearing requests, for other than an
imminent hazard suspension, the City Council shall hold a hearing on the
suspension within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the request. At the close of
the hearing, the City Council shall make its determination whether to
terminate, or conditionally terminate the suspension imposed by the Public
Works Director, or the City Council may cause the permit to be revoked. Except
in the case of a hearing within three (3) days being required as above
provided, reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given to the suspended
discharger in the manner provided for in Section
12-6-5 of this Chapter.
   F.   Stay Of Order Pending Council Determination: In the event that the City
Council fails to meet within the time set forth above or fails to make a
determination within seventy two (72) hours after the close of the hearing, the
order of suspension shall be stayed until a City Council determination is made
with respect to the action of the Public Works Director.
   G.   Reinstatement Of Permit Upon Compliance: The Public Works Director
shall reinstate the industrial wastewater permit upon proof of compliance which
ends the emergency nature of the hazard created by the discharge that had been
cause for the Public Works Director to initiate the suspension; provided, that
the Public Works Director is satisfied that all discharge requirements of this
Chapter, City Council rules and regulations, and any City Council order will be
implemented. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-2: REVOCATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PERMIT:
The City Council may revoke an industrial wastewater permit upon finding that
the discharger has violated any provision of this Title or the Council rules
and regulations. No revocation shall be ordered until a notice and hearing on
the question has been held by the Council as provided in Sections
12-6-4 and
12-6-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-3: ADDITIONAL EMERGENCY REMEDIAL MEASURES:
The Public Works Director shall have full power and authority to take any
necessary precautions including, but not limited to, decontamination, sewer
closure, packaging, diking, and transportation of materials, in order to
protect life, protect property, or prevent further damage resulting from a
condition that is likely to result in a discharge which presents an imminent
hazard to the public health, safety or welfare; or which either singly or by
interaction with other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the sewer system;
or which places the City in violation of its NPDES permit. In the pursuit of
such an operation, City personnel, any party contracting with the City, or duly
authorized representative of another government agency shall have immediate
access to the premises. The Public Works Director may prohibit approach to the
scene of such emergency by any person, vehicle, vessel or thing, and all
persons not actually employed in the extinguishment of the condition or the
preservation of lives and property in the vicinity thereof. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-6-4: CITY COUNCIL HEARING; HEARING EXAMINERS:
   A.   Conduct Of Hearings By Council Or Examiner: With respect to permit
revocation or suspension hearings, the City Council may conduct the hearing or
may appoint one or more examiners or designate one or more of its members to
serve as hearing examiners and to conduct a hearing with respect to any appeal
or protest filed. At such hearing the discharger may appear personally or
through counsel, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in the
discharger's behalf.
   B.   Examiners Report To Council; Notice Of Council Action:
      1.   The hearing examiner or examiners, if other than the City Council,
shall submit a written report and recommendations to the City Council together
with a brief summary of the evidence considered and conclusions reached with
respect thereto.
      2.   The City Council, after considering evidence presented at such a
hearing, and any report submitted to it with respect to such a hearing, or
after any hearing which it conducts, shall adopt findings supported by the
evidence, and may adopt, reject, or modify the report in whole or in part, make
its decision, and issue its order.
      3.   If the City Council's order is to revoke the discharger's industrial
wastewater permit, the order may be effective forthwith, or at a later
specified date.
      4.   The discharger shall be notified in writing of the City Council's
action.
   C.   Cease Discharging Upon Permit Revocation: Any discharger whose
industrial wastewater permit has been revoked shall immediately cease and
desist all discharge of any wastewater covered by the permit. The Public Works
Director may disconnect or permanently block the discharger's connection if
such action is necessary to ensure compliance with the order of revocation.
   D.   New Application: After revocation of a discharger's industrial waste
permit, there shall be no further discharge of industrial wastewater by that
discharger into the sewer system, the storm drain system, or the waters of the
State unless there has been a new application filed, all fees and charges that
would be required upon an initial application and all delinquent fees, charges,
penalties and other sums owed by the discharger and/or the applicant to the
City have been paid to the City, and a new industrial wastewater permit has
been issued. Any costs incurred by the City, including administrative costs and
investigative fees, in revoking the permit and disconnecting the connection if
necessary, shall also be paid for by the discharger before issuance of a new
industrial wastewater permit. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-5: NOTICE OF HEARING:
   A.   Mailing Or Posting Of Notice: Notice of the hearing shall be given to
the discharger at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing. Unless
otherwise provided herein, any notice required to be given by the Public Works
Director under this Title shall be in writing and served in person or by
registered or certified mail addressed to the addressee's last known address
with request for return receipt. Where no address is known, service may be made
upon the owner of record of the property upon which the alleged violation
occurred or by posting the notice conspicuously on the property.
   B.   Depositing In Mail: Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the
time the written notice is deposited, postage prepaid, in the United States
mail at El Segundo, California. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-6: ADDITIONAL LEGAL REMEDIES; ATTEMPT:
Any person who attempts to commit an act which is in violation of this Chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987; amd. 2000 Code)
12-6-7: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Provisions of this Title shall prevail over any other inconsistent or
conflicting provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
CHAPTER 7
SEWER USE FEE
SECTION:
12-7-1: Purpose
12-7-2: Imposition Of Sewer Use Fee
12-7-3: Determination Of Fee
12-7-4: Collection Of Fee By Utility Bill
12-7-5: Delinquencies
12-7-6: Joint Occupancy
12-7-7: Discontinuance Of Service
12-7-8: Application For Exemption
12-7-9: Application For Adjustment Of Fee
12-7-10: Debt; Penalty For Nonpayment
12-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide funds for the operation and
maintenance of the City sewer system by imposing a City sewer use fee upon the
users of these facilities. This charge is to be reviewed at least bi-annually.
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-2: IMPOSITION OF SEWER USE FEE:
Every person discharging sewage, effluent, industrial waste, or other waste
matter into a public sewer shall pay a sewer use fee to the City. This fee
shall be in addition to any other fee imposed by this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-7-3: DETERMINATION OF FEE:
The sewer use fee shall be computed and determined on the basis of water
supplied to the premises and shall be fixed and established from time to time
by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-4: COLLECTION OF FEE BY UTILITY BILL:
The fees imposed by this Chapter shall be collected by adding the same to the
water bills rendered by the Chief Financial Officer of the City. The period
covered by each billing shall be the same period for which the water bill is
rendered and shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as the water
bill. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
12-7-5: DELINQUENCIES:
Bills for sewer use fee set forth on water bills shall be delinquent if not
paid when the water bill is due; otherwise, within fifteen (15) days from the
date the bill is delivered or mailed. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-6: JOINT OCCUPANCY:
When there is more than one dwelling unit, business, industry, or other use on
any premises served by a single water meter, the sewer use fee will be billed
to the water user. In those instances where the water user fails to pay such
sewer use fee, the owner shall be liable to the City for payment thereof. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-7: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
In case of delinquency in payment of the sewer use fee, the sewer lateral shall
be plugged. The lessor or the owner shall be responsible for payment of all
fees incurred in plugging or unplugging of the sewer lateral in addition to the
delinquent charges. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-8: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
   A.   Water Supply Not Discharged To City Sewer: Where no portion of the
water supplied to any premises enters a public sewer of the City, no fee shall
accrue under this Chapter if an application for exemption is filed with the
Public Works Director and he finds that there is no discharge of any sewage,
effluent, industrial waste or other waste matter from such premises into a
public sewer of the City.
   B.   Low Income Residential Discount: Low income residential users meeting
the adjusted gross annual income criteria included in the current City water
rate resolution shall receive a discount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the
monthly charges for sewer use. (Ord. 1237, 4-4-1995)
12-7-9: APPLICATION FOR ADJUSTMENT OF FEE:
   A.   Determination Of Reasonable Fee: In any case where it is believed that
a sewer use fee imposed by this Chapter is excessive, the person responsible
for paying such fee may apply to the Public Works Director for an adjustment.
The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show that the fee
is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair. The fee shall be deemed to be
nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair if the following percentage of water
supplied to the premises on an annual basis enters a public sewer:
      Use Of Premises      Percentage
      Residential         40 or more
      Commercial         60 or more
      Industrial         60 or more
      Other            40 or more
      Measured discharge   100
   B.   Investigation; Findings: The Public Works Director shall conduct an
investigation and make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether
the fee is fair and reasonable. If he determines that the fee is excessive, he
shall adjust the fee so that it is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory. If
the fee has already been paid, he shall order a refund of the excess paid
during the twelve (12) months or any portion thereof immediately preceding the
date of application for adjustment. Fees which are delinquent for more than
ninety (90) days shall not be subject to adjustment. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-10: DEBT; PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT:
The sewer use fee imposed by this Chapter shall constitute a debt owed to the
City and, in the event suit is brought to recover such fee, shall be subject to
a delinquent penalty of twenty five percent (25%). (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
TITLE 13
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Code   1
Residential Code   2
Electrical Code   3
Mechanical Code   4
Plumbing Code   5
Energy Code   6
Property Maintenance Code   7
Swimming Pool And Spa Code   8
Fire Code   9
Existing Building Code   10
Green Building Standards Code   11
Moving Buildings   12
Numbering Buildings   13
Oil And Gas Wells   14
Oil Drilling Districts   14A
Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Code   15
Postdisaster Assessment Standards   16
Housing Code   17
Earthquake Hazard Reduction In Existing Buildings   18
Solar, Hydronics, And Geothermal Code   19
Security Code   20
Permit Process For Electric Vehicle Charging Stations   21
False Fire Alarms   22
Historical Building Code   23
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
13-1-1: Adoption Of California Building Code, 2022 Edition
13-1-2: Amendments To California Building Code
13-1-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 50022.2, the California Building
Code, 2022 Edition, published at title 24, part 2, of the California Code of
Regulations, including Appendices F, H, I, and J ("CBC") is adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below.
One true copy of the CBC is on file in the office of the Building Official and
is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1524, 12-6-2016;
amd. Ord. 1596, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE:
The California Building Code adopted pursuant to Section 13-1-1 is hereby
amended as follows:
Section 105.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   105.1 Permit Required.
   Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or
to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make
application to the building official and obtain the required permit. Parking
lots shall not be paved, improved, striped, or restriped unless a separate
permit for each parking lot has first been obtained from the building official.
      Exception: A separate permit shall not be required to pave, improve,
stripe, or restripe a parking lot when such work is included in the scope of
another project for which a building permit has been issued and when the design
of such parking lot was included in the plan check review of such project.
Subsection 14 is added to § 105.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC as follows:
   105.2 Work exempt from permit.
   Building:
      14. Block wall and concrete fences not over 3 feet 6 inches high.
Section 105.3.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   105.3.2 Expiration of Plan Check.
      An application for a permit for any proposed work is deemed abandoned 12
months after the application date. Unless otherwise provided, after expiration
of the application, the City will not issue a permit until the plans are
rechecked and approved and a new fee is paid.
         Exception: The Building Official may grant extensions of time for
additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if a permit applicant submits in
writing sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or circumstances precluded
the securing of the permit within the allocated time.
Section 105.8 Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   105.8 Responsibility of permittee.
   Building permits shall be presumed by the city to incorporate all of the
work that the applicant, the applicant's agent, employees and/or contractors
shall carry out. Said proposed work shall be in accordance with the approved
plans and with all requirements of this code and any other laws or regulations
applicable thereto. No city approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from
the responsibility of complying with the provisions of this code nor shall any
vested rights be created for any work performed in violation of this code.
Section 109.4 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance.
   Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be
subject to a fee in addition to the normally established permit fee, equal to
100% of such normally established permit fee, or as otherwise determined by the
building official.
Section 109.6.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   109.6.1 Plan check fees refund.
   No portion of the plan check fee shall be refunded unless plan review has
not been performed, in which case 80 percent of the plan check fee shall be
refunded upon written application for refund submitted by the person who made
original payment of such fee and with the written consent of the owner of the
real property on which the work was proposed to be done. The Building Official
shall determine, in such official's discretion, whether an applicant is
qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from the date of the
submittal for plan check, no plan check fees shall be refunded. In the event
subsequent application for plan check is made by a person who has received a
refund, the full amount of all required fees shall be paid as elsewhere
provided in this chapter.
Section 109.6.2 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   109.6.2 Permit fees refund.
   In the event any person shall have obtained a building permit and no portion
of the work or construction covered by such permit shall have commenced, nor
any inspection performed by any City employee, and notice of abandonment has
been received from the owner of the real property on which such work would have
been performed, the permittee, upon presentation to the Building Official of a
written request for refund, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to
80 percent of the building permit fee actually paid for such permit. The
Building Official shall determine, in such official's discretion, whether an
applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 12 months have elapsed from
the date of the issuance of the permit, no permit fees shall be refunded. In
the event subsequent application for a permit is made by a person who has
received a refund, the full amount of all required fees shall be paid as
elsewhere provided in this chapter.
      Exception:
      1. If a permit has been issued for a project located in an area outside
the jurisdiction of the City, 100 percent of the permit and plan checking fee
may be refunded.
      2. If a duplicate permit has been erroneously issued, 100 percent of the
duplicated permit and plan checking fee may be refunded.
Section 109.7 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   109.7 Re-inspections.
   A re-inspection fee in the amount set by City Council resolution may be
assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for
which inspection is called is incomplete or when required corrections are not
made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the
first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of
this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before
the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. Re-inspection fees may
be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise
available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the
inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is
requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building
official. In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no
additional inspection of the work will be performed until required fees have
been paid.
Section 110.1.1 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   110.1.1 Setback Certification required.
   A California State licensed surveyor is required to certify the location and
setbacks of all new construction prior to the first foundation inspection. A
copy of the certification shall be available to the Building Division inspector
for the job file prior to the first inspection.
      Exception: Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of this section, the Building Official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases.
Section 113.3 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   113.3 Board of Appeals.
   The board of appeals consists of members of the Planning Commission. The
term of a board of appeals member will coincide with the term of service as a
Planning Commissioner and will terminate should the member cease serving as a
Planning Commissioner. The building official is the secretary to the board. The
board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and will render all its decisions and findings on contested
matters, in writing to the building official, with a duplicate copy for any
appellant or contestant affected by such decision or finding, and may recommend
to the city council appropriate new legislation.
   Three members of the board constitute a quorum. The Planning Chairperson is
the board's chairperson and in the chairperson's absence the board will select
a temporary chairperson.
   The city will assess a filing fee set by City Council resolution, or a
higher amount set by resolution, at the time that an appellant file appeal of
any order, decisions, or determination made by the building official relative
to the application and interpretation of this code. The filing fee is
refundable should the appellant prevail in a decision by the board. The appeal
must be taken by filing a written notice of appeal, in letterform, to the board
of appeals. The board's decision constitutes the city's final decision.
Section 113.4 of Chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   113.4 Access Board of Appeals.
      A.   There shall be a Disability Access Board of Appeals ("Access Board
of Appeals") to consist of five members. Each member shall be appointed and
hold office in accordance with procedures established by resolution of the City
Council. Three of the five members shall be members of the Building Board of
Appeals, and shall be co-appointed by the City Council to be a member of the
Building Board of Appeals and the Access Board of Appeals. Two of the five
members shall be "physically handicapped persons" (as defined by California
Health and Safety Code Section 19957.5).
      B.   The Access Board of Appeals shall be considered a "standing
committee" with a continuing subject matter jurisdiction. Thus, the Access
Board of Appeals shall be subject to the requirements of the Brown Act
(California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.); however, the Access Board
of Appeals shall have no regular meetings, and all meetings shall be special
meetings noticed pursuant to California Government Code Section 54956. The
Access Board of Appeals shall conduct its meetings in accordance with
procedures established by resolution of the City Council. The Access Board of
Appeals may establish its own rules of procedure or by-laws consistent with
City Council resolutions and ordinances.
      C.   Any person aggrieved by a determination made by the Building
Official or Fire Code Official in administering or enforcing the portions of
this chapter related to access to "public accommodations or facilities"
(pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 19955, et seq.) may
appeal the determination to the Access Board of Appeals. The appeal shall be
filed with the Building Official no later than 10 days after receipt of written
notice of the determination and the appeal provisions of this section. Upon
receipt of an appeal by the Building Official, a hearing shall be scheduled
before the Access Board of Appeals. The Access Board of Appeals shall consider
relevant evidence presented at the hearing, and shall render a final written
decision within a reasonably prompt time after conducting the hearing. The
authority of the Access Board of Appeals to render a written decision shall be
limited to the scope of authority of the Building Official, and the Access
Board of Appeals shall have no authority to waive a requirement of this
chapter.
      D.   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Access Board of Appeals
may request an administrative hearing within 10 days of the issuance of the
final written decision. Any such request shall be made and heard in the same
manner as an administrative hearing related to an administrative citation, in
accordance with City of El Segundo Municipal Code.
      E.   Failure to timely request an appeal to the Access Board of Appeals
(pursuant to subsection C), or to an administrative hearing officer (pursuant
to subsection D) constitutes a waiver of the hearing and a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
      F.   Unless otherwise designated by the City Manager, the Building
Official shall be the principal city staff liaison to the Access Board of
Appeals, and the Building Official shall appoint a secretary to the Access
Board of Appeals to comply with all procedural requirements related to the
Brown Act.
      G.   The Building Official may request a special meeting of the Access
Board of Appeals in order to request advisory comments from the Access Board of
Appeals regarding issues related to this chapter, such as the potential
adoption of new codes, proposed code changes, or alternate methods and
materials.
Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the CBC, a new definition is added to read as
follows:
   MID-RISE BUILDING.  A building four or more stories high, but not exceeding
75 feet in height and not defined as a high-rise building by section 202 of the
California Building Code. Height measurements shall be made from the underside
of the roof or floor above the topmost space that may be occupied to the lowest
fire apparatus access road level.
Section 456 of Chapter 4 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   Section 456 Mid-Rise Buildings.
      The provisions of this section shall apply to buildings or structures
defined in Section 202 as mid-rise buildings. All mid-rise buildings shall meet
the requirements of Section 918 of the El Segundo Fire Code and any other
applicable fire and life safety provisions.
Section 903.2 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is amended and Sections 903.2.1 through
903.2.21 are deleted, to read as follows:
   903.2 Where Required.
      A.   New Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, an approved
automatic sprinkler system in new buildings and structures shall be required
for all occupancies.
         Exception: New detached buildings under one thousand (1,000) square
feet subject to approval of the Fire Official.
      B.   Existing Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any work to
an existing building which removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the
exterior perimeter wall height as defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and
alterations will require the existing building to be fully sprinklered
throughout.
Section 903.2.22 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   903.2.22 Structures in the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area.
   An automatic sprinkler system must be provided throughout every facility or
building hereafter constructed within the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area.
   903.2.22.1 Existing Buildings.
   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any work to an existing building which
removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the exterior perimeter wall height as
defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and alterations will require the existing
building to be fully sprinklered throughout.
Section 903.3.5.3 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
   903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems.
   The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not
exceed 90% of the water supply capacity.
Section 903.3.8 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is deleted in its entirety and replaced
to read as follows:
   903.3.8 Limited Area Sprinkler Systems.
   When a fire sprinkler system is required, it shall be provided throughout
the building.
      Exception: Protection for specific appliances and/or hazards.
Section 903.3.9 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   903.3.9 Floor Control Valves.
   Floor control valves and waterflow detection assemblies shall be installed
at each floor where any of the following occur:
      1.   Buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more
than 30 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
      2.   Buildings that are three of more stories in height.
      3.   Buildings that are two or more stories below the highest level of
fire department access.
         Exception:  Group R-2 and R-3.1 occupancies floor control valves and
water flow detection assemblies shall not be required.
Section 903.4.2 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
   903.4.2. Alarms.
   One exterior approved audible and visible device, located on the exterior of
the building in an approved location, shall be connected to each automatic
sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm device shall be activated by
water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice
size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation
of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system.
Exterior audible and visible alarm notification shall be provided on NFPA 13,
NFPA 13R and NFPA 13D systems.
Section 909.11 of Chapter 9 of the CBC is deleted in its entirety and replaced
to read as follows:
   909.11 General.
   The smoke-control system shall be supplied with two sources of power.
Primary power shall be from the normal building power systems. Secondary power
shall be from an approved standby source complying with Section 1203 of this
code. The standby power source and its transfer switches shall be in a room
separate from the normal power transformers and switchgear and ventilated
directly to and from the exterior. The room shall be enclosed with not less
than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
   Transfer to full standby power shall be automatic and within 60 seconds of
failure of the primary power. The systems shall comply with the City of El
Segundo Electrical Code.
      Exception: The secondary power is not required for pressurized enclosures
in buildings of less than 5 floors used for human occupancy.
Section 1206.6 is added to Chapter 12 of the 2022 Edition of the California
Building Code to read as follows:
   1206.6: RESIDENTIAL NOISE INSULATION STANDARDS (Airport Noise Sources)
   1206.6.01 Noise Insulation Requirements for New Construction.
   1206.6.02 Purpose and Scope. The purpose of this section is to establish
minimum noise insulation performance standards for new residential dwelling
units and additions of habitable rooms to existing residential dwelling units
to protect public health, safety, and welfare from the effects of excessive
noise, including without limitation, indoor quality of life, speech
interference, and sleep disruption.
   1206.6.03 Applicability. This section applies to all newly constructed
residences and habitable room additions to existing residences.
   1206.6.04 Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words
must have the following meaning:
   "Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)" means the noise measure defined in
21 Code of California Regulations § 5001(d), and any successor regulation or
amendment.
   "Habitable Room" means a room that is a space in a structure for living,
sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage or utility space, garages, and similar areas are not considered
habitable space.
   "LAX" means Los Angeles International Airport.
   "Noise Impact Boundary for LAX" means the area around LAX as defined in 21
California code of regulations § 5001(1), and any successor regulation or
amendment. The city's building safety department must at all times maintain a
current map of the noise impact boundary. The latest published map by LAWA
located at the Building Safety Counter shall be used as the basis for
determination.
   "Residence" means any occupancy group R building as used in El Segundo title
13 of the El Segundo municipal code.
   1206.6.05: Standards.
   Any new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing
residence that is within the noise impact boundary for LAX must be designed to
ensure that internal noise levels due to LAX do not exceed 45 dB CNEL. This
standard may be satisfied in two ways: (1) by performing the acoustical
analysis described in section 1206.6.06, below, or (2) by employing the
prescribed construction methods described in section 1206.6.07, below.
   1206.6.06: Acoustical Analysis.
   A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more
habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum noise
insulation performance standards established in this section if it includes an
acoustical analysis demonstrating that the proposed design will ensure that
internal noise levels due to LAX aircraft noise will not exceed 45 dB CNEL. The
acoustical analysis shall be proven to meet the standard by providing post-
construction/pre-occupancy acoustic measurement to verify compliance with the
45 dB CNEL standard. The Building Official has the discretion to implement
policies that meet the intent of this code section.
      A.   The acoustical analysis must be prepared by a person experienced in
the field of acoustical engineering. The analysis must consider and include:
the topographical relationship between LAX aircraft noise sources and the
dwelling site, the characteristics of those noise sources, predicted noise
spectra and levels at the exterior of the dwelling site, the basis for this
prediction (measured or obtained from published data), the noise insulation
measures to be employed, and the effectiveness of the proposed noise insulation
measures.
      B.   If the interior allowable noise levels are to be met by requiring
that windows be unopenable or closed, the design for the structure must also
specify a ventilation or air-conditioning system to provide a habitable
interior environment, having at least 2 air exchanges per hour for the affected
rooms. The ventilation system must not compromise the interior room noise
reduction.
   1206.6.07 Prescribed Construction Methods.
   A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more
habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum noise
insulation performance standards established in this section if the design
incorporates the following construction methods.
   Construction Methods in the 70 dB CNEL and Greater Noise Zone
   1206.6.08 Exterior Walls.
   New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be
constructed as follows:
      A.   Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
      B.   Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick
veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal
siding must be installed over 1/2-inch minimum solid sheathing.
      C.   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per
square foot must require an interior supporting stud-wall that is finished with
at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster.
      D.   Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool
and must be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
      E.   Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt
felt.
      F.   Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall
board or plaster.
   1206.6.09 Exterior Windows.
      A.   Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of
habitable rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC 40 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5
cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
      B.   Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms must:
         1.   Have a sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB, or
         2.   Must be 5/8-inch laminated glass with STC rating of 40 dB and
must be set in non-hardening glazing materials, or
         3.   Must be glass block at least 3 1/2 inches thick.
      C.   The total areas of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not
exceed 20% of the wall area.
   1206.6.10 Exterior Doors.
      A.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed
to aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and
edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least
STC 40 dB.
      B.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly
exposed to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a
minimum STC rating of 35 dB.
      C.   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must not be allowed in walls
that are directly exposed to aircraft noise. Sliding glass doors in walls that
are not directly exposed must have an STC rating of at least 40 dB.
      D.   Access doors from attached garage to the interior of a residence
must have an STC rating of at least 30 dB.
   1206.6.11 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
      A.   Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered
on their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this code.
      B.   Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
      C.   Attic ventilation must be:
         1.   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are
fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating
flexible ducting or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated
fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree
bend in the duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior
through the duct into the attic, or
         2.   Noise control louver vents, or
         3.   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
         4.   Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least 5/8-inch thick. Ceiling materials must be mounted on resilient channels.
         5.   Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line or at
any point that provides at least a 4-inch space between the skylight glazing
and the secondary glazing and must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic or
laminated glass. The weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted
by the building code. The size of skylights must be no more than 20 percent of
the roof area of the room.
   1206.6.12 Ventilation.
      A.   A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the
exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated flexible glass fiber ducting
that is at least 10 feet long between any two points of connection.
      B.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   1206.6.13 Fireplaces.
   Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that
is operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
   1206.6.14 Wall And Ceiling Openings.
   Openings in the shell of the residence that degrade its ability to achieve
an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed
are prohibited unless access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-
conditioning, or other openings are designed to maintain the 45 dB CNEL (or
less) standard in the room to which they provide access.
   Construction Methods In The 65 dB CNEL To 70 dB CNEL Noise Zone
   1206.6.15 Exterior Walls.
   New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be
constructed as follows:
      A.   Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
      B.   Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick
veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal
siding must be installed over 1/2-inch solid sheathing.
      C.   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per
square foot will require an interior studwall that is finished with at least 5/
8-inch thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
      D.   Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool
and must be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
      E.   Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt
felt.
      F.   Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum
wallboard or plaster.
   1206.6.16 Exterior Windows.
      A.   Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of
habitable rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC 35 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5
cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
      B.   Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms must be at least 1/4-inch thick and must be set in non-hardening glazing
materials.
      C.   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed
20% of the floor area.
   1206.6.17 Exterior Doors.
      A.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed
to aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and
edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least
STC 35 dB.
      B.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly
exposed to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a
minimum STC rating of 30 dB.
      C.   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must have glass that is 1/4-
inch thick.
      D.   Access doors from a garage to a habitable room must have an STC
rating of at least 30 dB.
   1206.6.18 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
      A.   Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered
on their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this code.
      B.   Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
      C.   Attic ventilation must be:
         1.   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are
fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating
flexible ducting or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated
fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree
bend in the duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior
through the duct into the attic, or
         2.   Noise control louver vents, or
         3.   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
      D.   Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least 5/8-inch thick.
      E.   Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line and must
be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated glass. The
weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted by the building code.
   1206.6.19 Floors.
   The floor of the lowest habitable rooms must be concrete slab on grade or
wood framed floors.
   1206.6.20 Ventilation.
      A.   A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of at least 2 air
exchanges in each affected habitable room without opening any window, door or
other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated
flexible glass fiber ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any two
points of connection.
      B.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   1206.6.21 Fireplaces.
   Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that
is operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
   1206.6.22 Wall and Ceiling Openings.
   Openings in the shell of the residence that degrade its ability to achieve
an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed
are prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-
conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB CNEL or
less standard in the room to which they provide access.
Section 1507.3.1 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1507.3.1 Deck requirements.
   Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only over solid structural
sheathing boards.
Section 1613.5 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.5 Amendments to ASCE 7.
   The provisions of Section 1613.5 shall be permitted as an amendment to the
relevant provisions of ASCE 7.
Section 1613.5.2 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.5.2 Structural Separation.
   Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.12.3 Equation 12.12-1 as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6433.png]   (12-12-1)
 
Section 1613.5.3 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.5.3 Values for Vertical Combinations.
   Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.2.3.1 Exception 3 as follows:
      3.   Detached one- and two-family dwellings up to two stories in height
of light frame construction.
Section 1613.5.4 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.5.4 Wood Diaphragms.
   Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.11.2.2.3 as follows:
   12.11.2.2.3 Wood Diaphragms.
   The anchorage of concrete or masonry structural walls to wood diaphragms
shall be in accordance with AWC SDPWS 4.1.5.1 and this section. In wood
diaphragms, the continuous ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm
sheathing. Anchorage shall not be accomplished by use of toe nails or nails
subject to withdrawal nor shall wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain
bending or cross-grain tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall not be considered
effective as providing ties or struts required by this section.
   For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, wood
diaphragms supporting concrete or masonry walls shall comply with the
following:
      1.   The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40 feet. Added
chords of diaphragms may be used to form subdiaphragms to transmit the
anchorage forces to the main continuous crossties.
      2.   The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the depth of the
subdiaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm shear.
Section 1613.5.5 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.5.5 Maximum SDS Value in Determination of CS and EV.
   Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.8.1.3 as follows:
   12.8.1.3 Maximum SDS Value in Determination of CS and EV.
   The value of CS and EV are permitted to be calculated using a value of SDS
equal to 1.0 but not less than 70% of SDS as defined in Section 11.4.4,
provided that all of the following criteria are met:
      1.   The structure does not have irregularities, as defined in Section
12.3.2;
      2.   The structure does not exceed five stories above the lower of the
base or grade plane as defined in Section 11.2, and, where present, each
mezzanine level shall be considered a story for the purpose of this limit;
      3.   The structure has a fundamental period, T, that does not exceed 0.5
seconds, as determined using Section 12.8.2;
      4.   The structure meets the requirements necessary for the redundancy
factor, , to be permitted to be taken as 1.0, in accordance with Section
12.3.4.2;
      5.   The site soil properties are not classified as Site Classes E or F,
as defined in Section 11.4.2; and
      6.   The structure is classified as Risk Category I or II, as defined in
Section 1.5.1.
Section 1613.7 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.7 Seismic Design Provisions for Hillside Buildings.
   1613.7.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to establish minimum regulations for the
design and construction of new buildings and additions to existing buildings
when constructing such buildings on or into slopes steeper than one unit
vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%). These regulations establish minimum
standards for seismic force resistance to reduce the risk of injury or loss of
life in the event of earthquakes.
   1613.7.2 Scope.
   The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of the lateral-
force-resisting system for hillside buildings at and below the base level
diaphragm. The design of the lateral-force-resisting system above the base
level diaphragm shall be in accordance with the provisions for seismic and wind
design as required elsewhere in this division.
      Exception: Non-habitable accessory buildings and decks not supporting or
supported from the main building are exempt from these regulations.
   1613.7.3 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this section certain terms are defined as follows:
   BASE LEVEL DIAPHRAGM is the floor at, or closest to, the top of the highest
level of the foundation.
   DIAPHRAGM ANCHORS are assemblies that connect a diaphragm to the adjacent
foundation at the uphill diaphragm edge.
   DOWNHILL DIRECTION is the descending direction of the slope approximately
perpendicular to the slope contours.
   FOUNDATION is concrete or masonry which supports a building, including
footings, stem walls, retaining walls, and grade beams.
   FOUNDATION EXTENDING IN THE DOWNHILL DIRECTION is a foundation running
downhill and approximately perpendicular to the uphill foundation.
   HILLSIDE BUILDING is any building or portion thereof constructed on or into
a slope steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%). If
only a portion of the building is supported on or into the slope, these
regulations apply to the entire building.
   PRIMARY ANCHORS are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a direct
connection as described in Sections 1613.7.5 and 1613.7.7.3 between the
diaphragm and the uphill foundation.
   SECONDARY ANCHORS are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a
redundant diaphragm to foundation connection, as described in Sections 1613.7.6
and 1613.7.7.4.
   UPHILL DIAPHRAGM EDGE is the edge of the diaphragm adjacent and closest to
the highest ground level at the perimeter of the diaphragm.
   UPHILL FOUNDATION is the foundation parallel and closest to the uphill
diaphragm edge.
   1613.7.4 Analysis and Design.
   1613.7.4.1 General.
   Every hillside building within the scope of this section shall be analyzed,
designed, and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this division.
When the code-prescribed wind design produces greater effects, the wind design
shall govern, but detailing requirements and limitations prescribed in this and
referenced sections shall be followed.
   1613.7.4.2 Base Level Diaphragm-Downhill Direction.
   The following provisions shall apply to the seismic analysis and design of
the connections for the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction.
   1613.7.4.2.1 Base for Lateral Force Design Defined.
   For seismic forces acting in the downhill direction, the base of the
building shall be the floor at or closest to the top of the highest level of
the foundation.
   1613.7.4.2.2 Base Shear.
   In developing the base shear for seismic design, the response modification
coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall and building frame systems.
The total base shear shall include the forces tributary to the base level
diaphragm including forces from the base level diaphragm.
   1613.7.5 Base Shear Resistance-Primary Anchors.
   1613.7.5.1 General.
   The base shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted through primary
anchors from diaphragm struts provided in the base level diaphragm to the
foundation.
   1613.7.5.2 Location of Primary Anchors.
   A primary anchor and diaphragm strut shall be provided in line with each
foundation extending in the downhill direction. Primary anchors and diaphragm
struts shall also be provided where interior vertical lateral-force-resisting
elements occur above and in contact with the base level diaphragm. The spacing
of primary anchors and diaphragm struts or collectors shall in no case exceed
30 feet (9144 mm).
   1613.7.5.3 Design of Primary Anchors and Diaphragm Struts.
   Primary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with
the requirements of Section 1613.7.8.
   1613.7.5.4 Limitations.
   The following lateral-force-resisting elements shall not be designed to
resist seismic forces below the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction:
      1.   Wood structural panel wall sheathing,
      2.   Cement plaster and lath,
      3.   Gypsum wallboard, and
      4.   Tension only braced frames.
   Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of Section
2205.2.1.2 may be used to transfer forces from the primary anchors and
diaphragm struts to the foundation provided lateral forces do not induce
flexural stresses in any member of the frame or in the diaphragm struts.
Deflections of frames shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal
members when the frame is not rectangular.
   1613.7.6 Base Shear Resistance-Secondary Anchors.
   1613.7.6.1 General.
   In addition to the primary anchors required by Section 1613.7.5, the base
shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted through secondary anchors in
the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in the base level
diaphragm.
      Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending
in the downhill direction spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm) on center
extend up to and are directly connected to the base level diaphragm for at
least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
   1613.7.6.2 Secondary Anchor Capacity and Spacing.
   Secondary anchors at the base level diaphragm shall be designed for a
minimum force equal to the base shear, including forces tributary to the base
level diaphragm, but not less than 600 pounds per lineal foot (8.76 kN/m) based
on Allowable Stress Design (ASD) levels. The secondary anchors shall be
uniformly distributed along the uphill diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a
maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
   1613.7.6.3 Design.
   Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with
Section 1613.7.8.
   1613.7.7 Diaphragms below the Base Level-Downhill Direction.
   The following provisions shall apply to the lateral analysis and design of
the connections for all diaphragms below the base level diaphragm in the
downhill direction.
   1613.7.7.1 Diaphragm Defined.
   Every floor level below the base level diaphragm shall be designed as a
diaphragm.
   1613.7.7.2 Design Force.
   Each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall be designed for all
tributary loads at that level using a minimum seismic force factor not less
than the base shear coefficient.
   1613.7.7.3 Design Force Resistance-Primary Anchors.
   The design force described in Section 1613.7.7.2 shall be resisted through
primary anchors from diaphragm struts provided in each diaphragm to the
foundation. Primary anchors shall be provided and designed in accordance with
the requirements and limitations of Section 1613.7.5.
   1613.7.7.4 Design Force Resistance-Secondary Anchors.
   1613.7.7.4.1 General.
   In addition to the primary anchors required in Section 1613.7.7.3, the
design force in the downhill direction shall be resisted through secondary
anchors in the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in each
diaphragm below the base level.
      Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending
in the downhill direction, spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm) on center,
extend up to and are directly connected to each diaphragm below the base level
for at least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
   1613.7.7.4.2 Secondary Anchor Capacity. 
   Secondary anchors at each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall be
designed for a minimum force equal to the design force but not less than 300
pounds per lineal foot (4.38 kN/m) based on Allowable Stress Design (ASD)
levels. The secondary anchors shall be uniformly distributed along the uphill
diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
   1613.7.7.4.3 Design.
   Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with
Section 1613.7.8.
   1613.7.8 Primary and Secondary Anchorage and Diaphragm Strut Design.
   Primary and secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in
accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Fasteners. All bolted fasteners used to develop connections to wood
members shall be provided with square plate washers at all bolt heads and nuts.
Washers shall be minimum 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm
by 76 mm) in size. Nuts shall be tightened to finger tight plus one half (1/2)
wrench turn prior to covering the framing.
      2.   Fastening. The diaphragm to foundation anchorage shall not be
accomplished by the use of toenailing, nails subject to withdrawal, or wood in
cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension.
      3.   Size of Wood Members. Wood diaphragm struts collectors, and other
wood members connected to primary anchors shall not be less than 3 inch (76 mm)
nominal width. The effects of eccentricity on wood members shall be evaluated
as required per Item 9.
      4.   Design. Primary and secondary anchorage, including diaphragm struts,
splices, and collectors shall be designed for 125% of the tributary force.
      5.   Allowable Stress Increase. The one-third allowable stress increase
permitted under Section 1605.3.2 shall not be taken when the working
(allowable) stress design method is used.
      6.   Steel Element of Structural Wall Anchorage System. The strength
design forces for steel elements of the structural wall anchorage system, with
the exception of anchor bolts and reinforcing steel, shall be increased by 1.4
times the forces otherwise required.
      7.   Primary Anchors. The load path for primary anchors and diaphragm
struts shall be fully developed into the diaphragm and into the foundation. The
foundation must be shown to be adequate to resist the concentrated loads from
the primary anchors.
      8.   Secondary Anchors. The load path for secondary anchors and diaphragm
struts shall be fully developed in the diaphragm but need not be developed
beyond the connection to the foundation.
      9.   Symmetry. All lateral force foundation anchorage and diaphragm strut
connections shall be symmetrical. Eccentric connections may be permitted when
demonstrated by calculation or tests that all components of force have been
provided for in the structural analysis or tests.
      10.   Wood Ledgers. Wood ledgers shall not be used to resist cross-grain
bending or cross-grain tension.
   1613.7.9 Lateral-Force-Resisting Elements Normal to the Downhill Direction.
   1613.7.9.1 General.
   In the direction normal to the downhill direction, lateral-force-resisting
elements shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this section.
   1613.7.9.2 Base Shear.
   In developing the base shear for seismic design, the response modification
coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall and building frame systems.
   1613.7.9.3 Vertical Distribution of Seismic Forces.
   For seismic forces acting normal to the downhill direction the distribution
of seismic forces over the height of the building using Section 12.8.3 of ASCE
7 shall be determined using the height measured from the top of the lowest
level of the building foundation.
   1613.7.9.4 Drift Limitations.
   The story drift below the base level diaphragm shall not exceed 0.007 times
the story height at strength design force level. The total drift from the base
level diaphragm to the top of the foundation shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19 mm).
Where the story height or the height from the base level diaphragm to the top
of the foundation varies because of a stepped footing or story offset, the
height shall be measured from the average height of the top of the foundation.
The story drift shall not be reduced by the effect of horizontal diaphragm
stiffness.
   1613.7.9.5 Distribution of Lateral Forces.
   1613.7.9.5.1 General.
   The design lateral force shall be distributed to lateral-force-resisting
elements of varying heights in accordance with the stiffness of each individual
element.
   1613.7.9.5.2 Wood Structural Panel Sheathed Walls.
   The stiffness of a stepped wood structural panel shear wall may be
determined by dividing the wall into adjacent rectangular elements, subject to
the same top of wall deflection. Deflections of shear walls may be estimated by
AWC SDPWS Section 4.3.2. Sheathing and fastening requirements for the stiffest
section shall be used for the entire wall. Each section of wall shall be
anchored for shear and uplift at each step. The minimum horizontal length of a
step shall be 8 feet (2438 mm) and the maximum vertical height of a step shall
be 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm).
   1613.7.9.5.3 Reinforced Concrete or Masonry Shear Walls.
   Reinforced concrete or masonry shear walls shall have forces distributed in
proportion to the rigidity of each section of the wall.
   1613.7.9.6 Limitations.
   The following lateral force-resisting-elements shall not be designed to
resist lateral forces below the base level diaphragm in the direction normal to
the downhill direction:
      1.   Cement plaster and lath,
      2.   Gypsum wallboard, and
      3.   Tension-only braced frames.
   Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of Section
2205.2.1.2 of this Code may be designed as lateral-force-resisting elements in
the direction normal to the downhill direction, provided lateral forces do not
induce flexural stresses in any member of the frame. Deflections of frames
shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal members when the frame is
not rectangular.
   1613.7.10 Specific Design Provisions.
   1613.7.10.1 Footings and Grade Beams.
   All footings and grade beams shall comply with the following:
      1.   Grade beams shall extend at least 12 inches (305 mm) below the
lowest adjacent grade and provide a minimum 24 inch (610 mm) distance
horizontally from the bottom outside face of the grade beam to the face of the
descending slope.
      2.   Continuous footings shall be reinforced with at least two No. 4
reinforcing bars at the top and two No. 4 reinforcing bars at the bottom.
      3.   All main footing and grade beam reinforcement steel shall be bent
into the intersecting footing and fully developed around each corner and
intersection.
      4.   All concrete stem walls shall extend from the foundation and
reinforced as required for concrete or masonry walls.
   1613.7.10.2 Protection against Decay and Termites.
   All wood to earth separation shall comply with the following:
      1.   Where a footing or grade beam extends across a descending slope, the
stem wall, grade beam, or footing shall extend up to a minimum 18 inches (457
mm) above the highest adjacent grade.
         Exception: At paved garage and doorway entrances to the building, the
stem wall need only extend to the finished concrete slab, provided the wood
framing is protected with a moisture proof barrier.
      2.   Wood ledgers supporting a vertical load of more than 100 pounds per
lineal foot (1.46 kN/m) based on Allowable Stress Design (ASD) levels and
located within 48 inches (1219 mm) of adjacent grade are prohibited. Galvanized
steel ledgers and anchor bolts, with or without wood nailers, or treated or
decay resistant sill plates supported on a concrete or masonry seat, may be
used.
   1613.7.10.3 Sill Plates.
   All sill plates and anchorage shall comply with the following:
      1.   All wood framed walls, including nonbearing walls, when resting on a
footing, foundation, or grade beam stem wall, shall be supported on wood sill
plates bearing on a level surface.
      2.   Power-driven fasteners shall not be used to anchor sill plates
except at interior nonbearing walls not designed as shear walls.
   1613.7.10.4 Column Base Plate Anchorage.
   The base of isolated wood posts (not framed into a stud wall) supporting a
vertical load of 4,000 pounds (17.8 kN) based on Allowable Stress Design (ASD)
levels or more and the base plate for a steel column shall comply with the
following:
      1.   When the post or column is supported on a pedestal extending above
the top of a footing or grade beam, the pedestal shall be designed and
reinforced as required for concrete or masonry columns. The pedestal shall be
reinforced with a minimum of four No. 4 bars extending to the bottom of the
footing or grade beam. The top of exterior pedestals shall be sloped for
positive drainage.
      2.   The base plate anchor bolts or the embedded portion of the post
base, and the vertical reinforcing bars for the pedestal, shall be confined
with two No. 4 or three No. 3 ties within the top 5 inches (127 mm) of the
concrete or masonry pedestal. The base plate anchor bolts shall be embedded a
minimum of 20 bolt diameters into the concrete or masonry pedestal. The base
plate anchor bolts and post bases shall be galvanized and each anchor bolt
shall have at least 2 galvanized nuts above the base plate.
   1613.7.10.5 Steel Beam to Column Supports.
   All steel beam to column supports shall be positively braced in each
direction. Steel beams shall have stiffener plates installed on each side of
the beam web at the column. The stiffener plates shall be welded to each beam
flange and the beam web. Each brace connection or structural member shall
consist of at least two 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) diameter machine bolts.
Section 1613.8 is added to Chapter 16 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1613.8 Suspended Ceilings.
   Minimum design and installation standards for suspended ceilings shall be
determined in accordance with the requirements of Section 2506.2.1 of this Code
and this section.
   1613.8.1 Scope.
   This part contains special requirements for suspended ceilings and lighting
systems. Provisions of Section 13.5.6 of ASCE 7 shall apply except as modified
herein.
   1613.8.2 General.
   The suspended ceilings and lighting systems shall be limited to 6 feet (1828
mm) below the structural deck unless the lateral bracing is designed by a
licensed engineer or architect.
   1613.8.3 Sprinkler Heads.
   All sprinkler heads (drops) except fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or
roof/ceiling assemblies, shall be designed to allow for free movement of the
sprinkler pipes with oversize rings, sleeves or adaptors through the ceiling
tile. Sprinkler heads and other penetrations shall have a 2 inch (50mm)
oversize ring, sleeve, or adapter through the ceiling tile to allow for free
movement of at least 1 inch (25mm) in all horizontal directions. Alternatively,
a swing joint that can accommodate 1 inch (25 mm) of ceiling movement in all
horizontal directions is permitted to be provided at the top of the sprinkler
head extension.
   Sprinkler heads penetrating fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/
ceiling assemblies shall comply with Section 714 of this Code.
   1613.8.4 Special Requirements for Means of Egress.
   Suspended ceiling assemblies located along means of egress serving an
occupant load of 30 or more shall comply with the following provisions.
   1613.8.4.1 General.
   Ceiling suspension systems shall be connected and braced with vertical
hangers attached directly to the structural deck along the means of egress
serving an occupant load of 30 or more and at lobbies accessory to Group A
Occupancies. Spacing of vertical hangers shall not exceed 2 feet (610 mm) on
center along the entire length of the suspended ceiling assembly located along
the means of egress or at the lobby.
   1613.8.4.2 Assembly Device.
   All lay-in panels shall be secured to the suspension ceiling assembly with
two hold-down clips minimum for each tile within a 4-foot (1219 mm) radius of
the exit lights and exit signs.
   1613.8.4.3 Emergency Systems.
   Independent supports and braces shall be provided for light fixtures
required for exit illumination. Power supply for exit illumination shall comply
with the requirements of Section 1008.3 of this Code.
   1613.8.4.4 Supports for Appendage.
   Separate support from the structural deck shall be provided for all
appendages such as light fixtures, air diffusers, exit signs, and similar
elements.
Section 1704.6 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1704.6 Structural Observations.
   Where required by the provisions of Section 1704.6.1 or 1704.6.2, the owner
or the owner's authorized agent shall employ a structural observer to perform
structural observations.
   Structural observation does not include or waive the responsibility for the
inspections in Section 110 or the special inspections in Section 1705 or other
section of this code. The structural observer shall be one of the following
individuals:
      1.   The registered design professional responsible for the structural
design, or
      2.   A registered design professional designated by the registered design
professional responsible for the structural design.
   Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural observer shall
submit to the building official a written statement identifying the frequency
and extent of structural observations.
   The owner or owner's authorized agent shall coordinate and call a
preconstruction meeting between the structural observer, contractors, affected
subcontractors and special inspectors. The structural observer shall preside
over the meeting. The purpose of the meeting shall be to identify the major
structural elements and connections that affect the vertical and lateral load
resisting systems of the structure and to review scheduling of the required
observations. A record of the meeting shall be included in the report submitted
to the Building Official.
   Observed deficiencies shall be reported in writing to the owner or owner's
authorized agent, special inspector, contractor and the Building Official. Upon
the form prescribed by the Building Official, the structural observer shall
submit to the Building Official a written statement at each significant
construction stage stating that the site visits have been made and identifying
any reported deficiencies which, to the best of the structural observer's
knowledge, have not been resolved. A final report by the structural observer
which states that all observed deficiencies have been resolved is required
before acceptance of the work by the Building Official.
Section 1704.6.1 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1704.6.1 Structural observations for seismic resistance.
   Structural observations shall be provided for those structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E or F, where one or more of the following
conditions exist:
      1.   The structure is classified as Risk Category III or IV in accordance
with Table 1604.5.
      2.   The height of the structure is greater than 75 feet (22860 mm) above
the base.
      3.   The structure is classified as Risk Category I or II in accordance
with Table 1604.5, and a lateral design is required for the structure or
portion thereof.
      Exception: One-story wood framed Group R-3 and Group U Occupancies less
than 2,000 square feet in area, provided the adjacent grade is not steeper than
1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% sloped), assigned to Seismic Design
Category D.
      4.   When so designated by the registered design professional responsible
for the structural design.
      5.   When such observation is specifically required by the building
official.
Section 1705.3 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1705.3 Concrete Construction.
   The special inspections and tests for concrete construction shall be
performed in accordance with this section and Table 1705.3.
   Exceptions: Special inspections and tests shall not be required for:
      1.   Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less
above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the
structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength,
f'c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa) regardless
of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in
the footing construction.
      2.   Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three
stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock
where:
         2.1.   The footings support walls of light-frame construction;
         2.2.   The footings are designed in accordance with Table 1809.7; or
         2.3.   The structural design of the footing is based on a specified
compressive strength, f'c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi)
(17.2 Mpa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the
construction documents or used in the footing construction.
      3.   Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground,
including prestressed slabs on grade, where the effective prestress in the
concrete is less than 150 psi (1.03 Mpa).
         3.1   Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.
Exception 3 of Section 1705.13 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1705.13 Special inspections for seismic resistance.
   Special inspections for seismic resistance shall be required as specified in
Sections 1705.13.1 through 1705.13.9, unless exempted by the exceptions of
Section 1704.2.
   Exception: The special inspections specified in Sections 1705.13.1 through
1705.13.9 are not required for structures designed and constructed in
accordance with one of the following:
      1.   The structure consists of light-frame construction; the design
spectral response acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in Section
1613.2.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does
not exceed 35 feet (10 668 mm).
      2.   The seismic force-resisting system of the structure consists of
reinforced masonry or reinforced concrete; the design spectral response
acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in Section 1613.2.4, does not
exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does not exceed 25 feet
(7620 mm).
      3.   The structure is a detached one- or two-family dwelling not
exceeding two stories above grade plane, is not assigned to Seismic Design
Category D, E or F and does not have any of the following horizontal or
vertical irregularities in accordance with Section 12.3 of ASCE 7:
         3.1   Torsional or extreme torsional irregularity.
         3.2   Nonparallel systems irregularity.
         3.3   Stiffness-soft story or stiffness-extreme soft story
irregularity.
         3.4   Discontinuity in lateral strength-weak story irregularity.
Section 1807.1.4 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1807.1.4 Permanent wood foundation systems.
   Permanent wood foundation systems shall be designed and installed in
accordance with AWC PWF. Lumber and plywood shall be treated in accordance with
AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B and Section 5.2) and shall
be identified in accordance with Section 2303.1.9.1. Permanent wood foundation
systems shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D,
E or F.
Section 1807.1.6 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls.
   Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the
top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance
with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used
for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
Section 1809.3 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1809.3 Stepped footings.
   The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings
shall be permitted to have a slope not exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units
horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary
to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the surface
of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-
percent slope).
   For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, the stepping
requirement shall also apply to the top surface of grade beams supporting
walls. Footings shall be reinforced with four No. 4 bars. Two bars shall be
place at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure 1809.3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6437.png]
 
   FIGURE 1809.3 - STEPPED FOOTING
Section 1809.7 and Table 1809.7 of the 2022 CBC are amended to read as follows:
   1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction.
   Where a specific design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings
supporting walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed
in accordance with Table 1809.7. Prescriptive footings in Table 1809.7 shall
not exceed one story above grade plane for structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category D, E or F.
   TABLE 1809.7
   PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF
   LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION a, b, c, d, e
 
NUMBER OF FLOORS SUPPORTED WIDTH OF FOOTING (inches) THICKNESS OF FOOTING
BY THE FOOTINGf                                      (inches)
1                          12                        6
2                          15                        6
3                          18                        8
 
      For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
      a.   Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.
      b.   The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the
elevation of the top of the footing.
      c.   Not Adopted.
      d.   See Section 1908 for additional requirements for concrete footings
of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.
      e.   For thickness of foundation walls, see Section 1807.1.6.
      f.   Footing shall be permitted to support a roof addition to the
stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required
for supporting one floor.
      g.   Not Adopted.
Section 1809.12 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1809.12 Timber footings.
   Timber footings shall be permitted for buildings of Type V construction and
as otherwise approved by the building official. Such footings shall be treated
in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B).
Treated timbers are not required where placed entirely below permanent water
level, or where used as capping for wood piles that project above the water
level over submerged or marsh lands. The compressive stresses perpendicular to
grain in untreated timber footing supported upon treated piles shall not exceed
70 percent of the allowable stresses for the species and grade of timber as
specified in the ANSI/AWC NDS. Timber footings shall not be used in structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
Section 1810.3.2.4 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1810.3.2.4 Timber.
   Timber deep foundation elements shall be designed as piles or poles in
accordance with ANSI/AWC NDS. Round timber elements shall conform to ASTM D 25.
Sawn timber elements shall conform to DOC PS-20. Timber shall not be used in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
Section 1905.1 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1905.1 General.
   The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as indicated in Sections 1905.1.1
through 1905.1.11.
Section 1905.1.7 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   1905.1.7 ACI 318, Section 14.1.4.
   Delete ACI 318, Section 14.1.4, and replace with the following:
   14.1.4 - Plain concrete in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C,
D, E or F.
   14.1.4.1 - Structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F shall
not have elements of structural plain concrete, except as follows:
   (a)   Concrete used for fill with a minimum cement content of two (2) sacks
of Portland cement or cementious material per cubic yard.
   (b)   Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns
are permitted, provided the projection of the footing beyond the face of the
supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.
   (c)   Plain concrete footings supporting walls are permitted provided the
footings have at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars shall
not be smaller than No. 4 and shall have a total area of not less than 0.002
times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing. A minimum of one bar shall
be provided at the top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement
shall be provided at corners and intersections.
   Exceptions:
   Detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in height and
constructed with stud-bearing walls, are permitted to have plain concrete
footings with at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars not smaller
than No. 4 are permitted to have a total area of less than 0.002 times the
gross cross-sectional area of the footing.
Sections 1905.1.9 thru 1905.1.11 are added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   1905.1.9 ACI 318, Section 18.7.5.
   Modify ACI 318, Section 18.7.5, by adding Section 18.7.5.8 and 18.7.5.9 as
follows:
   18.7.5.8 Where the calculated point of contraflexure is not within the
middle half of the member clear height, provide transverse reinforcement as
specified in ACI 318 Sections 18.7.5.1, Items (a) through (c), over the full
height of the member.
   18.7.5.9 - At any section where the design strength, Pn, of the column is
less than the sum of the shears Ve computed in accordance with ACI 318 Sections
18.7.6.1 and 18.6.5.1 for all the beams framing into the column above the level
under consideration, transverse reinforcement as specified in ACI 318 Sections
18.7.5.1 through 18.7.5.3 shall be provided. For beams framing into opposite
sides of the column, the moment components are permitted to be assumed to be of
opposite sign. For the determination of the design strength, Pn, of the column,
these moments are permitted to be assumed to result from the deformation of the
frame in any one principal axis.
   1905.1.10 ACI 318, Section 18.10.4.
   Modify ACI 318, Section 18.10.4, by adding Section 18.10.4.7 as follows:
   18.10.4.7 - Walls and portions of walls with Pu > 0.35Po shall not be
considered to contribute to the calculated shear strength of the structure for
resisting earthquake-induced forces. Such walls shall conform to the
requirements of ACI 318 Section 18.14.
   1905.1.11 ACI 318, Section 18.12.6.
   Modify ACI 318, by adding Section 18.12.6.2 as follows:
   18.12.6.2 Collector and boundary elements in topping slabs placed over
precast floor and roof elements shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) or 6 db
in thickness, where db is the diameter of the largest reinforcement in the
topping slab.
Section 2304.10.2 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2304.10.2 Fastener requirements.
   Connections for wood members shall be designed in accordance with the
appropriate methodology in Section 2301.1. The number and size of fasteners
connecting wood members shall not be less than that set forth in Table
2304.10.2. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.2 shall not be used to resist or
transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E
or F.
      Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when
the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by
the building official.
Section 2304.12.2.8 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2304.12.2.8 Wood used in retaining walls and cribs.
   Wood installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative treated in
accordance with AWPA U1 for soil and fresh water use. Wood shall not be used in
retaining or crib walls for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E
or F.
Section 2305.4 is added to Chapter 23 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   2305.4 Quality of Nails.
   In Seismic Design Category D, E or F, mechanically driven nails used in wood
structural panel shear walls shall meet the same dimensions as that required
for hand-driven nails, including diameter, minimum length and minimum head
diameter. Clipped head or box nails are not permitted in new construction. The
allowable design value for clipped head nails in existing construction may be
taken at no more than the nail-head-area ratio of that of the same size hand-
driven nails.
Section 2305.5 is added to Chapter 23 of the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   2305.5 Hold-down connectors.
   In Seismic Design Category D, E or F, hold-down connectors shall be designed
to resist shear wall overturning moments using approved cyclic load values or
75 percent of the allowable seismic load values that do not consider cyclic
loading of the product. Connector bolts into wood framing shall require steel
plate washers on the post on the opposite side of the anchorage device. Plate
size shall be a minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm
by 76 mm) in size. Hold-down connectors shall be tightened to finger tight plus
one half (1/2) wrench turn just prior to covering the wall framing.
Section 2306.2 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2306.2 Wood-frame diaphragms.
   Wood-frame diaphragms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
AWC SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples,
requirements and limitations of
   AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in Table
2306.2(1) or 2306.2(2) shall only be permitted for structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.
      Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing
members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by cyclic
testing and approved by the building official.
   The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.2(1) and 2306.2(2) are permitted
to be increased 40 percent for wind design.
   Wood structural panel diaphragms used to resist seismic forces in structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F shall be applied directly to the
framing members.
   Exception: Wood structural panel diaphragms are permitted to be fastened
over solid lumber planking or laminated decking, provided the panel joints and
lumber planking or laminated decking joints do not coincide.
Section 2306.3 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2306.3 Wood-frame shear walls.
   Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
AWC SDPWS. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F,
application of Tables 4.3A and 4.3B of AWC SDPWS shall include the following:
   1.   Wood structural panel thickness for shear walls shall not be less than
3/8 inch thick and studs shall not be spaced at more than 16 inches on center.
   2.   The maximum nominal unit shear capacities for 3/8 inch wood structural
panels resisting seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design
Category D, E or F is 400 pounds per linear foot (plf).
         Exception: Other nominal unit shear capacities may be permitted if
such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building
official.
   3.   Nails shall be placed not less than 1/2 inch in from the panel edges
and not less than 3/8 inch from the edge of the connecting members for shear
greater than 350 plf using ASD or 500 plf using LRFD. Nails shall be placed not
less than 3/8 inch from panel edges and not less than 1/4 inch from the edge of
the connecting members for shears of 350 plf or less using ASD or 500 plf or
less using LRFD.
   4.   Table 4.3B application is not allowed for structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E, or F.
   For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, application of Table
4.3C of AWC SDPWS shall not be used below the top level in a multi-level
building.
   Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and
limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth
in Table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall only be permitted for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.
      Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing
members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by cyclic
testing and approved by the building official.
   The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3(2) are permitted
to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with ANSI/APA PRP-
210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood Siding in the AWC
SDPWS.
Section 2307.2 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   2307.2 Wood-frame shear walls.
   Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Section 2306.3 as applicable.
Table 2308.6.1 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6435.png]
 
Section 2308.6.5, Figure 2308.6.5.1, and Figure 2308.6.5.2 of the 2022 CBC are
amended to read as follows:
   2308.6.5 Alternative bracing.
   An alternate braced wall (ABW) or a portal frame with hold-downs (PFH)
described in this section is permitted to substitute for a 48-inch (1219 mm)
braced wall panel of Method DWB, WSP, SFB, PBS, PCP or HPS. For Method GB, each
96-inch (2438 mm) section (applied to one face) or 48-inch (1219 mm) section
(applied to both faces) or portion thereof required by Table 2308.6.1 is
permitted to be replaced by one panel constructed in accordance with Method ABW
or PFH.
   2308.6.5.1 Alternate braced wall (ABW).
   An ABW shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure
2308.6.5.1. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less
than 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm).
Each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 3/8-inch (3.2 mm) minimum-
thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized
box nails in accordance with Table 2304.10.2 and blocked at wood structural
panel edges. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, each
panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm)
wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on
panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports. Two anchor bolts installed in
accordance with Section 2308.3.1 shall be provided in each panel. Anchor bolts
shall be placed at each panel outside quarter points. Each panel end stud shall
have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation, capable of providing an
approved uplift capacity of not less than 1,800 pounds (8006 N). The hold-down
device shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations. The ABW shall be supported directly on a foundation or on
floor framing supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the
entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with
not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is
required to have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by
12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing is permitted at door openings in
the braced wall line. This continuous footing shall be reinforced with not less
than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped 24 inches
(610 mm) with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located
directly under the braced wall line.
   Where the ABW is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, the
wood structural panel sheathing shall be provided on both faces, three anchor
bolts shall be placed at one-quarter points and tie-down device uplift capacity
shall be not less than 3,000 pounds (13 344 N).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6429.png]
 
   2308.6.5.2 Portal frame with hold-downs (PFH).
   A PFH shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure
2308.6.5.2. The adjacent door or window opening shall have a full-length
header.
   In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 16
inches (406 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each panel
shall be sheathed on one face with a single layer of 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) minimum-
thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized
box nails in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. For structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D or E, each panel shall be sheathed on one face with
15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm) wood structural panel sheathing nailed
with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate
supports and in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. The wood structural panel
sheathing shall extend up over the solid sawn or glued-laminated header and
shall be nailed in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. A built-up header
consisting of at least two 2-inch by 12-inch (51 mm by 305 mm) boards, fastened
in accordance with Item 24 of Table 2304.10.1 shall be permitted to be used. A
spacer, if used, shall be placed on the side of the built-up beam opposite the
wood structural panel sheathing. The header shall extend between the inside
faces of the first full-length outer studs of each panel. The clear span of the
header between the inner studs of each panel shall be not less than 6 feet
(1829 mm) and not more than 18 feet (5486 mm) in length. A strap with an uplift
capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4,400 N) shall fasten the header to the
inner studs opposite the sheathing. One anchor bolt not less than 5/8 inch
(15.9 mm) diameter and installed in accordance with Section 2308.3.1 shall be
provided in the center of each sill plate. The studs at each end of the panel
shall have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift
capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds (15 570 N).
   Where a panel is located on one side of the opening, the header shall extend
between the inside face of the first full-length stud of the panel and the
bearing studs at the other end of the opening. A strap with an uplift capacity
of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N) shall fasten the header to the bearing
studs. The bearing studs shall also have a hold-down device fastened to the
foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N). The
hold-down devices shall be an embedded strap type, installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's recommendations. The PFH panels shall be supported directly
on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall
line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top
and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater
than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm)
continuous footing is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This
continuous footing shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and
bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped not less than 24 inches (610 mm)
with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly
under the braced wall line.
   Where a PFH is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, each
panel shall have a length of not less than 24 inches (610 mm).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6427.png]
 
Section 2308.6.8.1 of Chapter 23 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2308.6.8.1 Foundation requirements.
   Braced wall lines shall be supported by continuous foundations.
      Exception: For structures with a maximum plan dimension not more than 50
feet (15240 mm), continuous foundations are required at exterior walls only for
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.
   For structures in Seismic Design Categories D and E, exterior braced wall
panels shall be in the same plane vertically with the foundation or the portion
of the structure containing the offset shall be designed in accordance with
accepted engineering practice and Section 2308.1.1.
Section 2308.6.9 of the 2022 CBC is amended to read as follows:
   2308.6.9 Attachment of sheathing.
   Fastening of braced wall panel sheathing shall not be less than that
prescribed in Tables 2308.6.1 or 2304.10.2. Wall sheathing shall not be
attached to framing members by adhesives. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.2
shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned
to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
      Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when
the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by
the building official.
   All braced wall panels shall extend to the roof sheathing and shall be
attached to parallel roof rafters or blocking above with framing clips (18
gauge minimum) spaced at maximum 24 inches (6096 mm) on center with four 8d
nails per leg (total eight 8d nails per clip). Braced wall panels shall be
laterally braced at each top corner and at maximum 24 inches (6096 mm)
intervals along the top plate of discontinuous vertical framing.
Section 3115 of the 2022 CBC is amended as follows:
   SECTION 3115
   INTERMODAL SHIPPING CONTAINERS
   3115.1 General. The provisions of Section 3115 and other applicable sections
of this code shall apply to intermodal shipping containers that are repurposed
for use as buildings or structures or as a part of buildings or structures.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Not adopted.
   2.   Stationary storage battery arrays located in intermodal shipping
containers complying with Chapter 12 of the California Fire Code.
   3.   Intermodal shipping containers that are listed as equipment complying
with the standard for equipment, such as air chillers, engine generators,
modular datacenters, and other similar equipment.
   4.   Intermodal shipping containers housing or supporting experimental
equipment are exempt from the requirements of Section 3115 provided they comply
with all of the following:
      4.1.   Single-unit stand-alone intermodal shipping containers shall be
supported at grade level and used only for occupancies as specified under Risk
Category I in Table 1604.5;
      4.2.   Single-unit stand-alone intermodal shipping containers shall be
located a minimum of 8 feet from adjacent structures and are not connected to a
fuel gas system or fuel gas utility; and
      4.3.   In hurricane-prone regions and flood hazard areas, single-unit
stand-alone intermodal shipping containers are designed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of Chapter 16.
      4.4   Intermodal shipping containers approved as temporary structures
complying with Section 3103.
   5.   [HCD] shipping containers constructed or converted off-site that meet
the definition of Factory-built Housing in Health and Safety Code Section 19971
or Commercial Modular(s) as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18001.8
shall be approved by the Department of Housing and Community Development.
   6.   Single-unit stand-alone intermodal shipping containers used as
temporary storage or construction trailer on active construction sites.
Construction support facilities for uses and activities not directly associated
with the actual processes of construction, including but not limited to,
offices, meeting rooms, plan rooms, other administrative or support functions
shall not be exempt from Section 3115.
   3115.2 Construction documents. The construction documents shall contain
information to verify the dimensions and establish the physical properties of
the steel components, and wood floor components, of the intermodal shipping
container in addition to the information required by Sections 107 and 1603.
   3115.3 Intermodal shipping container information. Intermodal shipping
containers shall bear the manufacturer's existing data plate containing the
following information as required by ISO 6346 and verified by an approved
agency. A report of the verification process and findings shall be provided to
the building owner.
   1.   Manufacturer's name or identification number.
   2.   Date manufactured.
   3.   Safety approval number.
   4.   Identification number.
   5.   Maximum operating gross mass or weight (kg) (lbs).
   6.   Allowable stacking load for 1.8G (kg) (lbs).
   7.   Transverse racking test force (Newtons).
   8.   Valid maintenance examination date.
   Where approved by the building official, the markings and manufacturer's
existing data plate are permitted to be removed from the intermodal shipping
containers before they are repurposed for use as buildings or structures or as
part of buildings or structures.
   3115.4 Protection against decay and termites. Wood structural floors of
intermodal shipping containers shall be protected from decay and termites in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 2304.12.1.1.
   3115.5 Under-floor ventilation. The space between the bottom of the floor
joists and the earth under any intermodal shipping container, except spaces
occupied by basements and cellars, shall be provided with ventilation in
accordance with Section 1202.4.
   3115.6 Roof assemblies. Intermodal shipping container roof assemblies shall
comply with the applicable requirements of Chapter 15.
      Exception: Single-unit stand-alone intermodal shipping containers not
attached to, or stacked vertically over, other intermodal shipping containers,
buildings or structures.
   3115.7 Joints and voids. Joints and voids that create concealed spaces
between intermodal shipping containers, that are connected or stacked, at fire-
resistance-rated walls, floor or floor/ceiling assemblies and roofs or roof/
ceiling assemblies shall be protected by an approved fire-resistant joint
system in accordance with Section 715.
   3115.8 Structural. Intermodal shipping containers that conform to ISO 1496-
1 and are repurposed for use as buildings or structures, or as a part of
buildings or structures, shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 16 and
this section.
   3115.8.1 Foundations and supports. Intermodal shipping containers repurposed
for use as a permanent building or structure shall be supported on foundations
or other supporting structures designed and constructed in accordance with
Chapters 16 through 23.
      3115.8.1.1 Anchorage. Intermodal shipping containers shall be anchored to
foundations or other supporting structures as necessary to provide a continuous
load path for all applicable design and environmental loads in accordance with
Chapter 16.
      3115.8.1.2 Stacking. Intermodal shipping containers used to support
stacked units shall comply with Section 3115.8.4.
   3115.8.2 Welds. The strength of new welds and connections shall be no less
than the strength provided by the original connections. All new welds and
connections shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapters 16,
17 and 22.
   3155.8.3 Structural design. The structural design of the intermodal shipping
containers repurposed for use as a building or structure, or as part of a
building or structure, shall comply with Section 3115.8.4 or 3115.8.5.
   3115.8.4 Detailed structural design procedure. A structural analysis meeting
the requirements of this section shall be provided to the building official to
demonstrate the structural adequacy of the intermodal shipping containers.
         Exception: Structures using an intermodal shipping container that meet
the limitation of Section 3115.8.5.1 and designed in accordance with the
simplified procedure in Section 3115.8.5.
      3115.8.4.1 Material properties. Structural material properties for
existing intermodal shipping container steel components shall be established by
Section 2202.
      3115.8.4.2 Seismic design parameters. The seismic force-resisting system
shall be designed and detailed in accordance with ASCE 7 and one of the
following:
      1.   Where all or portions of the profiled steel panel elements are
considered to be the seismic force-resisting system, design and detailing shall
be in accordance with the AISI S100 and ASCE 7 Table 12.2-1 requirements for
systems not specifically detailed for seismic resistance, excluding
cantilevered column systems.
      2.   Where all or portions of the profiled steel panel elements are not
considered to be a part of the seismic force-resisting system, an independent
seismic force- resisting system shall be selected, and detailed in accordance
with ASCE 7 Table 12.2-1; or
      3.   Where all or portions of the profiled steel panel elements are
retained and integrated into a seismic force-resisting system other than as
permitted by Section 3115.8.4.2 Item 1, seismic design parameters shall be
developed from testing and analysis in accordance with Section 104.11 and ASCE
7 Section 12.2.1.1 or 12.2.1.2.
      3115.8.4.3 Allowable shear value. The allowable shear values for the
profiled steel panel side walls and end walls shall be determined in accordance
with the design approach selected in Section 3115.8.4.2. Where penetrations are
made in the side walls or end walls designated as part of the lateral force-
resisting system, the penetrations shall be substantiated by rational analysis.
   3115.8.5 Simplified structural design procedure of single-unit containers.
Single-unit intermodal shipping containers conforming to the limitations of
Section 3115.8.5.1 shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with
Sections 3115.8.5.2 and 3115.8.5.3.
      3115.8.5.1 Limitations. Use of Section 3115.8.5 is subject to all the
following limitations:
         1.   The intermodal shipping container shall be a single-unit, stand-
alone unit supported on a foundation and shall not be in contact with or
supporting any other shipping container or other structure.
         2.   The intermodal shipping container's top and bottom rails, corner
castings, and columns or any portion thereof shall not be notched, cut, or
removed in any manner.
         3.   The intermodal shipping container shall be erected in a level and
horizontal position with the floor located at the bottom.
         4.   The intermodal shipping container shall be located in Seismic
Design Category A, B, C, and D.
      3115.8.5.2 Simplified structural design assumptions. Where permitted by
Section 3115.8.5.1, single-unit stand-alone, intermodal shipping containers
shall be designed using the following assumptions for the profiled steel panel
side walls and end walls:
         1.   The appropriate detailing requirements contained in Chapters 16
through 23.
         2.   Response modification coefficient, R = 2,
         3.   Over strength factor, S0 = 2.5,
         4.   Deflection amplification factor, Cd = 2, and
         5.   Limits on structural height, hn = 9.5 feet (2900 mm).
      3115.8.5.3 Allowable shear value. The allowable shear values for the
profiled steel panel side walls (longitudinal) and end walls (transverse) for
wind design and seismic design using the coefficients of Section 3114.8.5.2
shall be in accordance with Table 3115.8.5.3, provided that all of the
following conditions are met:
         1.   The total linear length of all openings in any individual side
walls or end walls shall be limited to not more than 50 percent of the length
of that side walls or end walls, as shown in Figure 3115.8.5.3(1).
         2.   Any full height wall length, or portion thereof, less than 4 feet
(305 mm) long shall not be considered as a portion of the lateral force-
resisting system, as shown in Figure 3115.8.5.3(2).
         3.   All side walls or end walls used as part of the lateral force-
resisting system shall have an existing or new boundary element on all sides to
form a continuous load path, or paths, with adequate strength and stiffness to
transfer all forces from the point of application to the final point of
resistance, as shown in Figure 3115.8.5.3(3). The existing door interlocking
mechanism shall not be considered as a component of the required load path.
         4.   Where openings are made in container walls, floors, and roofs for
doors, windows and other similiar openings:
            4.1   The openings shall be framed with steel elements that are
designed in accordance with Chapter 16 and Chapter 22.
            4.2   The cross section and material grade of any new steel element
shall be equal to or greater than the steel element removed.
         5.   A maximum of one penetration not greater than a 6-inch (152 mm)
diameter hole for conduits, pipes, tubes or vents, or not greater than16 square
inches (10 322mm2) for electrical boxes, is permitted for each individual 8
feet length (2438 mm) lateral force resisting wall. Penetrations located in
walls that are not part of the wall lateral force resisting system shall not be
limited in size or quantity. Existing intermodal shipping container's vents
shall not be considered a penetration, as shown in Figure 3115.8.5.3(4).
         6.   End wall door or doors designated as part of the lateral force-
resisting system shall be welded closed around the full perimeters of the door
panels.
   TABLE 3115.8.5.3
   ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES FOR PROFILED STEEL PANEL
   SIDE WALLS AND END WALLS FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADING
CONTAINER    CONTAINER DIMENSION CONTAINER DIMENSION ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES
DESIGNATION2 (Nominal Length)    (Nominal Height)    (PLF)1,3
CONTAINER    CONTAINER DIMENSION CONTAINER DIMENSION ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES
DESIGNATION2 (Nominal Length)    (Nominal Height)    (PLF)1,3
                                                     Side Wall End Wall
1EEE         45 feet (13.7 M)    9.5 feet (2896 mm)  75
1EE                              8.6 feet (2591 mm)
1AAA                             9.5 feet (2896 mm)
1AA          40 feet (12.2 M)    8.5 feet (2592 mm)  84
1A                               8.0 feet (2438 mm)
1AX                              <8.0 feet (2483 mm)
1BBB                             9.5 feet (2896 mm)            843
1BB          30 feet (9.1 M)     8.5 feet (2591 mm)  112
1B                               8.0 feet (2438 mm)
1BX                              <8.0 feet (2438 mm)
1CC                              8.5 feet (2591 mm)
1C           20 feet (9.1 M)     8.0 feet (2438 mm)  168
1CX                              <8.0 feet (2438 mm)
 
         1.   The allowable shear values for the side walls and end walls of
the intermodal shipping containers are derived from ISO 1496-1 and reduced by a
factor of safety of 5.
         2.   Container designation type is derived from ISO 668.
         3.   Limitations of Sections 3115.8.5.1 and 3115.8.5.3 shall apply.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6425.png]
 
   FIGURE 3115.8.5.3(1)
   Bracing Unit Distribution - Maximum Linear Length
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6423.png]
 
   FIGURE 3115.8.5.3(2)
   Bracing Unit Distribution - Minimum Linear Length
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6421.png]
 
   FIGURE 3115.8.5.3(3)
   Bracing Unit Distribution - Boundary Elements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6419.png]
 
   FIGURE 3115.8.5.3(4)
   Bracing Unit Distribution - Penetrating Limitations
Section J101.3 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.3 Hazards.
   1.   Whenever the building official determines that any land or any existing
excavation or fill has, from any cause, become a menace to life or limb, or
endangers public or private property, or adversely affects the safety, use or
stability of public or private property, the owner or other person in legal
control of the property concerned shall, upon receipt of a written notice
thereof from the building official, correct such condition in accordance with
the provisions of this appendix and the requirements and conditions set forth
in the notice so as to eliminate such condition. The owner or other person in
legal control of the property shall immediately comply with the provisions set
forth in the notice and shall complete the work within 180 days from the date
of the notice unless a shorter period of time for completion has been specified
in the notice in which case the owner shall comply with the shorter period of
time. Upon written application and good cause shown, the building official may
approve the request for an extension of time to complete the work required by
the notice.
   2.   If the above condition is not eliminated within the specified time
period, the building official may file with the Office of the Los Angeles
County Recorder a certificate stating that the property is deemed substandard
and that the owner thereof has been so notified to correct the substandard
condition. Said certificate shall specify the conditions creating the
substandard classification.
   3.   When the above conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of
the building official, upon receiving a sixty-dollar fee from the owner or his
agent, the building official shall file with the Office of the Los Angeles
County Recorder, within a reasonable period of time, a certificate specifying
that the conditions creating the substandard classification have been corrected
and that the property is no longer considered substandard.
Section J101.4 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.4 Safety Precautions.
   1.   General.
      a)   If at any stage of work on an excavation or fill, the building
official determines that the work has become or is likely to become dangerous
to any person, or is likely to endanger any property, public or private, the
building official must be authorized to require safety precautions to be
immediately taken by the property owner as a condition to continuing such
permitted work or to require cessation thereof forthwith unless and until it is
made safe and to amend the plans for such work.
      b)   Safety precautions may include, without limitation, specifying a
flatter exposed slope or construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
terracing, compaction, cribbing, retaining walls or buttress fills, slough
walls, desilting basins, check dams, benching, wire mesh and guniting, rock
fences, revetments or diversion walls.
      c)   Upon the determination of the building official that such safety
precautions during grading are necessary, the building official must provide a
notice and order to the permittee to implement same. After receiving such
notice, oral or written, it is unlawful for the permittee or any person to
proceed with such work contrary to such order.
   2.   Removal of Ground Cover.
      a)   The existing vegetative ground cover of any watershed in any
hillside area cannot be destroyed, removed or damaged except for routine
maintenance pursuant to lawful grading, use or occupancy of the property or to
clear hazardous vegetation near structures and roads.
      b)   Whenever ground cover is removed or damaged pursuant to a validly
issued grading permit, the permittee must restore and maintain the affected
area with an approved ground cover, or must accomplish such other erosion
control protection measures as may be approved by the building official. Such
erosion control must be completed within thirty days after cessation of the
grading work or other work pursuant to a validly issued building permit.
   3.   Maintenance of Protective Devices.
      All devices used to protect hillside areas from erosion or landslide
damage including, without limitation, retaining walls, cribbing, terracing,
surface and subsurface drainage structures, interceptor drains, check dams, and
riprap must be maintained in good condition and repair as approved by the
building official at the time of completion of construction thereof.
Section J101.5 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.5 Protection of Utilities.
   The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed
and that requires a grading permit must be responsible for the prevention of
damage to any public utilities or services.
Section J101.6 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J 101.6 Protection of Adjacent Properties.
   The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed
and that requires a grading permit is responsible for the prevention of damage
to adjacent property and no person must excavate on land sufficiently close to
the property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public or private property without supporting and protecting such
property from settling, cracking or other damage that might result. Special
precautions approved by the building official must be made to prevent imported
or exported materials from being deposited on the adjacent public way and/or
drainage courses. A 30 day excavation notice must be provided as required by
California Civil Code Section 829-834 when the excavation is of sufficient
depth and proximity to adjacent lot structures.
Section J101.7 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.7 Storm water control measures.
   The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed
and that requires a grading permit under Section J103 shall put into effect and
maintain all precautionary measures necessary to protect adjacent water courses
and public private property from damage by erosion, flooding, and deposition of
mud, debris and construction-related pollutants originating from the site
during, and after, grading and related construction activities. Furthermore,
the owner and permittee shall be responsible for putting into effect and
maintaining appropriate measures necessary to prevent any change in cross-lot
surface drainage that may adversely affect any adjoining property as a result
of grading and/or construction-related activities. Such measures to prevent any
adverse cross-lot surface drainage effects on adjoining property shall be
required whether shown on approved grading plans or not.
Section J101.8 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.8 Conditions of approval.
   In granting any permit under this code, the building official may include
such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a
nuisance or hazard to public or private property. Such conditions may include,
but shall not be limited to:
      1.   Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of
this code.
      2.   Requirements for fencing of excavations or fills which would
otherwise be hazardous.
Section J101.9 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J101.9 Rules and regulations.
      J101.9.1 Rules. The permissive provisions of this chapter shall not be
presumed to waive any regulations imposed by other statutes or other ordinances
of the State of California or the City of El Segundo.
      J101.9.2 Regulations. If two or more pertinent regulations are not
identical, those regulations shall prevail which are more restrictive or which
afford greater safety to life, limb, health, property or welfare. For the
purposes of these regulations, grading permits shall be considered as building
permits and shall be subject to the administrative provisions of this code,
unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter.
Section J103.2 is amended to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J103.2 Exemptions.
   A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
      1.   When approved by the building official, grading in an isolated,
self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such
grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
      2.   Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code
where the excavation is limited to within the volume of the proposed structure.
      3.   Cemetery graves.
      4.   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
      5.   Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.
      6.   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand,
aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do
not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil
and adjoining properties.
      7.   Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a
registered soils engineer or engineering geologist. This shall not exempt
grading of access roads or pads created for exploratory excavations.
Exploratory excavations must not create a hazardous condition to adjacent
properties or the public in accordance with Section J101.3. Exploratory
excavations must be restored to existing conditions, unless approved by the
building official.
      8.   An excavation that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m^) and
complies with one of the following conditions:
         (1)   is less than 2 feet (0.6 m) in depth.
         (2)   does not create a cut slope greater than 5 feet (1.5 m) measured
vertically upward from the cut surface to the surface of the natural grade and
is not steeper than 2 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
      9.   A fill not intended to support a structure that does not obstruct a
drainage course and complies with one of the following conditions:
         (a)   is less than 1 foot (0.3 m) in depth and is placed on natural
terrain with a slope flatter than 5 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (20
percent slope).
         (b)   is less than 3 feet (0.9 m) in depth at its deepest point
measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does
not exceed 50 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than 2 units
horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
         (c)   is less than 5 feet (1.5 m) in depth at its deepest point
measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does
not exceed 20 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than 2 units
horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
   Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed
to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of
the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
Section J103.3 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J103.3 Permit issuance.
      1.   The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization
to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for
the permit or on the grading plans and specifications approved by the building
official at the time of issuance.
      2.   Jurisdiction of other agencies. Permits issued under the
requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for
securing required permits for work to be accomplished which is regulated by any
other code, department or division of the governing agency.
      3.   Conditions of permit. The building official, upon recommendation of
the city traffic and transportation administrator, may impose such regulations
with respect to access routes to and from grading sites in hillside areas as
the building official shall determine are required in the interest of safety
precautions involving pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      4.   Consent of adjacent property owner. Whenever any excavation or fill
requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permit applicant
shall obtain the written consent or legal easements or other property rights of
the adjacent property owner or their authorized representative, and shall file
a signed and duly notarized copy of such consent with the building official,
and no permit for such grading work may be issued unless and until all
necessary consent documents are so filed. The consent shall be in a form
acceptable to the building official.
Section J103.4 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J103.4 Grading fees.
      1.   Fees for grading plan check and for grading permits shall be
established or modified by resolution of the city council. The schedule of such
fees shall remain on file and be available in the office of the building
official. The building official shall, with the approval of the city manager,
recommend changes to the council when the costs to provide grading plan check
and grading inspection services make it appropriate.
      2.   The applicant shall pay a plan check fee prior to acceptance of
grading plans and specifications for checking by the city. The plan check fee
shall be based on the total volume of the excavation and fill, on the site. The
grading plan check fee shall be recalculated each time the grading plan volume
of excavation and fill exceeds the volume used to determine the original plan
check fee, and the applicant shall pay the difference between the revised and
original fee before the revised grading plans are accepted for review by the
city. The original grading plan check fee includes the cost to the applicant
for the original submittal plus two additional submittals of corrected grading
plans and specifications. When required by the building official, the applicant
shall pay a supplemental grading plan check fee in accordance with the fee
resolution established by the city council.
      3.   Whenever the applicant submits a grading plan for plan check that is
substantially different in design of the earthwork as compared to previously
submitted grading plans, the submittal shall be considered an original and a
new grading plan check fee shall be determined and paid to the city as provided
in this section.
      4.   The applicant shall pay a grading permit fee prior to the issuance
of a grading permit by the city. The fee shall be based on the total volume of
excavation and fill, on the site. If, during grading operations, the plans and
specifications for the grading project are revised increasing the volume of
excavation, fill, or a combination thereof above the volume that was used to
determine the grading permit fee, the applicant shall pay to the city the
difference between the original grading permit fee and the recalculated fee
before work may resume under the grading permit.
      5.   Whenever grading operations are commenced without an approved
grading permit, a penalty shall be added to all unpaid fees for grading plan
check and grading permits. The penalty shall be three hundred percent of all
fees due the city.
Section J104.2.1 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J104.2.1 Grading Designation.
   Grading in hilly terrain and all grading in excess of 2,500 cubic yards
shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a
registered civil engineer, and shall be designated as "engineered grading."
Grading involving less than 2,500 cubic yards and not located in an area of
mountainous terrain shall be designated as "regular grading" unless the
permittee chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading, or the
building official determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist,
in which case grading shall conform to the requirements for engineered grading.
Section J104.2.2 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J104.2.2 Regular grading requirements.
   In addition to the provisions of Section 106, and Section 104.2, Chapter 1,
Division II, an application for a regular grading permit shall be accompanied
by plans in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work.
The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner, and the
name of the person who prepared the plan. If the slope of the grade exceeds 3
units horizontal to 1 unit vertical or as required by the building official,
the plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual
licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications. The plan shall
include the following information:
      1.   General vicinity of the proposed site.
      2.   Limits and depths of cut and fill.
      3.   Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be
performed, and the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet (4.6
m) of the proposed grading.
      4.   Contours, flow areas, elevations, or slopes which define existing
and proposed drainage patterns.
      5.   Storm water provisions in accordance with the requirements of
Appendix J and Title 5 Chapter 4 of the City of El Segundo Municipal Code.
      6.   Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities,
and recorded public and private easements and use restricted use areas.
      7.   Location of all Special Flood Hazard Areas as designated and defined
in Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations.
Section J104.2.3 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J104.2.3 Engineered grading requirements.
   In addition to the provisions of Chapter 1 Division II, Section 107 and
Appendix J Section J 104.2, an application for an engineered grading permit
shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, and supporting data
consisting of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report. The
plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed
by the state to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the
building official. Specifications shall contain information covering structures
and material requirements. Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and
show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set
of plans shall give location of the work, the name and address of the owner,
and the person by whom they were prepared. The plans shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following information:
   1.   General vicinity of the proposed site.
   2.   Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of
terrain and area drainage.
   3.   Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finish contours to be achieved by
the grading, proposed drainage channels, and related structures.
   4.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls,
cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a
part of, the proposed work. A map showing the drainage area and the estimated
runoff of the area served by any drains shall also be provided.
   5.   Location of any existing or proposed buildings or structures on the
property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or
structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet (4.6 m) of the
property or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations.
   6.   Recommendations in the geotechnical engineering report and the
engineering geology report shall be incorporated into the grading plans or
specifications. When approved by the building official, specific
recommendations contained in the geotechnical engineering report and the
engineering geology report, that are applicable to grading, may be included by
reference.
   7.   The dates of the geotechnical engineering and engineering geology
reports together with the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the firms
or individuals who prepared the reports.
   8.   A statement of the earthwork quantities of materials to be excavated
and/or filled. Earthwork quantities shall include quantities for geotechnical
and geological remediation. In addition, a statement of material to be imported
or exported from the site.
   9.   A statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for work
covered by the permit.
   10.   A statement signed by the owner acknowledging that a field engineer,
geotechnical engineer and engineering geologist, when appropriate, will be
employed to perform the services required by this code, whenever approval of
the plans and issuance of the permit are to be based on the condition that such
professional persons be so employed. These acknowledgments shall be on a form
furnished by the building official.
   11.   Storm water provisions are required to be shown on the grading plan in
accordance with Appendix J Section J and Title 5 Chapter 4 of the ESMC.
   12.   A drainage plan for that portion of a lot or parcel to be utilized as
a building site (building pad), including elevation of floors with respect to
finish site grade and locations of existing and proposed stoops, slabs, fences
or other features that may affect drainage.
   13.   Location and type of any existing or proposed private sewage disposal
system.
   14.   Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities, and
recorded public and private easements.
   15.   Location of all recorded floodways.
   16.   Location of all Special Flood Hazard Areas as designated and defined
in Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations.
Section J109.5 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   J109.5 Disposal.
   All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest
practicable street, storm drain, or natural watercourse drainage way approved
by the building official or other appropriate governmental agency jurisdiction
provided it is a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the
area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-erosive down drains
or other devices. Desilting basins, filter barriers or other methods, as
approved by the building official, shall be utilized to remove sediments from
surface waters before such waters are allowed to enter streets, storm drains,
or natural watercourses. If the drainage device discharges onto natural ground,
riprap or a similar energy dissipater may be required. Building pads shall have
a minimum drainage gradient of 2 percent toward approved drainage facilities, a
public street or drainage structure approved to receive storm waters unless
waived by the building official. A lesser slope may be approved by the building
official for sites graded in relatively flat terrain, or where special drainage
provisions are made, when the building official finds such modification will
not result in unfavorable drainage conditions.
Section J113 is added to the 2022 CBC to read as follows:
   SECTION J113
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) COMPLIANCE
   J113.1 General.
   All grading plans and permits shall comply with the provisions of this
section for NPDES compliance including the owner of any property on which
grading has been performed and which requires a grading permit under Appendix J
Section J103. Sites which have been graded and which require a grading permit
under Appendix J Section J103 are subject to penalties and fines per Appendix J
Section J113.4. All best management practices shall be installed before grading
begins or as instructed in writing by the building official for unpermitted
grading as defined by Section J 103.3. As grading progresses, all best
management practices shall be updated as necessary to prevent erosion and
control structures related pollutants from discharging from the site. All best
management practices shall be maintained in good working order to the
satisfaction of the building official unless final grading approval has been
granted by the building official and all permanent drainage and erosion control
systems, if required, are in place.
   J113.2 Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP).
   When requested by the building official, no grading permit shall be issued
unless the plans for such work include a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
with details of best management practices, including desilting basins or other
temporary drainage or control measures, or both, as may be necessary to control
structures-related pollutants which originate from the site as a result of
structures related activities. For unpermitted grading as defined by Section
J103.3 upon written request a SWPPP in compliance with the provisions of this
section and Section J106.4.3 for NPDES compliance shall be submitted to the
building official.
   J113.3 Wet weather erosion control plans (WWECP).
   In addition to the SWPPP required in Appendix J Section J113.2, where a
grading permit is issued and it appears that the grading will not be completed
prior to November 1, then on or before October 1 the owner of the site on which
the grading is being performed shall file or cause to be filed with the
building official a WWECP which includes specific best management practices to
minimize the transport of sediment and protect public and private property from
the effects of erosion, flooding or the deposition of mud, debris or structures
related pollutants. The best management practices shown on the WWECP shall be
installed on or before October 15. The plans shall be revised annually or as
required by the building official to reflect the current site conditions. The
WWECP shall be accompanied by an application for plan checking services and
plan check fees equal in amount to 10 percent of the original grading permit
fee.
(Ord. 1524, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1596, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 2
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
13-2-1: Adoption Of California Residential Code, 2022 Edition
13-2-2: Amendments To The California Residential Code
13-2-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 50022.2, the California
Residential Code, 2022 Edition, published at title 24, part 2.5, of the
California Code of Regulations, including Appendices J and AX (“CRC”) is
adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set
forth in Section
13-1-2. One true copy of the CRC, is on file in the office of the Building
Official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1525,
12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1597, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE:
The California Residential Code adopted pursuant to Section 13-2-1 is hereby
amended as follows:
Subsection 11 is added to section R105.2 of the 2022 CRC:
   R105.2 Work exempt from permit.
   Building
   11.   Block wall and concrete fences not over 3 feet 6 inches high.
Section R105.3.2 of the 2022 CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   R105.3.2 Expiration of Plan Check.
   An application for a permit for any proposed work is deemed to have been
abandoned 12 months after the application date. Unless otherwise provided,
after expiration of the application, the City will not issue a permit until the
plans are rechecked and approved and a new fee is paid.
      Exception: The Building Official may grant extensions of time for
additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if a permit applicant submits in
writing sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or circumstances precluded
the securing of the permit within the allocated time.
Section R105.8 of Chapter 1 of the 2022 CRC is added to read as follows:
   R105.8 Responsibility of permittee.
   Building permits shall be presumed by the city to incorporate all the work
that the applicant, the applicant's agent, employees and/or contractors shall
carry out. Said proposed work shall be in accordance with the approved plans
and with all requirements of this code and any other laws or regulations
applicable thereto. No city approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from
the responsibility of complying with the provisions of this code nor shall any
vested rights be created for any work performed in violation of this code.
Section R108.5.1 of Chapter 1 of the 2022 CRC is added to read as follows:
   R108.5.1 Plan check fees refund.
   No portion of the plan check fee shall be refunded unless plan review has
not been performed, in which case 80 percent of the plan check fee shall be
refunded upon written application for refund submitted by the person who made
original payment of such fee and with the written consent of the owner of the
real property on which the work was proposed to be done. The Building Official
shall determine, in such official's discretion, whether an applicant is
qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from the date of the
submittal for plan check, no plan check fees shall be refunded. In the event
subsequent application for plan check is made by a person who has received a
refund, the full amount of all required fees shall be paid as elsewhere
provided in this chapter.
Section R108.5.2 of Chapter 1 of the 2022 CRC is added to read as follows:
   R108.5.2 Permit fees refund.
   In the event any person shall have obtained a building permit and no portion
of the work or construction covered by such permit shall have commenced, nor
any inspection performed by any City employee, and notice of abandonment has
been received from the owner of the real property on which such work would have
been performed, the permittee, upon presentation to the Building Official of a
written request for refund, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to
80 percent of the building permit fee actually paid for such permit. The
Building Official shall determine, in such official's discretion, whether an
applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 12 months have elapsed from
the date of the issuance of the permit, no permit fees shall be refunded. In
the event subsequent application for a permit is made by a person who has
received a refund, the full amount of all required fees shall be paid as
elsewhere provided in this chapter.
      Exception:
      1.   If a permit has been issued for a project located in an area outside
the jurisdiction of the City, 100 percent of the permit and plan checking fee
may be refunded.
      2.   If a duplicate permit has been erroneously issued, 100 percent of
the duplicated permit and plan checking fee may be refunded.
Section R108.6 of Chapter 1 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance.
   Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be
subject to a fee in addition to the normally established permit fee, equal to
100% of such normally established permit fee, or as otherwise determined by the
building official.
Section R109.1.7 of Chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
   R109.1.7 Setback Certification required.
   A California State licensed surveyor is required to certify the location and
setbacks of all new construction prior to the first foundation inspection. A
copy of the certification shall be available to the Building Division inspector
for the job file prior to the first inspection.
      Exception: Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of this section, the Building Official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases.
Section R109.5 of Chapter 1 of the 2022 CRC is hereby added to read as follows:
   R109.5 Re-inspections.
   A re-inspection fee in the amount set by the City Council resolution may be
assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for
which inspection is called is incomplete or when required corrections called
are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection
fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the
requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for
inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. Re-
inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted
or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily
available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which
inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of
the building official. In instances where re-inspection fees have been
assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until required
fees have been paid.
Section R112.3 of Chapter 1 of the 2022 CRC is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   R112.3 Board of Appeals.
   The board of appeals consists of members of the Planning Commission. The
term of a board of appeals member will coincide with the term of service as a
Planning Commissioner and will terminate should the member cease serving as a
Planning Commissioner. The building official is the secretary to the board. The
board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and will render all its decisions and findings on contested
matters, in writing to the building official, with a duplicate copy for any
appellant or contestant affected by such decision or finding, and may recommend
to the city council appropriate new legislation.
   Three members of the board constitute a quorum. The Planning Chairperson is
the board's chairperson and in the chairperson's absence the board will select
a temporary chairperson.
   The city will assess a filing fee set by City Council resolution, at the
time that an appellant files appeal of any order, decisions, or determination
made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of
this code. The filing fee is refundable should the appellant prevail in a
decision by the board. The appeal must be taken by filing a written notice of
appeal, in letterform, to the board of appeals. The board's decision
constitutes the city's final decision.
Section R301.1.3.2 of Chapter 3 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R301.1.3.2 Wood-frame structures.
   The building official shall require construction documents to be approved
and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of
wood-frame construction more than two stories and basement in height located in
Seismic Design Category A, B or C. Notwithstanding other sections of law; the
law establishing these provisions is found in Business and Professions Code
Section 5537 and 6737.1.
   The building official shall require construction documents to be approved
and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of
wood-frame construction more than one story in height or with a basement
located in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, D2.
Section R301.1.5 is added to Chapter 3 of the 2022 CRC to read as follows:
   R301.1.5 Seismic design provisions for buildings constructed on or into
slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3 percent
slope).
   The design and construction of new buildings and additions to existing
buildings when constructed on or into slopes steeper than one-unit vertical in
three units horizontal (33.3 percent slope) shall comply with Section 1613.9 of
the Building Code.
Items 1, 3 and 5 of Section R301.2.2.2.6 of the 2022 CRC are amended to read as
follows:
   R301.2.2.2.6 Irregular Buildings.
   1.   Shear wall or braced wall offsets out of plane. Conditions where
exterior shear wall lines or braced wall panels are not in one plane vertically
from the foundation to the uppermost story in which they are required.
   3.   Shear wall or braced wall offsets in plane.  Conditions where the end
of a braced wall panel occurs over an opening in the wall below.
   5.   Floor level offset. Conditions where portions of a floor level are
vertically offset.
Section R301.2.2.3.11 is added to Chapter 3 of the 2022 CRC to read as follows:
   R301.2.2.3.11 Anchorage of Mechanical, Electrical, or Plumbing Components
and Equipment.
   Mechanical, electrical, or plumbing components and equipment shall be
anchored to the structure. Anchorage of the components and equipment shall be
designed to resist loads in accordance with the California Building Code and
ASCE 7, except where the component is positively attached to the structure and
flexible connections are provided between the component and associated
ductwork, piping, and conduit; and either
      1.   The component weighs 400 lbs. (1,780 N) or less and has a center of
mass located 4 ft. (1.22 m) or less above the supporting structure; or
      2.   The component weighs 20 lbs. (89N) or less or, in the case of a
distributed system, 5 lb/ft. (73 N/m) or less.
Section R313.1 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R313.1 Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
      A.   New Buildings and Structures: Unless otherwise prohibited by law,
approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be
required for all occupancies.
      B.   Existing Buildings and Structures:  Unless otherwise prohibited by
law, any work to an existing building which removes more than fifty percent
(50%) of the exterior perimeter wall height as defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for
additions and alterations will require the existing building to be fully
sprinklered throughout.
   R313.1.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems.
   An approved automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed
in townhouses.
      Exception:  Deleted.
   R313.1.2 Design and installation.
   Automatic fire sprinkler systems for townhouses shall be designed and
installed in accordance with Section R313.3, NFPA 13 or NFPA 13D.
Section R328.1 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R328.1 General.
   Energy storage systems (ESS) shall comply with the provisions of this
section and the El Segundo Fire Code.
      Exceptions: Deleted.
Section R328.4 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R328.4 Locations.
   ESS shall be installed only in the following locations:
      1.   Detached garages and detached accessory structures.
      2.   Deleted.
      3.   Outdoors or on the exterior side of exterior walls located not less
than 3 feet (914 mm) from doors and windows directly entering the dwelling
unit; including accessory dwelling units.
      4.   Deleted.
Section R328.5 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R328.5 Energy Ratings.
   Individual ESS units shall have a maximum rating of 20 kWh. The aggregate
rating of the ESS shall not exceed:
      1.   Delete.
      2.   80 kWh in attached or detached garages and detached accessory
structures.
      3.   80 kWh on exterior walls.
      4.   80 kWh outdoors on the ground.
   ESS installations exceeding the permitted individual or aggregate ratings
shall be installed in accordance with Section 1207 of the El Segundo Fire Code.
Section R328.7 of the 2022 CRC is deleted in its entirety:
Section R341 is added to the 2022 CRC to read as follows:
   R341 RESIDENTIAL NOISE INSULATION STANDARDS (Airport Noise Sources)
   R341.1 Noise Insulation Requirements for New Construction.
   R341.2 Purpose and Scope.
   The purpose of this section is to establish minimum noise insulation
performance standards for new residential dwelling units and additions of
habitable rooms to existing residential dwelling units to protect public
health, safety, and welfare from the effects of excessive noise, including
without limitation, indoor quality of life, speech interference, and sleep
disruption.
   R341.3 Applicability.
   This section applies to all newly constructed residences and habitable room
additions to existing residences.
   R341.4 Definitions.
   For purposes of this section, the following words must have the following
meaning:
   "Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)" means the noise measure defined in
21 Code of California Regulations § 5001(d), and any successor regulation or
amendment.
   "Habitable Room" means a room that is a space in a structure for living,
sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage or utility space, garages, and similar areas are not considered
habitable space.
   "LAX" means Los Angeles International Airport.
   "Noise Impact Boundary for LAX" means the area around LAX as defined in 21
California code of regulations § 5001(1), and any successor regulation or
amendment. The city's building safety department must at all times maintain a
current map of the noise impact boundary. The latest published map by LAWA
located at the Building Safety Counter shall be used as the basis for
determination.
   "Residence" means any occupancy group R building as used in El Segundo Title
13 of the El Segundo municipal code.
   R341.5 Standards.
   Any new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing
residence that is within the noise impact boundary for LAX must be designed to
ensure that internal noise levels due to LAX do not exceed 45 dB CNEL. This
standard may be satisfied in two ways: (1) by performing the acoustical
analysis described in section R341.1207.6.06, below, or (2) by employing the
prescribed construction methods described in section R341.1207.6.07, below.
   R341.6 Acoustical Analysis.
   A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more
habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum noise
insulation performance standards established in this section if it includes an
acoustical analysis demonstrating that the proposed design will ensure that
internal noise levels due to LAX aircraft noise will not exceed 45 dB CNEL. The
acoustical analysis shall be proven to meet the standard by providing post-
construction/pre-occupancy acoustic measurement to verify compliance with the
45 dB CNEL standard. The Building Official has the discretion to implement
policies that meet the intent of this code section.
      A.   The acoustical analysis must be prepared by a person experienced in
the field of acoustical engineering. The analysis must consider and include:
the topographical relationship between LAX aircraft noise sources and the
dwelling site, the characteristics of those noise sources, predicted noise
spectra and levels at the exterior of the dwelling site, the basis for this
prediction (measured or obtained from published data), the noise insulation
measures to be employed, and the effectiveness of the proposed noise insulation
measures.
      B.   If the interior allowable noise levels are to be met by requiring
that windows be unopenable or closed, the design for the structure must also
specify a ventilation or air-conditioning system to provide a habitable
interior environment, having at least 2 air exchanges per hour for the affected
rooms. The ventilation system must not compromise the interior room noise
reduction.
   R341.7 Prescribed Construction Methods.
   A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more
habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum noise
insulation performance standards established in this section if the design
incorporates the following construction methods.
   Construction Methods in the 70 dB CNEL and Greater Noise Zone
   R341.8 Exterior Walls.
   New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be
constructed as follows:
      A.   Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
      B.   Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick
veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal
siding must be installed over 1/2-inch minimum solid sheathing.
      C.   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per
square foot must require an interior supporting stud-wall that is finished with
at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster.
      D.   Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool
and must be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
      E.   Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt
felt.
      F.   Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall
board or plaster.
   R341.9 Exterior Windows.
      A.   Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of
habitable rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC 40 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5
cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
      B.   Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms must:
         1.   Have a sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB, or
         2.   Must be 5/8-inch laminated glass with STC rating of 40 dB and
must be set in non-hardening glazing materials, or
         3.   Must be glass block at least 3 1/2 inches thick.
      C.   The total areas of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not
exceed 20% of the wall area.
   R341.10 Exterior Doors.
      A.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed
to aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and
edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least
STC 40 dB.
      B.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly
exposed to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a
minimum STC rating of 35 dB.
      C.   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must not be allowed in walls
that are directly exposed to aircraft noise. Sliding glass doors in walls that
are not directly exposed must have an STC rating of at least 40 dB.
      D.   Access doors from attached garage to the interior of a residence
must have an STC rating of at least 30 dB.
   R341.11 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
      A.   Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered
on their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this code.
      B.   Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
      C.   Attic ventilation must be:
         1.   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are
fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating
flexible ducting or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated
fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree
bend in the duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior
through the duct into the attic, or
         2.   Noise control louver vents, or
         3.   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
         4.   Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least 5/8-inch thick. Ceiling materials must be mounted on resilient channels.
         5.   Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line or at
any point that provides at least a 4-inch space between the skylight glazing
and the secondary glazing and must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic or
laminated glass. The weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted
by the building code. The size of skylights must be no more than 20 percent of
the roof area of the room.
   R341.12 Ventilation.
      A.   A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the
exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated flexible glass fiber ducting
that is at least 10 feet long between any two points of connection.
      B.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   R341.13 Fireplaces.
   Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that
is operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
   R341.14 Wall and Ceiling Openings.
   Openings in the shell of the residence that degrade its ability to achieve
an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed
are prohibited unless access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-
conditioning, or other openings are designed to maintain the 45 dB CNEL (or
less) standard in the room to which they provide access.
   Construction Methods In The 65 dB CNEL To 70 dB CNEL Noise Zone
   R341.15 Exterior Walls.
   New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be
constructed as follows:
      A.   Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
      B.   Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick
veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal
siding must be installed over 1/2-inch solid sheathing.
      C.   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per
square foot will require an interior stud wall that is finished with at least
5/8-inch thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
      D.   Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool
and must be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
   Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
      E.   Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum
wallboard or plaster.
   R341.16 Exterior Windows.
      A.   Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of
habitable rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC 35 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5
cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
      B.   Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms must be at least 1/4-inch thick and must be set in non-hardening glazing
materials.
      C.   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed
20% of the floor area.
   R341.17 Exterior Doors.
      A.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed
to aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and
edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least
STC 35 dB.
      B.   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly
exposed to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a
minimum STC rating of 30 dB.
      C.   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must have glass that is 1/4-
inch thick.
      D.   Access doors from a garage to a habitable room must have an STC
rating of at least 30 dB.
   R341.18 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
      A.   Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered
on their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this code.
      B.   Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
      C.   Attic ventilation must be:
         1.   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are
fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating
flexible ducting or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated
fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree
bend in the duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior
through the duct into the attic, or
         2.   Noise control louver vents, or
         3.   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
      D.   Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least 5/8-inch thick.
      E.   Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line and must
be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated glass. The
weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted by the building code.
   R341.19 Floors.
   The floor of the lowest habitable rooms must be concrete slab on grade or
wood framed floors.
   R341.20 Ventilation.
      A.   A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of at least 2 air
exchanges in each affected habitable room without opening any window, door or
other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated
flexible glass fiber ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any two
points of connection.
      B.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   R341.21 Fireplaces.
   Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that
is operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
   R341.22 Wall and Ceiling Openings. Openings in the shell of the residence
that degrade its ability to achieve an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less
when all doors and windows are closed are prohibited. Any access panels, pet
doors, mail delivery drops, air-conditioning, or other openings must be
designed to maintain the 45 dB CNEL or less standard in the room to which they
provide access.
Section R401.1 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R401.1 Application.
   The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of
the foundation and foundation spaces for buildings. In addition to the
provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in flood
hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) shall meet the provisions of
Section R322. Wood foundations shall be designed and installed in accordance
with AWC PWF.
      Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be used
for wood foundations only in the following situations:
         1.   In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof.
         2.   When interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at
intervals not exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm).
   Wood foundations in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2 shall not be
permitted.
      Exception: In non-occupied, single-story, detached storage sheds and
similar uses other than carport or garage, provided the gross floor area does
not exceed 200 square feet, the plate height does not exceed 12 feet in height
above the grade plane at any point, and the maximum roof projection does not
exceed 24 inches.
Section R403.1.2 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R403.1.2 Continuous footing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.
   Exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and
D2 shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete
footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings located in
Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be supported on continuous
foundations.
Section R403.1.3.6 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R403.1.3.6 Isolated concrete footings.
   In detached one- and two-family dwellings located in Seismic Design Category
A, B, or C that are three stories or less in height and constructed with stud
bearing walls, isolated plain concrete footings supporting columns or pedestals
are permitted.
Section R403.1.5 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R403.1.5 Slope.
   The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings
shall not have a slope exceeding one-unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-
percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the
elevation of the top surface of the footings or where the slope of the bottom
surface of the footings will exceed one-unit vertical in 10 units horizontal
(10-percent slope).
   For structures located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 or D2, stepped
footings shall be reinforced with four No. 4 rebar. Two bars shall be place at
the top and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure R403.1.5.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6461.png]
 
   FIGURE R403.1.5 - STEPPED FOOTING
Section R404.2 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R404.2 Wood foundation walls.
   Wood foundation walls shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions
of Sections R404.2.1 through R404.2.6 and with the details shown in Figures
R403.1(2) and R403.1(3). Wood foundation walls shall not be used for structures
located in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2.
Section R501.2 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R501.2 Requirements.
   Floor construction shall be capable of accommodating all loads in accordance
with Section R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting
structural elements. Mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment shall be
attached or anchored to the structure in accordance with Section R301.2.2.11.
Section R503.2.4 is added to Chapter 5 of the CRC to read as follows:
   R503.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms.
   Openings in horizontal diaphragms with a dimension per pendicular to the
joist that is greater than 4 feet (1.2 m) shall be constructed in accordance
with Figure R503.2.4.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6459.png]
 
      a.   Blockings shall be provided beyond headers.
      b.   Metal ties not less than 0.058 inch [1.47 mm (16 galvanized gage)]
by 1.5 inches (38 mm) wide with eight 16d common nails on each side of the
header-joist intersection. The metal ties shall have a minimum yield of 33,000
psi (227 MPa).
      c.   Openings in diaphragms shall be further limited in accordance with
Section R301.2.2.2.6.
   FIGURE R503.2.4
   OPENINGS IN HORIZONTAL DIAPHRAGMS
Table R602.3(1) lines 20, 21, 24, 34-37 of the 2022 CRC are amended to read as
follows:
   TABLE R602.3(1) - continued
   FASTENING SCHEDULE
Item Description of Building Number and Type of Spacing and Location
     Elements                Fastenera,b,c
                                                                                                                            Spacing
Item Description of Building Elements       Number and Type of Fastenera,b,c                                                and
                                                                                                                            Location
                                            3-8d box (2½” x 0.113"); or
                                            2-8d common (2½” x 0.131"); or                                               Face
20k  1" x 6" sheathing to each bearing      2-10d box (3" x 0.128"); or                                                     nail
                                            2 staples, 1" crown, 16 ga.,
                                            1¾” long
                                            3-8d box (2½” x 0.113"); or
                                            3-8d common (2½” x 0.131"); or
                                            3-10d box (3" x 0.128"); or
                                            3 staples, 1" crown, 16 ga.,
     1" x 8" and wider sheathing to each    1¾” long                                                                     Face
21k  bearing                                Wider than 1" x 8"                                                              nail
                                            4-8d box (2½” x 0.113"); or
                                            3-8d common (2½” x 0.131"); or
                                            3-10d box (3" x 0.128"); or
                                            4 staples, 1" crown, 16 ga.,
                                            1¾” long
Floor
                                            3-8d box (2½” x 0.113"); or
                                            2-8d common (2½” x 0.131"); or                                               Face
24k  1" x 6" subfloor or less to each joist 3-10d box (3" x 0.128"); or                                                     nail
                                            2 staples, 1" crown, 16 ga.,
                                            1¾” long
Other wall sheathingg
34k  ½” structural cellulosic fiberboard 1½” x 0.120" galvanized roofing nail, 7/16" head diameter, or 1¼” long 16 3a6
     sheathing                              staple with 7/16" or 1" crown
35k  25/32" structural cellulosic           1¾” x 0.120" galvanized roofing nail, 7/16" head diameter, or 1¼” long 16 3a6
     fiberboard sheathing                   staple with 7/16" or 1" crown
36k  ½” gypsum sheathingd                1½” x 0.120" galvanized roofing nail, 7/16" head diameter, or 1¼” long 16 7a7;
                                            staple galvanized, 1½” long; 7/16" or 1" crown or 1¼” screws, Type W or S
37k  ” gypsum sheathingd                  1¾” galvanized roofing nail, 7/16" head diameter, or 1¼” long, 16 ga.;    7 7
                                            staple galvanized, 1½” long; 7/16" or 1" crown or 1¼” screws, Type W or S
 
   TABLE R602.3(1) - continued
   FASTENING SCHEDULE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6457.png]
 
k.   Use of staples in roof, floor, and braced wall panels shall be prohibited
in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2.
Table R602.3(2) footnote “b” of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   b.   Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16-inch on diameter
except as noted. Use of staples in roof, floor, subfloor, and braced wall
panels shall be prohibited in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, or D2.
Section R602.3.2 exception and Table R602.3.2 of the 2022 CRC is amended to
read as follows:
   Exception: In other than Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2, a single top
plate used as an alternative to a double top plate shall comply with the
following:
      1.   The single top plate shall be tied at corners, intersecting walls,
and at in-line splices in straight wall lines in accordance with Table
R602.3.2.
      2.   The rafters or joists shall be centered over the studs with a
tolerance of not more than 1 inch (25 mm).
      3.   Omission of the top plate is permitted over headers where the
headers are adequately tied to adjacent wall sections in accordance with Table
R602.3.2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6455.png]
 
Section R602.10.2.3 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R602.10.2.3 Minimum number of braced wall panels. Braced wall lines with a
length of 16 feet (4877 mm) or less shall have a minimum of two braced wall
panels of any length or one braced wall panel equal to 48 inches (1219 mm) or
more. Braced wall lines greater than 16 feet (4877 mm) shall have a minimum of
two braced wall panels. In Seismic Design Category D0, D1, or D2, no braced
wall panel shall have a contributing length less than 48 inches in length or as
required in Section R602.10.3, whichever is greater.
Table R602.10.3(3) of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6453.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6451.png]
 
      a.    Linear interpolation shall be permitted.
      b.    Interpolation of bracing length between the Sds values associated
with the seismic design categories shall be permitted when a site-specific Sds
value is determined in accordance with Section 1613.2 of the California
Building Code.
      c.   Where the braced wall line length is greater than 50 feet, braced
wall lines shall be permitted to be divided into shorter segments having
lengths of 50 feet or less, and the amount of bracing within each segment shall
be in accordance with this table.
      d.   Method LIB shall have gypsum board fastened to not less than one
side with nails or screws in accordance with Table R602.3(1) for exterior
sheathing or Table R702.3.5 for interior gypsum board. Spacing of fasteners at
panel edges shall not exceed 8 inches.
      e.   Methods PFG and CS-SFB do not apply in Seismic Design Categories D0,
D1 and D2.
      f.   Methods PFH, PFG and ABW are only permitted on a single story or a
first of two stories.
      g.   Where more than one bracing method is used, mixing methods shall be
in accordance with Section R602.10.4.1.
      h.   One- and two- family dwellings in Seismic Design Category D2
exceeding two stories shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering
practice.
      i.   Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:
1 in SDC D0, D1 and D2. Methods DWB, SFB, PBS, HPS, and CS-SFB are not
permitted in D0, D1 and D2.
Table R602.10.4 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6449.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6447.png]
 
   a.    Adhesive attachment of wall sheathing, including Method GB, shall not
be permitted in Seismic Design Categories C, D0, D1 and D2.
   b.    Applies to panels next to garage door opening where supporting gable
end wall or roof load only. Shall only be used on one wall of the garage. In
Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, roof covering dead load shall not
exceed 3 psf.
   c.   Garage openings adjacent to a Method CS-G panel shall be provided with
a header in accordance with Table R602.7(1). A full-height clear opening shall
not be permitted adjacent to a Method CS-G panel.
   d.   Method CS-SFB does not apply in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and
D2.
   e.   Method applies to detached one- and two- family dwellings in Seismic
Design Categories D0 through D2 only.
   f.   Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:1 in
SDC D0, D1 and D2. Methods LIB, DWB, SFB, PBS, HPS, and PFG are not permitted
in SDC D0, D1 and D2.
   g.   Use of stapes in braced wall panels shall be prohibited in SDC D0, D1
and D2.
Table R602.10.5 of the 2022 Edition of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6445.png]
 
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304. 8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
NP = Not Permitted.
      a.     Linear interpolation shall be permitted.
      b.     Use the actual length where it is greater than or equal to the
minimum length.
      c.     Max imum header height for PFH is 10 feet in accordance with
Figure R602.10.6.2, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12
feet with pony wall.
      d.   Maximum header height for PFG is 10 feet in accordance with Figure
R602.10.6.3, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12 feet with
pony wall.
      e.   Maximum header height for CS-PF is 10 feet in accordance with Figure
R602.10.6.4, but wall height shall be permitted to be increased to 12 feet with
pony wall.
Figure R602.10.6.1 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows :
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6443.png]
 
Figure R602.10.6.2 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6441.png]
 
Figure R602.10.6.4 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6439.png]
 
Section R606.4.4 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R606. 4.4 Parapet walls.
   Unreinforced solid masonry parapet walls shall not be less than 8 inches
(203 mm) thick and their height shall not exceed four times their thickness.
Unreinforced hollow unit masonry parapet walls shall be not less than 8 inches
(203 mm) thick, and their height shall not exceed three times their thickness.
Masonry parapet walls in areas subject to wind loads of 30 pounds per square
foot (1.44 kPa) or located in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2, or on
townhouses in Seismic Design Category C shall be reinforced in accordance with
Section R606.12.
Section R606.12.2.2.3 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R606.12.2.2.3 Reinforcement requirements for masonry elements.
   Masonry elements listed in Section R606.12.2.2.2 shall be reinforced in
either the horizontal or vertical direction as shown in Figure R606.11(3) and
in accordance with the following:
      1.   Horizontal reinforcement. Horizontal joint reinforcement shall
consist of least one No. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm).
Horizontal reinforcement shall be provided within 16 inches (406 mm) of the top
and bottom of these masonry elements.
      2.   Vertical reinforcement. Vertical reinforcement shall consist of at
least one No. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm). Vertical
reinforcement shall be within 8 inches (406mm) of the ends of masonry walls.
Section R803.2.4 is added to Chapter 8 of the 2022 CRC to read as follows:
   R803.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms.
   Openings in horizontal diaphragms shall conform with Section R503.2.4.
Section R905.3.1 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R905.3.1 Deck requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only
over solid sheathing.
      Exception: Spaced lumber shall be permitted in Seismic Design Categories
A, B, and C.
Section R1001.3.1 of the 2022 CRC is amended to read as follows:
   R1001.3.1 Vertical reinforcing.
   For chimneys up to 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, four No. 4 continuous vertical
bars adequately anchored into the concrete foundation shall be placed between
wythes of solid masonry or within the cells of hollow unit masonry and grouted
in accordance with Section R609. Grout shall be prevented from bonding with the
flue liner so that the flue liner is free to move with thermal expansion. For
chimneys more than 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, two additional No. 4 vertical bars
adequately anchored into the concrete foundation shall be provided for each
additional flue incorporated into the chimney or for each additional 40 inches
(1016 mm) in width or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 1525, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1597, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
13-3-1: Adoption Of California Electrical Code, 2022 Edition
13-3-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 50022.2, the California
Electrical Code, 2022 Edition, published as Title 24, Part 3, of the California
Code of Regulations, including all Annexes except H, (“CEC”) is adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth in
Section 13-3-2. One true copy of the CEC, is on file in the office of the
Building Official and is available for public inspection as required by law.
(Ord. 1526, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1598, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
13-4-1: Adoption Of California Mechanical Code, 2022 Edition
13-4-2: Amendments To The Mechanical Code
13-4-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Mechanical Code, 2022 Edition, published at title 24, part 4, of the
California Code of Regulations, including Appendices A through E ("CMC") is
adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set
forth below. One true copy of the CMC is on file in the office of the Building
Official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1527,
12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1599, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-4-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE MECHANICAL CODE:
Section 104.4 of the CPC is amended to read as follows:
   CPC Section 104.4 Permit Issuance, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the CPC.
Section 104.5 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   CPC Section 104.5 Fees, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022 California
Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code, will govern
the administration of the CPC.
Section 107.0 of the CMC is hereby amended as follows:
   CMC Section 107.0, Board of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the CMC.
(Ord. 1527, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1599, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
13-5-1: Adoption Of California Plumbing Code, 2022 Edition
13-5-2: Amendments To The Plumbing Code
13-5-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Plumbing Code, 2022 Edition, published at title 24, part 5, of the
California Code of Regulations, including all Appendices except for C, F, and L
(“CPC”) is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and
deletions set forth below. One true copy of the CPC is on file in the office of
the Building Official and is available for public inspection as required by
law.
(Ord. 1528, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1600, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-5-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE PLUMBING CODE:
Section 104.4 of the CPC is amended to read as follows:
   CPC Section 104.4 Permit Issuance, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the CPC.
Section 104.5 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   CPC Section 104.5 Fees, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022 California
Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code, will govern
the administration of the CPC.
Section 107.0 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   CPC Section 107.0, Board of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the CPC.
Section 1211.8 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   1211.8 Seismic Gas Shutoff Valves.
   1211.8.1 Scope. A seismic gas shutoff valve shall be installed in compliance
with the requirements of this section on each gas fuel line in the following:
      1211.8.1.1 Any building or structure for which a building permit was
first issued on or after January 1, 2023.
      1211.8.1.2 Any building or structure which is altered or expanded under a
building permit first issued on or after January 1, 2023, when such alteration
or addition is valued at more than $250,000.
      1211.8.1.3 Any building or structure sold on or after January 9, 2023.
However, when an individual condominium unit is sold in a building that has
multiple gas lines, then the requirements of this section shall apply only to
the line or lines serving the condominium unit that has been sold.
   1211.8.2 Maintenance. Where the installation of a seismic gas shutoff valve
is required by this section in any building or structure, that seismic gas
shutoff valve shall be maintained for the life of that building or structure or
shall be replaced with a valve complying with the requirements of this section.
   1211.8.3 General Requirements. Where the installation of a seismic gas
shutoff valve on a fuel line is required by this section, that valve must:
      1211.8.3.1 Be mounted rigidly to the exterior of the building or
structure containing the fuel line unless the Building Official determines that
the seismic gas shutoff valve has been tested and listed for an alternate
method of installation.
      1211.8.3.2 Be installed downstream of the gas utility meter, except that
a valve may be installed upstream of the gas utility meter at the discretion of
the gas utility if the valve would otherwise meet the requirements of this
section.
      1211.8.3.3 Be listed by an approved testing laboratory and certified by
the Office of the State Architect.
      1211.8.3.4 Have a thirty-year warranty which warrants that the valve is
free from defects and will continue to properly operate for thirty (30) years
from the date of operation.
   1211.8.4 Critical Facilities. The requirements of this section shall not
apply to any building that is used by any public agency for the provision of
emergency services, including fire, police, and similar public safety services,
provided the following:
      (a)   That the building or structure has available 24-hour, year-round
maintenance staffing; and
      (b)   That the gas piping system contained in the building or structure
is designed to withstand seismic effects of earthquakes.
   1211.8.5 Definitions. For purposes of this section, certain terms shall be
defined as follows:
      1211.8.5.1 DOWNSTREAM OF THE GAS UTILITY METER. Shall refer to all
customer owned gas piping.
      1211.8.5.2 SEISMIC GAS SHUTOFF VALVE. A system consisting of a seismic
sensing means and actuating means designed to automatically actuate a companion
gas shutoff means installed in a gas piping system in order to shut off the gas
downstream of the location of the gas shutoff means in the event of a severe
seismic disturbance. The system may consist of separable components or may
incorporate all functions in a single body. The terms "seismically activated
gas shutoff valves" and "earthquake sensitive gas shutoff valves," are
synonymous.
      1211.8.5.3 UPSTREAM OF THE GAS UTILITY METER. Shall refer to all gas
piping installed by the utility up to and including the meter and the utility's
bypass toe at the connection to the customer owned piping.
(Ord. 1528, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1600, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 6
ENERGY CODE
SECTION:
13-6-1: Adoption Of California Energy Code, 2021 Edition
13-6-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Energy Code, 2022 Edition, published at title 24, part 6, of the
California Code of Regulations, (“CEC”) is adopted by reference, subject to the
amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of the CEC
is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available for public
inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1529, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1601, 11-19-
2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
13-7-1: Adoption Of International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 Edition
13-7-2: Amendments To The Property Maintenance Code
13-7-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, 2021 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
International Property Maintenance Code ("IPMC"), 2021 Edition, promulgated and
published by the International Code Council, adopted by reference, subject to
the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of the
IPMC is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available for
public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1530, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1602,
11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
Section [A]111.2 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   IPMC Section [A] 111.2 Membership of board, is deleted in its entirety. The
2022 California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal
Code, will govern the administration of the IPMC.
Sections [A]111.2.1 through [A]111.8 of the IPMC are hereby deleted.
(Ord. 1530, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1602, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 8
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
SECTION:
13-8-1: Adoption Of International Swimming Pool And Spa Code, 2021 Edition
13-8-2: Amendments To The Swimming Pool And Spa Code
13-8-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE, 2021 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code ("ISPSC"), 2021 Edition, promulgated
and published by the International Code Council, adopted by reference, subject
to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of
the ISPSC is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available
for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1531, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord.
1603, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-8-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE:
Section [A]112.1 Membership of board, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022
California Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code,
will govern the administration of the ISPSC.
Section 102.9 of the 2022 ISPSC is amended to read as follows:
   102.9 The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any
provisions of the California Swimming Pool Safety Act (El Segundo Residential
Code Appendix AX), or any other local, state or federal law.
Section 301.1.2 is added to the 2022 ISPSC to read as follows:
   301.1.2 Conflicts.  In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the
Swimming Pool Safety Act, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021
Edition, the 2022 California Building Code, or the 2022 California Residential
Code, the Building Official shall implement the most restrictive measures
cited.
Section 305 "Barrier Requirements", in the 2022 ISPSC is deleted in its
entirety.
(Ord. 1531, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1603, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 9
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
13-9-1: Adoption Of California Fire Code, 2022 Edition
13-9-2: Amendments To The Fire Code
13-9-3: Geographical Limits
13-9-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Fire Code (“CFC”), 2022 Edition, published as Title 24, Part 9, of
the California Code of Regulations, including Appendices B, C, O, BB, and CC,
and Sections 503, 510.3, 808.5, and 1103.2, is adopted by reference, subject to
the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of the
CFC is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available for
public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1532, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1604,
11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022; Ord. 1660, 5-7-2024)
13-9-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE FIRE CODE:
Section 1.11.4.1 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   1.11.4.1 Fees. The fire department is authorized to collect fees for
permits, fire inspections and other services, including the review of plans,
annual fire inspections and new business inspections. Fees shall be paid by the
applicant prior to issuance of permits. Fire department fees shall be subject
to change based upon the producer's price index.
Section 104.1.1 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   104.1.1 Authority of the Fire Chief and Fire Department.
   1.   The Fire Chief is authorized and directed to enforce all applicable
State fire laws and provisions of this ordinance and to perform such duties as
directed by the El Segundo City Council.
   2.   The Fire Chief is authorized to administer, interpret, and enforce this
ordinance. Under the Fire Chief's direction, the El Segundo Fire Department is
authorized to enforce ordinances of the City of El Segundo pertaining to the
following:
      2.1.   The prevention of fires.
      2.2.   The suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous fires.
      2.3.   The storage, use, and handling of hazardous materials.
      2.4.   The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual, and other
private fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
      2.5.   The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
      2.6.   The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire
hazards on land, in buildings, structures and other property, including those
under construction.
      2.7.   The maintenance of means of egress.
      2.8.   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire
and unauthorized releases of hazardous materials.
   3.   The following persons are hereby authorized to interpret and enforce
the provisions of this ordinance and to make arrests and issue citations as
authorized by law:
      3.1.   The Fire Chief, Peace Officers and Public Officers of the El
Segundo Fire Department.
      3.2.   The Police Chief and any police officer serving the city of El
Segundo.
      3.3.   Officers of the California Highway Patrol.
      3.4.   Code Officers of El Segundo Code Enforcement Department.
Section 104.1.2 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   104.1.2 Operating Guidelines. The El Segundo Fire Department Fire Prevention
Standard Operating Guidelines has been created and adopted to serve as
instructions and interpretations of the adopted Fire Code. The El Segundo Fire
Department Fire Prevention Standard Operating Guidelines shall be a published
document, amended from time to time to provide current instruction and
interpretation.
Section 104.11.2 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   104.11.2 Technical assistance. When there is a fire, explosion, hazardous
materials incident or other potential life or serious property threatening
situation, the fire code official can request the owner to or operator to hire
a private fire protection or hazardous materials investigator, acceptable to
the fire code official and at the expense of the owner or operator, to provide
a full report of the incident, including, without limitation, such matters as
origin, cause, circumstances or proposed solution to the problem.
Section 104.12.4 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   104.1.4 Financial Responsibility. Any person who personally, or through
another, willfully, negligently, or in violation of law, sets a fire, allows a
fire to be set, or allows a fire kindled or attended by him/her to escape from
his/her control, allows any hazardous material to be handled, stored, disposed
of or transported in a manner not in accordance with this Code, State law or
nationally recognized Standards, allows any hazardous material to escape from
his/her control, allows continuation of a violation of this Code is liable for
the expense of fighting the fire or for the expenses incurred during a
hazardous materials incident, and such expense will be a charge against that
person.
Section 104.12.4 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   104.12.4 Authority of Peace Officers. In enforcing the provisions of the
California Fire Code, California Building Code, California Health & Safety
Code, California Penal Code, California Vehicle Code and the El Segundo
Municipal Code and such laws, orders, rules and regulations, variances and
standards in connection therewith, the Fire Marshal and Fire Prevention
Specialist are hereby given the powers of peace officers.
Section 105.2 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   105.2 Application for Permit. Applications for permits will be made to the
fire prevention office in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire code
official. Applications for permits must be accompanied by such plans as
required by the fire code official. Any applicable permit and/or plan check
fees must be paid at the time of application for the permit and/or plan review.
Section 107.4 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   107.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. A person who commences any
work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee in
addition to the normally established plan check fee, equal to 100% of such
normally established permit fee, or as otherwise determined by the fire code
official.
Section 107.7 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   107.7 Cost Recovery. Fire suppression, investigation, rescue, or emergency
medical costs are recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety Code
Sections 13009 and 13009.1, as may be amended from time to time. Additionally,
any person who negligently, intentionally or in violation of law causes an
emergency response, including, but not limited to, a traffic accident, spill of
toxic or flammable fluids or chemicals is liable for the costs of securing such
emergency, including those costs pursuant to Government Code Section 53150, et
seq, as may be amended from time to time. Any expense incurred by the El
Segundo Fire Department for securing such emergency shall constitute a debt of
such person and shall be collectable by the city of El Segundo in the same
manner as in the case of an obligation under contract, express or implied.
Section 108.2.1 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   108.2.1 Inspection requests. It is the duty of the holder of the permit or
their duly authorized agent to notify the fire code official when work is ready
for inspection. It is the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and
means for inspection of such work that are required by this code. Every request
for inspection must be filed not less than three working days before such
inspection is desired. Such request must be in writing and all inspection fees
paid prior to requesting.
Section 111.5 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   111.5 Filing fee and application. The City will assess a fee in an amount
set by resolution at the time that an appellant files an appeal of any order,
decisions, or determination made by the fire code official relative to the
application and interpretation of this Code. The fee is refundable should the
appellant prevail in a decision by the Board. The appeal must be taken by
filing a written notice of appeal, in letterform, to the Board of Appeals. The
Board's decision constitutes the City's final decision.
Section 112.4 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   112.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or fail to comply with any of its requirements or who shall erect,
install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate
used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 dollars or by imprisonment not
exceeding 6 months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served constitutes a separate
offense.
Section 202, definition of "Fire Chief" in the 2022 CFC is amended to read as
follows:
   FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the El Segundo Fire Department or the Fire
Chief's designee.
Section 202, definition of "Low-Rise Building" is added to the 2022 CFC to read
as follows:
   LOW-RISE BUILDING. Is any building that is less than four stories in height
from the lowest level of fire department access.
Section 202, definition of "Mid-Rise Building" is added to the 2022 CFC to read
as follows:
   MID-RISE BUILDING.  A building four or more stories high, but not exceeding
75 feet in height and not defined as a high-rise building by section 202 of the
California Building Code. Height measurements shall be made from the underside
of the roof or floor above the topmost space that may be occupied to the lowest
fire apparatus access road level.
Section 308.1.4, "Open-Flame Cooking Devices" of the 2022 California Fire Code
is deleted in its entirety.
Section 311.5, “Placards” of the 2022 California Fire Code is deleted in its
entirety.
Section 503 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
Section 503 Fire Apparatus Access Roads
   503.1 Where required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through 503.1.3.
      503.1.1. Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads
shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building
hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire
apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and
shall extend to within 150 feet (45270 mm) of all portions of the facility and
all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of a building as measured
by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility.
      Exceptions:
         1.   The fire code official is authorized to increase the dimension of
150 feet (45720 mm) where any of the following conditions occur:
            1.1.   The building is equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.1, 903.3
or 903.1.3.
            1.2.   Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed because of
location on property, topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other
similar conditions, and an approved alternative means of fire protection is
provided.
            1.3.   There are not more than two Group R-3 or Group U
occupancies.
         2.   Where approved by the fire code official, fire apparatus access
roads shall be permitted to be exempted or modified for solar photovoltaic
power generation facilities.
      503.1.2. Additional access. The fire code official is authorized to
require more than one fire apparatus access road based on the potential for
impairment of a single road by vehicle congestion, condition of terrain,
climatic conditions or other factors that could limit access.
      503.1.3. High-piled storage. Fire department vehicle access to buildings
used for high-piled combustible storage shall comply with the applicable
provisions of Chapter 32.
   503.2 Specifications. Fire apparatus access roads shall be installed and
arranged in accordance with Sections 503.2.1 through 503.2.8. Per California
Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, §3.05(a) Fire Department Access and
Egress, required access roads form every building to a public street shall be
all-weather hard-surfaced (suitable for use by fire apparatus) right-of-way not
less than 20 feet in width. Such right-of-way shall be unobstructed and
maintained only as access to the public street.
   Exception: The enforcing agency may waive or modify this requirement if in
his opinion such all-weather hard-surfaced condition is not necessary in the
interest of public safety and welfare.
      503.2.1. Dimensions. Fire apparatus roads shall have an unobstructed
width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for
approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed
vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).
      503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to
require or permit modifications to the required access widths where they are
inadequate for fire or rescue operations or where necessary to meet the public
safety objectives of the jurisdiction.
      503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus roads shall be designed and maintained to
support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to
provide all-weather driving capabilities.
      503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus
access road shall be determined by the fire code official.
      503.2.5 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150
feet (45720 mm) in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning
around fire apparatus.
      503.2.6 Bridges and elevated surfaces. Where a bridge or an elevated
surface is part of a fire apparatus access road, the bridge shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with AASHTO HB-17. Bridges and
elevated surfaces shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the
imposed loads of fire apparatus. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both
entrances to bridges where required by the fire code official. Where elevated
surfaces designed for emergency vehicle use are adjacent to surfaces that are
not designed or such use, approved barriers, approved signs or both shall be
installed and maintained where required by the fire code official.
      503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall be
within the limits established by the fire code official based on the fire
department’s apparatus.
      503.2.8 Angles of approach and departure. The angles of approach and
departure for fire apparatus access roads shall be within the limits
established by the fire code official based on the fire department’s apparatus.
   503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or
other approved notices or markings that include the words “NO PARKING-FIRE
LANE” shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads
or prohibit the obstruction thereof. The means by which fire lanes are
designated shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times
and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.
   503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access
roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including eh parking of vehicles.
The minimum widths and clearances established in Sections 503.2.1 and 503.2.2
shall be maintained at all times.
      503.4.1 Traffic calming devices. Traffic calming devices shall be
prohibited unless approved by the fire code official.
   503.5 Required gates or barricades. The fire code official is authorized to
require the installation and maintenance of gates or other approved barricades
across fire apparatus access roads, trails or other accessways, not including
public streets, alleys or highways. Electric gate operators, where provided,
shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic
operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the
requirements of ASTM F2200.
      503.5.1 Secured gates and barricades. Where required, gates and
barricades shall be secured in an approved manner. Roads, trails and other
accessways that have been closed and obstructed in the manner prescribed in
Section 503.5 shall not be trespassed on or used unless authorized by the owner
and the fire code official.
         Exception: The restriction on use shall not apply to public officers
acting within the scope of duty.
      503.5.2 Fence and gates. School grounds may be fenced and gates therein
may be equipped with locks, provided that safe dispersal areas based on 3
square feet (0.28 m²) per occupant are located between the school and the
fence. Such required safe dispersal areas shall not be located less than 50
feet (15240 mm) from school buildings. Every public and private school shall
conform with Section 32020 of the Education Code.
   503.6 Security gates. The installation of security gates across a fire
apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire code official. Where
security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency
operation. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained
operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be
listed in accordance with ULA 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall
be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM
F2200.
Section 503.6.1 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   503.6.1 Automatic opener. New motorized gates shall be provided with means
to be automatically opened remotely by emergency vehicle in accordance with El
Segundo Fire Department Guidelines, as may be amended from time to time.
      Exception: Gates serving individual one- and two-family dwelling parcels.
Section 507.2.1 of the 2022 CFC to amended to read as follows:
   507.2.1 Private fire hydrants. When required, private on-site fire hydrants
shall be in accordance with the location and spacing specified for public
streets and hydrants for similar occupancies. All private hydrants shall be
installed in accordance with NFPA 24, Installation of Private Fire Service
Mains and their Appurtenances, unless required to meet public standards.
Private hydrants shall be painted red. When alternate materials or methods of
protection, as approved by the chief are provided, these requirements may be
modified or waived.
Section 510.3 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   Section 510.3 Permit Required. A construction permit for the installation of
or modification to in-building, two-way emergency responder communication
coverage systems and related equipment is required as specified in Section
105.6.4. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a
modification and does not require a permit.
Section 510.4.2.9 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   510.4.2.9 Building conduit and pathway survivability. All new buildings
shall be constructed with not less than a two inch (2") dedicated conduit
raceway or other method approved by the fire code official for future
expandability, or the installation of an Emergency Responder Radio Coverage
System. The raceway shall meet pathway survivability requirements in NFPA 1221
and shall be installed from the lowest floor level to the roof.
   510.4.2.9.1 Identification. The raceway and junction boxes shall be labeled
“Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System use only”.
Section 511 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   Section 511 Mid-Rise Buildings.
   Section 511.1 General.
   511.1.1 Scope. In addition to other applicable provisions of this code,
other laws and regulations, and any policies of the fire code official, the
provisions of this article applies to every mid-rise building, of any type
construction, newly constructed after the adoption of this Code, or which
undergoes a complete renovation that requires the complete vacancy of the
building.
      Exceptions: The following structures, while defined as mid-rise
buildings, are not subject to this article:
         1.   Buildings used exclusively as open parking garage;
         2.   Buildings where all floors above the third floor (9,144 mm) level
are used exclusively as open parking garage;
         3.   Buildings such as power plants, lookout towers, steeples, grain
houses, and similar structures with non-continuous human occupancy, when so
determined by the fire code official;
         4.   Buildings used exclusively for jails, prisons, and hospitals.
   511.1.2 Definitions. For definitions of MID-RISE BUILDING and BUILDING
ACCESS, see Section 202.
   511.2 Building Access.
   511.2.1 Building Access. Building access must be provided and approved by
the fire code official.
   511.3 Fire and Life Safety Requirements.
      511.3.1 Automatic Fire Sprinklers. Every mid-rise building must be
protected throughout by an automatic fire sprinkler system that is designed and
installed in conformance with NFPA 13. A shut-off valve and a water flow alarm
device must be provided for each floor.
      511.3.2 Standpipes. Every mid-rise building must be provided with a class
I standpipe system in each required stairway. The standpipe system must be
interconnected with the fire sprinkler system. The system must consist of 2 1 /
2 inch hose valves provided for each floor level above or below grade. Two hose
outlets must also be located on the roof, outside of each stair shaft enclosure
that penetrates the roof. Hose connections must be located in the exit
vestibule, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
      511.3.3 Smoke Detection. Smoke detectors must be provided in accordance
with this section. Smoke detectors must be connected to an automatic fire alarm
system installed in accordance with NFPA 72. The actuation of any detector
required by this section will operate the emergency voice alarm signaling
system and will place into operation all equipment necessary to prevent the
circulation of smoke through air return and exhaust ductwork.
         511.3.3.1 Location. Smoke detectors must be located as follows:
            1.   In every elevator machinery room and in all elevator lobbies.
Elevator lobby detectors must be connected to an alarm verification zone or be
listed as a releasing device.
            2.   In the main return-air and exhaust-air plenum of each air-
conditioning system. Such device must be located in a serviceable area
downstream of the last duct inlet.
            3.   At each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or
more stories from a return-air duct or plenum of an air conditioning system. In
Group R-1 and R-2 Occupancies, an approved smoke detector may be used in each
return-air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cubic feet per minute and serving
not more than 10 air inlet openings.
            4.   For Group R-1 and R-2 Occupancies, in all corridors serving as
a means of egress for an occupant load for 10 or more.
   511.3.4 Smoke Control. A passive or active smoke control system must be
provided for all mid-rise buildings whenever a complete floor is in excess of
55 feet (16.764 mm) from the lowest point of Fire Department access. Such
system must be mechanical and must be designed, installed, and tested to be in
compliance with Section 909.
   511.3.5 Fire Alarm System. An approved and listed, automatic and manual,
fully addressable and electronically supervised fire alarm system must be
provided in conformance with this code and any policies of the Fire Prevention
Division.
   511.3.6 Emergency voice alarm signaling system. The operation of any
automatic or manual fire alarm initiating device must automatically sound an
alert tone followed by a pre-recorded voice instruction giving appropriate
information and direction on a general or selective basis to the entire
building, occupied and normally non-occupied areas.
   511.3.6.1 Manual override. A manual override for emergency voice
communication must be provided for all paging zones.
   511.4 Central Control Station.
      511.4.1 General. A central control station room for fire department-
operations must be provided. The location and accessibility of the central
control station room must be approved by the fire department. The room must be
separated from the remainder of the building by not less than one-hour, fire
resistive occupancy separation. The room must be a minimum of 200 square feet
with a minimum dimension of 8 feet. It must contain the following as a minimum:
      1.   The voice alarm and public address panels.
      2.   The fire alarm graphic annunciator panel.
      3.   Elevator annunciator panel when the building exceeds 55 feet in
height.
      4.   Status indicators and controls of air handling systems.
      5.   Controls for unlocking stairwell doors.
      6.   Annunciator panels for emergency and stand-by power status.
      7.   Annunciator panels for fire pump status.
      8.   Complete building plans set.
      9.   Work table.
      10.   Elevator control switches for switching of emergency power.
   511.4.2 Annunciation identification. Control panels in the central control
station must be permanently identified as to function. Water flow, automatic
fire detection and manually activated fire alarms, supervisory and trouble
signals must be monitored by an approved central monitoring station and
annunciated in the central control station by means of an audible and visual
indicator. For the purposes of annunciation, zoning must be in accordance with
the following:
      1.   When the system serves more than one building, each building must be
considered separately.
      2.   Each floor must be considered a separate zone.
      3. When one or more risers serve the same floor, each riser must be
considered a separate zone.
   511.5 Elevators.
      511.5.1 Standards. Elevators and elevator lobbies must be provided and
must comply with the California Building Code and the following:
      511.5.2 General. At least one elevator cab must be assigned for Fire
Department use, which serves all floors of the building. All provisions
hereinafter are in reference to said elevator cab(s).
         511.5.2.1 Size. The size of the elevator cab must have dimensions as
specified in Section 915.5.2.1.1.
         511.5.2.1.1 Ambulance Stretcher. The elevator cab must be provided
with adequate dimensions to accommodate an ambulance type stretcher in
accordance with the provisions of Section 3002.4a.1 of California Building
Code.
   511.6 Standby Power.
      511.6.1 General. An on-site standby power system conforming to the City
of El Segundo Electrical Code must be provided. In the event of failure of the
normal power source, the standby power system must provide an alternate source
of electrical power to serve at least the designated loads as set forth in
Section 511.6.2 at full power. The system may consist of an on-site generator
or a system of batteries, or both. The installation must be in accordance with
this code, nationally recognized standards, and any policies of the fire code
official.
      511.6.2 Loads. The power load requirements for sizing the standby power
system must include, without limitation to the following:
      1.   Exit signs and exit path illumination;
      2.   Fire alarm system;
      3.   Elevator(s) assigned for fire department use;
      4.   Electrically driven fire pumps (if provided);
      5.   Smoke control systems;
      6.   Stairwell pressurization;
      7.   Lighting circuits supplying all elevator cabs, elevator lobbies,
generator room, fire pump room, and other areas designated by the fire code
official.
      511.6.3 Fuel Supplies. On-site fuel supplies for prime movers of a
standby power generator must be sufficient for at least 12 hours at the
generator’s listed full load. Where fuel supplies require automatic transfer
into a primary tank from a secondary fuel storage tank, the fuel transfer
system must be provided with redundant fuel pumps to insure reliability. The
fuel supply tank provided must be capable of storing at least 200% of the
calculated amount of fuel needed.
   511.7 Emergency Electrical System.
      511.7.1 General. Electrical systems and equipment specified in Section
915.6 are classed as emergency systems and must be installed in accordance with
this code, NFPA 110, NFPA 111 and policies of the fire code official. Such
systems must operate within 10 seconds of failure to normal power supply. Such
emergency power supply may be separate from the standby power required for fire
pumps and elevators assigned for fire department use.
      511.7.2 Emergency Systems. The following are classed as emergency
systems:
      1.   Exit signs and means of egress illumination.
      2.   Fire alarm system.
      3.   Fire detection system.
      4.   Sprinkler alarm system.
      5.   Elevator cab lighting.
      6.   Smoke control systems.
   511.8 Means of Egress.
      511.8.1 General. Means of egress must comply with the provisions of
Section 915.8.
      511.8.1 Stairway enclosures. All stairways used for exiting must be
protected by an exit enclosure designed in accordance with the California
Building Code, Section 1020.1 and this Section.
      511.8.2.1 Construction. Construction of stairway enclosures must be in
accordance with the California Building Code, Section 1023.
      511.8.2.2 Extent of Enclosure. Stairway enclosures must be continuous and
must fully enclose all portions of the stairway. Exit enclosure must exit
directly to the exterior of the building or include an exit passageway on the
ground floor, leading to the exterior of the building. Each exit enclosure must
extend completely through the roof and be provided with a door that leads onto
the roof.
      511.8.2.3 Openings and Penetrations. Openings and penetrations must be as
specified in the California Building Code, Section 1023.4 and 1023.5.
      511.8.2.4 Pressurized Enclosures. A pressurized stairway enclosure must
be provided for all mid-rise buildings whenever a complete floor is in excess
of 55 feet (16.764 mm) from the lowest point of Fire Department access. The
pressurized stairway must be designed and pressurized as specified in the
California Building Code, Section 909.20.
         511.8.2.4.1 Vestibules. Pressurized stairway enclosures, serving Mid-
Rise buildings must be provided with a pressurized entrance vestibule on each
floor that complies with the California Building Code, Section 909.20.
         511.8.2.4.1.1 Vestibule Size. Vestibule size must be not less than 44
inches in width and not less than 72 inches in the direction of travel.
         511.8.2.4.1.2 Vestibule Construction. Vestibules must have walls,
ceilings and floors of not less than two-hour fire resistive construction.
         511.8.2.4.1.3 Vestibule Doors. Vestibule doors must comply with
California Building Code, Section 909.20.
         511.8.2.4.1.4 Pressure Differences. The minimum pressure difference
within a vestibule must comply with California Building Code, Section 909.20.
         511.8.2.4.1.5 Standpipes. Fire Department standpipe connections and
valves serving the floor must be within the vestibule and located in a manner
so as not to obstruct egress when hose lines are connected and charged.
      511.8.2.5 Locking of Stairway doors. All stairway doors that are locked
to prohibit access from the stairway side must have the capability of being
unlocked simultaneously, without unlatching, upon a signal from the fire
control room. Upon failure of normal electrical service, or activation of any
fire alarm, the locking mechanism must automatically retract to the unlocked
position. Hardware for locking of stairway doors must be State Fire Marshal
listed and approved by the fire code official by permit before installation.
Stairway doors located between the vestibules and stairway shaft must not be
locked.
      511.8.2.6 Communications. A telephone or other two-way communications
system connected to an approved emergency service which operates continuously
must be provided at not less than every third floor in each required exit
stairway vestibule.
Section 808.5 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   Section 808.5. Play Structures Added to Existing Buildings. Where play
structures that exceed 10 feet (3048 mm) in height or 150 square feet (14 m²)
in area are added inside an existing building, they shall comply with Section
424 of the California Building Code.
Section 901.4.8 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   901.8 Partial fire sprinkler systems. Where in this Code or the Building
Code a partial fire sprinkler system is required, the fire sprinkler system
must be installed, modified or extended to protect the entire building or
structure.
Section 901.11 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   901.11 Problematic systems. In the event of a failure of a fire protection
system or 2 or more alarms in a week where the fire code official finds no
evidence of a situation requiring a response, the fire code official is
authorized to require the building owner or occupant to provide a fire watch
until the system is repaired. Fire watch personnel must be provided with at
least one approved means for notification of the Fire Department and their only
duty is to perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch
for fires.
Section 901.12 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   901.12 Firewatch. Per Section 901.11 the Fire Chief is authorized to require
the building owner or occupant to provide a fire watch with personnel
acceptable to the Fire Chief until documentation is provided that the system is
repaired and is operational. Such individuals shall be provided with at least
one approved means for notification of the fire department and their only duty
shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected premises, keep and
maintain a log and keep watch for fires.
Section 903.2 of the 2022 CFC is amended as follows:
   903.2 Where required.
   A.   New Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, an approved
automatic sprinkler system in new buildings and structures shall be required
for all occupancies.
      Exception:  New detached buildings under one thousand (1,000) square feet
subject to approval of the Fire Official.
   B.   Existing Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any work to an
existing building which removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the exterior
perimeter wall height as defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and alterations
will require the existing building to be fully sprinklered throughout.
Section 903.2.1 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.2 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.3 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.4 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.5 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.6 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.7 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.8 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.9 of the 2022 CFC is deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.10 of the 2022 CFC is deleted.
Section 903.2.10.2 of the 2022 CFC is deleted.
Section 903.2.11.1 of the 2022 CFC is deleted.
Section 903.2.11.3 of the 2022 CFC is deleted.
Section 903.2.22 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   903.2.22 Structures in the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area. An automatic
sprinkler system must be provided throughout every facility or building
hereafter constructed within the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area.
      903.2.22.1 Existing Buildings. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, any
work to an existing building which removes more than fifty percent (50%) of the
exterior perimeter wall height as defined in ESMC 15-1-6 for additions and
alterations will require the existing building to be fully sprinklered
throughout.
Section 903.3.5.3 is added to the 2022 CFC to read as follows:
   903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically
calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply
capacity.
Section 903.3.8 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   903.3.8 Limited Area Sprinkler Systems. When a fire sprinkler system is
required it shall be provided throughout the building.
      Exception: Protection for specific appliances and/or hazards.
Section 903.3.9 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   903.3.9 Floor Control valves. Floor control valves and waterflow detection
assemblies shall be installed at each floor where any of the following occur:
   1.   Buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more
than 30 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
   2.   Buildings that are three or more stories in height.
   3.   Buildings that are two or more stories below the highest level of fire
department access.
Section 903.4.2 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   903.4.2 Alarms. One exterior approved audible and visible device, located on
the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to
each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm device shall
be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the
smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is
installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the
building fire alarm system. Exterior audible and visible alarm notification
shall be provided on NFPA 13, NFPA 13R and NFPA 13D systems.
      Exception: Group R-3 and R-3.1 occupancies floor control valves and
waterflow detection assemblies shall not be required.
Section 909.11 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   909.11 General. The smoke-control system shall be supplied with two sources
of power. Primary power shall be from the normal building power systems.
Secondary power shall be from an approved standby source complying with Section
1203 of this code. The standby power source and its transfer switches shall be
in a room separate from the normal power transformers and switchgear and
ventilated directly to and from the exterior. The room shall be enclosed with
not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707
or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
   Transfer to full standby power shall be automatic and within 60 seconds of
failure of the primary power. The systems shall comply with the Electrical
Code.
      Exception: The secondary power is not required for pressurized enclosures
in buildings of less than 5 floors used for human occupancy
Section 1103.2 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   Section 1103.2. Emergency Responder Communication Coverage in Existing
Buildings. Existing buildings other than Group R-3, that do not have approved
in-building, two-way emergency response communication coverage for emergency
responders in the building based on existing coverage levels of public safety
communication systems, shall be equipped with such coverage according to one of
the following:
      1.   Where an existing wired communication system cannot be repaired or
is being replaced, or where not approved in accordance with Section 510.1,
Exception 1.
      2.   Within a time frame established by the adopting authority.
         Exception: Where it is determined by the fire code official that the
in-building, two-way emergency responder communication coverage system is not
needed.
Section 1207.11.3 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   1207.11.3 Location. ESS shall be installed only in the following locations:
   1   Detached garages and detached accessory structures.
   2.   Deleted.
   3.   Outdoors or on the exterior side of the exterior walls located not less
than 3 feet (914mm) from doors and windows directly entering the dwelling unit.
   4.   Deleted.
   ESS shall not be installed in any attached structure to a dwelling unit.
Section 1207.11.4 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   1207.11.4 Energy Ratings. Individual ESS units shall have a maximum rating
of 20kWh. The aggregate rating structure shall not exceed:
   1.   Delete.
   2.   80 kWh in detached garages and detached accessory structures not
associated with dwelling units.
   3.   80 kWh on exterior walls.
   4.   80 kWh outdoors on the ground.
   ESS Installations exceeding the permitted individual or aggregate ratings
shall be installed in accordance with Sections 1207.1 through 1207.9 of the
California Fire Code.
Section 1207.11.6 “Fire Detection” of the 2022 CFC is deleted.
Section 3305.9 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   3305.9 Separations between construction areas. Separations used in Type I
and Type II construction to separate construction areas from occupied portions
of the building, shall be constructed of materials that comply with one of the
following:
   1.   Non-combustible materials.
   2.   Materials that exhibit a flame spread index not exceeding 25 when
tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.
   3.   Materials exhibiting a heat peak release rate not exceeding 300kW/
m when tested in accordance with ASTM E1354 at an incident heat flux of 50 kW/
m2 in the horizontal orientation on specimens at the thickness intended for
use.
Section 5601.1.3 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and
use of fireworks is prohibited. The possession, sale, use, and/or discharge of
“Safe and Sane” fireworks is prohibited.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Storage and handling of fireworks as allowed by Section 5604.
      2.   Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as allowed in Section
5605 and Health and Safety Code Division 11.
      3.   The use of fireworks for fireworks displays, pyrotechnic before a
proximate audience and pyrotechnic special effects in motion pictures,
television, theatrical or group entertainment productions are allowed in Title
19, Division 1, Chapter 6 Fireworks reprinted in Section 5608 and Health and
Safety Code Division 11.
Section 5601.3.1 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   5601.3.1 Fireworks. The manufacturing, possession, storage, sale, use and
handling of fireworks, including without limitation, “Safe and Sane” fireworks,
is prohibited.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Storage of fireworks in accordance with the requirements for low
order explosives in Title 19, California Code of Regulations, Chapter 10.
         2.   Storage of fireworks, 1.4G in accordance with the Building Code.
         3.   Use and handling of fireworks for professional display in
accordance with Title 19, California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6.
Section 5601.7 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   5601.7 Seizure. All fireworks including “State approved” shall be illegal in
the City of El Segundo. The fire code official and police officers shall have
the authority to seize, take and remove fireworks and/or safe and sane
fireworks stored, sold, offered for sale, used or handled in violation of the
provisions of Title 19 CCR, Division 1, Chapter 6 and Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 9.
      Exception: When permits are issued for such use.
   5601.7.1 Financial Responsibility. See section 104.11.4 Financial
Responsibility for cost recovery of enforcement of section 5609.1. Fireworks
may be identified as hazardous waste by the State of California; violators
shall be responsible for any disposal fees.
Section 5801.1.1 is added to the CFC to read as follows:
   5801.1.1 Methane Soil Gas. All sources of methane soil gas, including
petrogenic and biogenic, are subject to methane soil gas testing, passive or
active mitigation, and methane detection and alarm system per El Segundo Fire
Departments Guidelines.
Section B105.2 of Appendix B of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-
4 buildings and townhouses. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for
buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings
and townhouses shall be as specified in Table B105.1.
      Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow up to 50 percent, as
approved, is allowed when the building is protected with an approved automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.1, 903.1.2, or
903.3.1.3. The resulting fire-flow must not be less than 1,500 gallons per
minute (5678 U/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1.
(Ord. 1532, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1604, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022; Ord.
1660, 5-7-2024)
CHAPTER 10
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
13-10-1: Adoption Of California Existing Building Code, 2022 Edition
13-10-2: Amendments To The Existing Building Code
13-10-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE, 2019 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Existing Building Code ("CEBC"), 2022 Edition, published at title
24, part 10, of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference,
subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true
copy of the CEBC is on file in the office of the Building Official and is
available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1533, 12-6-2016; amd.
Ord. 1605, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-10-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
Section 1.8.8. of the CEBC is hereby amended as follows:
   CEBC 1.8.8 APPEALS BOARD, is deleted in its entirety. The 2022 California
Building Code, as incorporated into the El Segundo Municipal Code, will govern
the administration of the CEBC.
(Ord. 1533, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1605, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 11
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
SECTION:
13-11-1: Adoption Of California Green Building Standards Code, 2022 Edition
13-11-2: Amendments To The Green Building Standards Code
13-11-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Green Building Standards Code, 2022 Edition, published as title 24,
part 11, of the California Code of Regulations ("CGBSC") is adopted by
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below.
One true copy of the CGBSC is on file in the office of the Building Official
and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1534, 12-6-
2016; amd. Ord. 1606, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-11-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE:
Section 101.13 is added to the 2022 Edition of the California Green Building
Standards Code to read as follows:
   101.13 Board of Appeals. The 2022 California Building Code, as incorporated
into the El Segundo Municipal Code, will govern the administration of the
CGBSC.
(Ord. 1534, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1606, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 12
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
13-12-1: Permit Requirements
13-12-2: Permit Fee; Compliance With Other Regulations
13-12-3: Bond Requirements
13-12-4: Examination Of Building; Posting Notice
13-12-5: Appeal
13-12-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required; Conditions For Issuance Or Denial: It is unlawful for
any person to move a building, structure or garage over, upon or along any
street to a location within the corporate limits of the City, or to perform any
part of the moving work, unless the building or the garage has first been
examined and posted in the manner in this Chapter hereinafter required, and a
permit in writing so to do for each and every separate moving operation has
been applied for and obtained from the Building Inspector. Nothing herein shall
be deemed applicable to the moving of a structure from one location on a lot to
another location on the same lot.
   B.   Permit Fee; Application: Before a house moving permit is issued, the
persons proposing to do the work shall pay to the City fees as hereinafter
required and shall complete an application form furnished by the Building
Inspector and shall set forth such information thereon as the Building
Inspector may reasonably require, in order to carry out the purposes of this
Chapter. The Building Inspector shall then cause to be made an examination of
the building or structure proposed to be moved, and the location to which it is
proposed to move the same, if such location is within the City.
   C.   Contents Of Permit; Filing:
      1.   Attached to the building permit shall be a sketch of the building as
it will look when finally placed upon the location to which it is proposed to
be moved, showing the type of plumbing to be installed; the remodeling, if any
to be done on the inside, and if the roof requires replacing, the type and kind
of roofing material that will be used; and in addition to the foundation, the
permit shall state the type and kind of driveway to be installed to the garage,
if any; the type and kind of steps or porch to be built both in front and back,
electric wiring and such other requirements as the Building Inspector may
require in order to bring the building up to the minimum community standards,
both in structure and appearance. Provided, further, that if there is a garage
in connection with the house, that the permit shall also specify the same
general requirements as set forth for the house. The improvements outlined
above shall be completed within ninety (90) days after the date of issuance of
the house moving permit.
      2.   The applicant for a moving permit shall, at the time of making the
application, file with the Building Inspector a full and complete certified
copy of the building permit previously issued for the building.
   D.   Restrictions On Issuance: No permit shall be issued to move and
relocate any building or structure within the City which is so constructed or
in such condition as to be dangerous; or which is infested with pests or is
unsanitary; or which, if it be a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human
habitation; or which is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or is in such a
condition of deterioration or disrepair that its location at the proposed site
would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or
improvements on both sides of the street within three hundred feet (300') of
the proposed location; or if the proposed use is prohibited by the zoning laws
of the City; or if the structure is of a type otherwise prohibited at the
proposed location by any other law or ordinance; or if the proposed moving or
relocation would violate any other law or code or violate or disturb the public
safety, welfare or peace. Provided, however, that if the condition of the
building or structure, in the reasonable judgment of the Building Inspector,
admits of practical and effective repair and its proposed moving or relocation
does not violate any law or ordinance, such Inspector may issue a permit for
such moving and relocation upon condition as hereinafter provided and complying
with the other provisions of this Chapter. The Building Inspector shall, in
granting any permit, impose thereon such terms and conditions as he may deem
reasonable and proper, including, but not limited to, the requirements of
changes, alterations, additions, or repairs to be made to or upon the building
or structure, set forth in subsection C of this Section, to the end that the
moving or relocation thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to
public safety or to public welfare or to the property and improvements, or
either, in the area, as hereinabove limited, to which it is to be moved. The
terms and conditions upon which any permit may be granted shall be written upon
the permit or attached in writing thereto.
   E.   Application For Permit: Any person desiring a permit shall make a
written application therefor to the Building Inspector. The application shall
include the information that must be stated in the permit as more fully set
forth in subsections A through D of this Section. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
13-12-2: PERMIT FEE; COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Fee Established: Every applicant desiring a permit for the relocation
of a building shall, with his application, pay to the City the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) as an inspection fee.
   B.   Compliance: The house moving permit shall be subject to compliance with
all requirements of the vehicle and traffic code provisions and other
regulations of the City. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
13-12-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Bond Required:
      1.   Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, no house moving
permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall first post with the
Building Inspector a bond executed by the owner of the premises where the
building or structure is to be located, as principal and by a surety company
authorized to do business in this State, as surety. The bond shall be subject
to the approval of the City Attorney as to form and, in the event of approval,
shall be filed with the Building Inspector.
      2.   The bond, which shall be in form joint and several, shall name the
City as obligee, and shall be in an amount equal to twice the cost of the work
required to be done in order to comply with all of the conditions of the house
moving permit, as estimated by the Building Inspector, and not less than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In lieu of a surety bond, the
applicant may post a bond executed by the owner, as principal, which is secured
by a deposit of cash in the amount named above and conditioned as required in
the case of a surety bond; such as so executed is hereinafter called a "cash
bond" for the purpose of this Section.
   B.   Conditions:
      1.   Every bond posted pursuant to this Section shall be conditioned as
follows:
         a.   Each and all of the terms and conditions of this Chapter and of
the house moving permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector;
         b.   All of the work required to be done pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the house moving permit shall be fully performed and completed,
within ninety (90) days after the date of the issuance by the Building
Inspector of the house moving permit. The time limit herein specified or the
time limit specified in any permit, may be extended for good and sufficient
cause by the Building Inspector.
      2.   No such extension of time shall be valid unless written and no such
extension shall release any surety upon any bond.
   C.   Default In Performance:
      1.   Whenever the Building Inspector shall find that a default has
occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written
notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond.
The notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the
period of time deemed by the Building Inspector to be reasonably necessary for
the completion of the work. After receipt of the notice, the surety must,
within the time limit therein specified, either cause the required work to be
performed or, failing therein, must pay to the Building Inspector twice the
estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice. Upon the receipt
of such money, the City shall proceed by such mode as it deems convenient, to
cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall
be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of said sum of money in hand
therefor.
      2.   If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default as provided above
shall be given to the principal, and if compliance is not had within the time
specified, the City shall proceed without delay and without further notice of
proceedings whatever, to use the cash deposit, or any portion of the deposit,
to cause the required work to be done, by contract or otherwise, in the
discretion of the City. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit shall, upon
the completion of the work, be returned to the depositor, or to his successors
or assigns, after deducting the cost of the work, plus fifteen percent (15%)
thereof, to cover cost of supervision and direction of work of completion.
   D.   Option To Demolish: When any default has occurred, on the part of the
principal under the preceding provisions, the surety shall have the option, in
lieu of completing the work required, to demolish the building or structure,
and to clear, clean and restore the site, within ninety (90) days of said
default. If the surety defaults, the City shall have the same option. (Ord.
671, 10-9-1967)
   E.   Term: The term of each bond posted pursuant to this Chapter shall begin
upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion, to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector, of the performance of all the terms and
conditions of the house moving permit. The completion shall be evidenced by a
statement of completion signed by the Building Inspector, a copy of which shall
be filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk, upon receipt of a copy of the
statement, shall and is, hereby authorized and directed to exonerate the bond
and furnish a letter of exoneration to any surety or principal upon the bond
upon request. When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to
the depositor, or to his successors or assigns, upon the termination of the
bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as
elsewhere in this Section provided. (Ord. 687, 3-11-1968)
   F.   Access: The Building Inspector, the surety, and the duly authorized
representatives of either, shall have access to the premises described in the
house moving permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work. In
the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the
house moving permit with reference to the relocation of a structure, the
surety, or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, or the Building
Inspector, or any person employed or engaged on his behalf, shall have the
right to go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or
demolish the building or structure. It is unlawful for the owner, or his
representatives, successors, or assigns or any other person, to interfere with
or obstruct the ingress to or egress from the premises of any authorized
representative or agent of any surety or of the City engaged in the work of
completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a house
moving permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance
of the terms or conditions thereof. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
13-12-4: EXAMINATION OF BUILDING; POSTING NOTICE:
Upon receiving an application for a permit to move a building, the Building
Inspector shall make an examination of the building described in the
application and shall examine the proposed location. If it is found that no
ordinance or law will be violated and that the public welfare, safety or peace
will not be endangered, he shall cause a notice to be posted on the front of
the building which is desired to be moved. The notice shall also state the
location of the house by street and number, and the location of the lot or land
to which it is proposed to move said building, together with the name of the
applicant. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
13-12-5: APPEAL:
The applicant, or any person who may feel aggrieved by any ruling or action of
the Building Inspector, may appeal to the City Council within ten (10) days for
hearing thereon, whereupon the City Council shall hear the same and make its
final determination of the matter in accordance with the information presented.
(Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
CHAPTER 13
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
13-13-1: Block Defined
13-13-2: Numbering Entrances To Buildings
13-13-3: Starting Points For Numbering
13-13-4: Odd And Even Numbers
13-13-5: Numbers Used In Each Block
13-13-6: Feet Allowed For Each Number
13-13-1: BLOCK DEFINED:
"Block," within the meaning of this Chapter, means that portion of any street
between two (2) cross streets, or between a cross street and an abutting
street, or between two (2) abutting streets. In cases of abutting streets, the
prolonged center line of the abutting streets shall be the dividing line of the
blocks; provided, however, that all blocks exceeding six hundred sixty feet
(660') in length shall be considered two (2) blocks. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-2: NUMBERING ENTRANCES TO BUILDINGS:
   A.   Placement: All entrances from the public streets of the City to
buildings or structures within the City shall be numbered as hereinafter
provided. The number of each and every such entrance shall be placed in a
conspicuous place upon or immediately adjacent to the door or gate closing such
entrance. Each figure of the number shall be at least two inches in height and
of corresponding width. The appropriate number of any entrance to any building
or structure shall be placed thereon as herein provided within five days after
the receipt by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of such
building of a notice from the Building Official or designee of the number
designated for such building or structure, and all numbers, other than the
numbers provided for in this Chapter for the respective entrances, shall be
removed from every building by the owners, occupants, lessees, tenants or
subtenants thereof within five days from the service of the notice designating
the appropriate numbers to be placed thereon.
   B.   Designation: It shall be the duty of the Building Official or designee
to designate the respective numbers for buildings or structures fronting on
streets heretofore laid out, or hereafter to be laid out or extended, and which
may at this time, or at any future time, be included within the present or
future boundaries of the City. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947; amd. Ord. 1648, 6-21-
2023)
13-13-3: STARTING POINTS FOR NUMBERING:
The following shall be the respective starting points or dividing lines on
buildings or structures fronting on streets heretofore laid out, or hereafter
to be laid out or extended, namely: the street now known as El Segundo
Boulevard shall be the starting point or dividing line for all numbers from
north to south, and the street now known as Main Street shall be the dividing
line of all numbers from east to west. Numbers shall begin at the above- named
starting points or dividing lines, and continue to the termini of the
respective streets. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-4: ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS:
The numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of the streets shall be odd
numbers, and the numbers on the southerly and easterly sides of the streets
shall be even numbers. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-5: NUMBERS USED IN EACH BLOCK:
One hundred (100) numbers or as many thereof as may be necessary, shall be
allotted to each block. Number 100 shall be the first number used at the
respective beginning points on the sides of the streets, which are to contain
the even numbers, and number 101 for the sides which are to contain the odd
numbers. At the beginning of the second block from the starting point, the
first numbers shall be 200 and 201 respectively, and so continue throughout the
system. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-6: FEET ALLOWED FOR EACH NUMBER:
Twenty foot (20') frontage shall be allowed for each number to be calculated
from the end of the block at which the number begins. On all streets, the
numbering shall be done as if the streets extended to the dividing line of the
City as defined in Section
13-13-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
CHAPTER 14
OIL AND GAS WELLS
SECTION:
13-14-1: Permit Requirements
13-14-2: Bond Requirement
13-14-3: Operating Charge
13-14-4: Fence, Enclosure Requirements
13-14-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal,
agent or otherwise, to drill, bore or otherwise sink or dig, or operate or
maintain any oil or gas well or to commence, carry on or prosecute the erection
of any derrick or other structures for use in connection with any such well, or
to maintain the same in any portion of the City without a valid, current and
subsisting permit from the City Council so to do first had and obtained.
   B.   Application For Permit; Contents And Information:
      1.   Application for the permit required by subsection A of this Section
to drill, bore or otherwise sink or bore any oil or gas well and to erect and
maintain the usual and necessary structures in connection therewith, shall be
made to the City Council, in writing, by the applicant for the permit, stating
the name of the applicant, the definite location of the proposed well and
appurtenant structures, the purpose for which the same is to be drilled, bored
or otherwise sunk or dug, and a statement that if the permit is granted, the
well will be drilled, bored or otherwise sunk or dug at the location shown in
the application and that the permit for the same contemplated hereunder, if
granted by the City Council, may contain a provision as a condition thereof
that the well will be located at the place so designated and that otherwise the
permit shall lapse and become and remain void.
      2.   Each application for the permit required by subsection A of this
Section shall be accompanied by two (2) duplicate maps or plats correctly
showing the exterior boundaries of the property covered by the lease under or
pursuant to which the well applied for is to be drilled, together with the name
and address of the lessor and the description of the property owned by each
respective lessor; and, also the area covered by any adjoining leases owned or
drilled by the applicant, or in which the applicant is interested, as the City
Council deems that the public peace, health, safety, interest and convenience
of the City requires that the City Council be fully advised with reference to
such matters when considering the application. The respective areas shall be
designated either by colored boundary lines or by shading so as to accurately
indicate the extent thereof respectively.
   C.   Filing Of Application: On and after the effective date hereof, all
applications for permits to construct derricks and prospect and drill for oil
within the City shall be filed on application forms to be furnished by the City
and the City Council reserves the right to refuse to consider any application
not so filed. (Ord. 211, 11-24-1937)
   D.   Issuance; Signing Of Permit: When the City Council has authorized the
issuance of any permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the
same shall be signed by the Director of Building Safety. (Ord. 855, 7-16-1974)
   E.   Misrepresentation Of Facts In Application: Any permit issued upon an
application filed in accordance with subsection B of this Section may contain a
provision as a condition thereof, that any misrepresentation of fact contained
in the application shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit and all
rights of the permittee therein named shall cease and terminate. (Ord. 211, 11-
24-1937)
   F.   Permit Fee: Until the further order of the City Council, no fee shall
be charged for the permit required by subsection A of this Section. (Ord. 226,
12-6-1939)
13-14-2: BOND REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Bond Required; Conditions:
      1.   Every permittee shall, either before or at the time of securing his
permit, and a permittee now operating under a permit heretofore granted,
deliver to the City Clerk a bond approved by the City Attorney as to form and
by the Mayor as to surety, for the principal sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) payable to the City, indemnifying the City against any loss which
may be suffered by the City or any public property therein located, or by any
public street, avenue, alley, way or place within the City, by reason of the
drilling or redrilling or existence or operation, abandonment or conduct of the
well referred to in his permit, or the violation of the terms and conditions of
his permit, or any of them, or the failure of the permittee to remove the
derrick or its appurtenances, or any act, whether of commission or omission on
the part of the permittee, or any agent or contractor employed in connection
with the well referred to in the respective permit, or any agent or contractor
acting under the direction of the permittee.
      2.   Any permittee now engaged or who shall hereafter engage in the
drilling or redrilling or existence or operation, abandonment or conduct of
five (5) or more wells at any one or the same time, may file with the City
Clerk one bond approved by the City Attorney as to form and by the Mayor as to
surety, for the principal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to cover all
operations of the permittee, indemnifying the City against any loss which may
be suffered by the City, or any public property therein located, or by any
public street, avenue, alley, or place within the City, by reason of drilling
or redrilling or existence or operation, abandonment or conduct of the wells,
or the violation of the terms and conditions of any permit issued to the
permittee, or the failure of the permittee to remove any derrick or its
appurtenances, or any act, whether of commission or omission on the part of the
permittee, or any agent or contractor employed in connection with any well for
which a permit has been granted to the permittee, or any agent or contractor
acting under the direction of the permittee, in lieu of a two thousand dollar
($2,000.00) bond for each well for which a permit has been granted.
      3.   Should the permittee who has filed a ten thousand dollar
($10,000.00) bond, properly abandon, in accordance with the terms of his
permit, any well covered by the bond, such bond may, with the consent of the
City Council, if all of the obligations thereunder as to the permits have been
satisfied, be terminated and cancelled and the surety thereon be relieved of
all obligations thereunder, upon the filing by the permittee of a two thousand
dollar ($2,000.00) bond as hereinabove provided, for each well on which the
permittee is still obligated by reason of the permits issued to him.
   B.   Keeping Bond In Effect: A good and sufficient bond as hereinabove
provided shall at all times be kept in full force and effect by the permittee
covering each and every well for which the permittee has been granted a permit,
until he has been released from the obligation by completion of the terms of
the permit issued to him, and a consent to the release has been granted by the
City Council. Unless the permittee keeps the bond in full force and effect, as
hereinabove provided, then and in that event the City Council may declare the
permit forfeited, and all rights of the permittee therein named thereunder
shall cease and terminate. (Ord. 266, 12-23-1942)
13-14-3: OPERATING CHARGE:
   A.   Amount:
      1.   Each person holding a permit issued under the provisions of this
Chapter shall pay for each derrick, well or operations referred to in or
authorized by any permit, a license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
per year, plus two cents ($0.02) per barrel. The fee shall be payable annually
in advance and shall be based on an estimate of the number of barrels
anticipated to be produced during the license period. Upon renewal of the
license, the estimate of the number of barrels upon which the previous license
fee was calculated shall be adjusted to reflect the actual number of barrels
produced; and a new estimate for the renewal license period shall be submitted,
but in no case shall the estimate be less than the fee paid for the preceding
tax period. If the actual number of barrels exceeds the estimate, the licensee
shall pay to the City the difference; if the actual number of barrels is less
than the estimate, no refund shall be made but a credit shall be allowed on the
following year's license fee.
      2.   Only the first annual charge shall be prorated. No such license fee
or operating charge, or any part thereof, shall be refunded. The license fee or
operating charge must continue to be paid for each well as long as drilling
operations, drilling, mining, pumping or other operations in or about the same
continue, including the production therefrom of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon
substance from a flowing well, and as long as the derrick remains standing, and
until the well referred to in the permit has been fully, completely and
satisfactorily abandoned in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Division of Oil and Gas of the Department of Natural Resources of the State and
of the City, relating to the abandonment of the wells, and until the premises
relating to the well have been cleaned up and restored as nearly as reasonably
possible to the same condition as that in which they existed at the time of the
granting of the permit. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983)
   B.   Payment Date: The first license fee or operating charge established by
subsection A of this Section shall become due and payable on the effective date
hereof as to all wells, permits for which were issued prior to the effective
date, and for all wells, permits for which are hereafter issued, shall become
due and payable on the date of the granting of the respective permits by the
City Council. The annual fees or charges prescribed in this Chapter shall
thereafter become due and payable to the Chief Financial Officer on the first
day of each and every calendar year. If any license fee or operating charge
prescribed is not paid within fifteen (15) days after the same becomes due and
payable, a penalty shall accrue upon the same, in the sum of twenty five
dollars ($25.00). Unless the license fee and the penalty thereon are paid
within fifteen (15) days after the date upon which the same become delinquent,
then and in that event the City Council may declare the permits forfeited, and
all rights of the permittee therein named thereunder shall cease and terminate.
(Ord. 855, 7-16-1974; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
13-14-4: FENCE, ENCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS:
No person owning, having possession of or in control of any oil well or any oil
well site within the City shall maintain or allow to exist thereon, therein or
thereabout any sump or drainage basin, or any moving parts or machinery in use
or intended to be used at the oil well or oil well site, unless the sump or
drainage basin or machinery or moving parts are securely enclosed by an
adequate noncombustible ventilated type fence, screen or housing sufficient to
prevent the entry of minors. The fence or screen shall be not less than six
feet (6') high, and if equipped with gates, the gates must be not less than six
feet (6') high and equipped with adequate locks, lock latches or other securing
devices to effectively prevent the entry of minors. A single adequate fence or
screen may be used to enclose more than one oil well or oil well site and
appurtenances. Fences, screens or housings required by this Section must be
approved by the Building Inspector, or his representative. (Ord. 460, 7-22-
1955)
ARTICLE A. OIL DRILLING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
13-14A-1: Purposes And Objectives
13-14A-2: Definitions
13-14A-3: Creation Of Districts; Application
13-14A-4: Standard Conditions
13-14A-5: Applications For Variances
13-14A-6: Variance Conditions
13-14A-7: Optional Conditions
13-14A-8: Denial Of Application For Zone Variance
13-14A-9: Existing Wells Excepted
13-14A-10: Location Of Site Near Public Ways
13-14A-11: Supplemental To Land Use Plan
13-14A-1: PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   It is hereby declared that oil drilling and oil production and related
processes when conducted in "urbanized areas", as the term is herein defined,
may be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare; and that
the extension of oil drilling into such areas in the City in which drilling has
not already been permitted is justified only by reason of recognizing the
material and social value of developing natural resources; that oil and other
hydrocarbon substances constitute property within the meaning of the
constitutional provisions guaranteeing the right of ownership and enjoyment of
such property; by recognizing also the similar constitutional guarantees for
the enjoyment of the surface use of real property and improvements thereon; and
the need for invoking such reasonable controls over both the subsurface and
surface use of property as may be necessary to assure maximum enjoyment of each
with minimum restrictions to either. It is, therefore, declared to be the
object and purpose of this Article to establish reasonable and uniform
limitations, safeguards and controls for the future drilling for and production
of oil or other hydrocarbon substances in the urbanized areas of the City.
   B.   More restrictive limitations, safeguards and controls than those which
have heretofore been imposed in metropolitan and urbanized areas are deemed
necessary in the public interest to effect practices which will not only
provide for a more economic recovery of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon
substances, but which will also take into consideration the surface uses of
land, as such uses are indicated by the value and character of the existing
improvements in or near districts where oil drilling or production are
hereinafter permitted, the desirability of the area for residential or other
uses, or any other factor relating to the public health, comfort, safety and
general welfare. It is contemplated that extensive urbanized areas may be
explored for oil by directional drilling methods by which surface drilling and
production operations are limited to a few small, controlled drilling sites so
located and spaced as to cause the least detriment to the community and to the
public health, safety, comfort and general welfare. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Article shall, for the
purposes of this Article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this Section:
   CONTROLLED DRILLING SITE: That particular location upon which surface
operations incident to oil well drilling or deepening and the production of oil
or gas may be permitted under the terms of this Chapter 15, pursuant to a
permit obtained; and by virtue of a variance granted by the Zoning Ordinance.
   URBANIZED AREAS: Shall refer to any improved or vacant property in
residential, business or light industrial zones, as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance of the City, Title 15 of this Code. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-3: CREATION OF DISTRICTS; APPLICATION:
   A.   Governing Provisions:
      1.   The provisions of this Article shall apply to the creation of all
oil drilling districts in urbanized areas. The provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance relating to variances shall govern the procedure relative to the
creation of oil drilling districts in urbanized areas. In addition to the
procedure set forth in the Zoning Ordinance relating to variances, the City
Planning Commission shall, by written resolution, find that the property
involved is in an "urbanized area" as herein defined, and the resolution shall
contain a statement setting forth the physical improvements, amount of land
subdivided, zoning and other pertinent considerations upon which the finding is
based.
      2.   Where uncertainty exists as to whether a particular area shall be
considered urbanized, any person contemplating filing a petition for the
creation of an oil drilling district may, prior to the filing thereof, request
the Planning Commission to determine the status of the area sought to be
included in the district. The Planning Commission shall thereafter, by written
resolution, determine the status of the area, based upon the considerations
mentioned in this Section, and in the resolution shall state the facts upon
which the determination is based.
   B.   Authority Of Applicant; District Boundaries: Each application for the
creation of an oil drilling district under the provisions of this Article shall
contain a statement that the applicant has the proprietary or contractual
authority to drill for and produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances
under the surface of at least fifty one percent (51%) of the property to be
included in the district. The district described in the application shall be
not less than twenty (20) acres in area, including all streets, ways and alleys
within the boundaries thereof, and shall be substantially compact in area, and
the boundaries thereof shall follow public streets, ways or alleys so far as
may be practicable. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-4: STANDARD CONDITIONS:
All oil drilling districts established under the provisions of this Article
shall be subject to the conditions in the following subsections:
   A.   Minimum Area; Location: Each district shall not be less than twenty
(20) acres in area, including all streets, ways and alleys within the
boundaries thereof; provided further, that if a proposed district is not
adjacent to an existing district, that the area in between shall be of such
size as to allow a suitable future district to be formed.
   B.   Site Number And Area:
      1.   Not more than one controlled drilling site shall be permitted for
each twenty (20) acres in any district and the site shall not be larger than
two (2) acres when used to develop a district approximating the minimum size;
provided, however, that where the site is to be used for the development of
larger oil drilling districts or where the Planning Commission and City Council
require that more than one oil drilling district be developed from one
controlled drilling site, the site may, at the discretion of the Planning
Commission and City Council, be increased by not more than two (2) acres for
each twenty (20) acres included in the district.
      2.   An alternative standard of locating drilling sites may be employed
in any part of the urbanized areas where permanent building improvements do not
occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the property within a radius of four
hundred feet (400') from any proposed drilling site; provided further, that
drilling sites for individual wells as provided in this subsection shall be
located not closer than four hundred feet (400') to any other well; and,
provided further, that individual wells thus drilled shall not exceed one to
each five (5) acres comprising any drilling area as defined in this subsection.
   C.   Well Number: The number of wells which may be drilled from any
controlled drilling site shall not exceed one well to each five (5) acres in
the district to be exploited from the site.
   D.   Drilling Variance: Each applicant for a variance to drill for and
produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances on a controlled drilling site
must have the proprietary or contractual authority to drill for oil under the
surface of at least fifty one percent (51%) of the property in the district to
be exploited.
   E.   Property Owner Participation:
      1.   Concurrently with the filing of an application for the establishment
of an oil drilling district, the applicant shall execute and file in favor of
each owner of lands within the district for which the application is made and
who is not then a party to the oil and gas lease, operating agreement or other
contract under which the applicant claims the right to conduct oil development
operations, a written offer giving to each owner the right to participate in
the proceeds of the production by exercising either of the following options:
         a.   To join within one year from the date thereof in the execution of
the oil and gas lease, operating agreement or other contract under which
applicant claims the right to conduct oil drilling operations within the
district; or
         b.   At any time prior to the commencement of drilling operations in
connection with the first well to give applicant written notice of owner's
election to participate with applicant in the development and operations in the
district as a tenant in common and agree to advance his pro rata share of the
cost of the drilling and development operations, owner's interest to be
computed on the basis that the square foot area of his particular lot or parcel
of land bears to the total square foot area of the district.
      2.   The offer hereby required must remain open for acceptance for a
period of one year after the granting of the variance. During the period the
offer is in effect, the applicant, or his successor in interest, shall impound
all royalties to which the owners or any of them may become entitled in a bank
or trust company in the State with proper provisions for payment to the record
owners of property in the district who had not signed the lease at the time the
variance was granted, but who accept the offer in writing within the one year
period. Any such royalties remaining in any bank or trust company at the time
the offer expires, which are not due or payable as hereinabove provided, shall
be paid pro rata to those owners who, at the time of the expiration, are
otherwise entitled to share in the proceeds of the production.
   F.   Bond: Each applicant to whom a variance is granted under this Article
shall post with the City Planning Commission a satisfactory corporate surety
bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in favor of the City,
conditioned upon the performance by the applicant of each and all of the
conditions, provisions, restrictions and requirements of this Article, and all
additional conditions, restrictions or requirements that are imposed by the
Planning Commission and City Council. No extension of time that may be granted
by the Planning Commission and City Council, or any change of specifications or
requirements that may be approved or required by them or by any other officer
or department of the City or any other alteration, modification or waiver
affecting any of the obligations of the grantee made by any City authority or
by any other power or authority whatsoever shall be deemed to exonerate either
the grantee or the surety on any bond posted pursuant to this Article. (Ord.
312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-5: APPLICATIONS FOR VARIANCES:
Applications for variances to create controlled drilling sites and to permit
the drilling for and production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances
thereon shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance relating to variances. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-6: VARIANCE CONDITIONS:
In granting a variance to drill for oil in any district created under this
Article, the City Planning Commission and the City Council shall include in the
variance all conditions and limitations designated in or required by the
ordinance enacted by the City Council in creating the district, and in addition
thereto, the City Planning Commission and the City Council may include any
other conditions or limitations not in conflict therewith which they may deem
appropriate in order to give proper effect to the stated purposes of this
Article. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-7: OPTIONAL CONDITIONS:
For the guidance and convenience of the Planning Commission and the City
Council, certain optional conditions, most likely to be required, are
enumerated:
   A.   Drilling Commencement And Completion: Drilling operations shall be
commenced within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the variance or
within such additional period as the City Planning Commission and the City
Council may, for good cause, allow, and thereafter shall be prosecuted
diligently to completion, or else abandoned strictly as required by law and the
premises restored to their original condition as nearly as practicable so to
do. If a producing well is not secured within twelve (12) months, the well
shall be abandoned and the premises restored to its original condition as
nearly as practicable so to do. The City Planning Commission and the City
Council shall, for good cause, allow additional time for the completion of the
well.
   B.   Equipment; Mufflers: An internal combustion engine or steam- driven
equipment may be used in the drilling of the well and, if an internal
combustion engine or steam-driven equipment is used, mufflers shall be
installed on the mud pumps and engines.
   C.   Electrical Power: Pumping and other power operations (other than
drilling) shall at all times be carried on only by electrical power and such
power shall not be generated on the controlled drilling site or in the
district.
   D.   Multiple Well Drilling: Drilling operations shall be carried on or
conducted in connection with only one well at a time in any one such district,
and the well shall be brought in or abandoned before operations for the
drilling of another well are commenced; provided, however, that the City
Planning Commission and the City Council may permit the drilling of more than
one well at a time after the discovery well has been brought in.
   E.   Reduction Of Annoying Factors: All oil drilling and production
operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as
practicable, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors and shall be in accordance
with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for and the production of
oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in
drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they may become, from time
to time, available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance.
   F.   Screening: All tools, pipe and other equipment used in connection with
any production operations, when conducted under the provisions of subsection
13-14A-4B1 of this Article, shall be screened from view.
   G.   Time For Moving Materials Or Equipment: No materials, equipment, tools
or pipe used for either drilling or production operations shall be delivered to
or removed from the controlled drilling site, except between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day, except in case of
emergency incident to unforeseen drilling or production operations.
   H.   Fire Extinguishers: Fire extinguishers as approved by the Fire
Department, and of sufficient number as required by the Fire Department, shall
be maintained on the premises at all times during the drilling and production
operations.
   I.   Removal Of Equipment After Completion Of Well: Within sixty (60) days
after the drilling of each well has been completed, and the well placed on
production, the derrick, all boilers and all other drilling equipment shall be
entirely removed from the premises, unless such derrick and appurtenant
equipment is to be used within a reasonable time limit determined by the City
Planning Commission and the City Council for the drilling of another well on
the same controlled drilling site.
   J.   Building To House Production Equipment: No oil, gas or other
hydrocarbon substance may be produced from any well permitted under the
provisions of subsection
13-14A-4B1 of this Article, unless all equipment necessarily incident to the
production is completely enclosed within a building, the plans for the building
to be approved by the Department of Building. This building shall be of a
permanent type, of attractive design and constructed in a manner that will
eliminate as far as practicable, dust, noise, noxious odors and vibrations or
other conditions which are offensive to the senses, and shall be equipped with
such devices as are necessary to eliminate the objectionable features mentioned
above. The architectural treatment of the exterior of the building shall also
be subject to the approval of the City Planning Commission and the City
Council.
   K.   Screening Equipment: No oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances may be
produced from any well permitted unless all equipment necessarily incident to
the production is appropriately screened. A plot plan showing the type and
extent of the screening shall be subject to the approval of the City Planning
Commission and the City Council.
   L.   Underground Pipeline: There shall be no tanks or other facilities for
the storage of oil erected or maintained on the premises and all oil produced
shall be transported from the drilling site by means of an underground
pipeline, without venting products to the atmospheric pressure at the
production site.
   M.   Production Tanks: Not more than two (2) production tanks shall be
installed for each well being drilled, neither one of which shall have a rated
capacity in excess of one thousand (1,000) barrels. The plans for the tanks,
including the plot plan showing the location thereof on the property, shall be
submitted to and approved in writing by the Planning Commission and the City
Council before the tanks and appurtenances are located on the premises, and the
tanks and appurtenances shall be kept painted and maintained in good condition
at all times.
   N.   Protection And Screening Of Production Tanks: Any production tank
extending above the surface of the ground shall be reasonably screened by
appropriate planting, and shall be effectively protected by surrounding dykes
having a capacity within the enclosed area not less than the capacity of the
tanks surrounded.
   O.   Refinery, Dehydrating Or Absorption Plant: No refinery, dehydrating or
absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on
the premises at any time.
   P.   Signs: No sign shall be constructed, erected, maintained or placed on
the premises or any part thereof, except those required by law or ordinance to
be displayed in connection with the drilling or maintenance of the well.
   Q.   Toilet And Washing Facilities: Suitable and adequate sanitary toilet
and washing facilities shall be installed and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
   R.   Landscaping: The controlled drilling site or any part thereof shall be
adequately landscaped, except for those portions occupied by any required
structure, appurtenance or driveway, and all such landscaping shall be
maintained in good condition at all times. Plans showing the type and extent of
the landscaping shall first be submitted to and approved by the City Planning
Commission and the City Council.
   S.   Insurance: The holder of the variance, his successors and assigns, must
at all times be insured to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) against liability in tort arising from the drilling, or
production or activities or operations incident thereto, conducted or carried
on under the variance or by virtue thereof. The policy of insurance, which may
include self-insurance, issued pursuant thereto shall be subject to the
approval of the City Attorney, and duplicates shall be furnished to him. Each
such policy shall be conditioned or endorsed to cover such agents, lessees or
representatives of the variance holder as may actually conduct drilling,
production or incidental operations permitted by the variance. (Ord. 312, 5-7-
1947)
13-14A-8: DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR ZONE VARIANCE:
The City Planning Commission and City Council may deny any application for a
zone variance to create a controlled drilling site if they find that there is
available and reasonably obtainable in the same district or in an adjacent or
nearby district within a reasonable distance, one or more other locations where
controlled drilling could be conducted with greater safety and security, with
appreciably less harm to other property, or with greater conformity to the
zoning plans of the City. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-9: EXISTING WELLS EXCEPTED:
The provisions of this Article are not applicable to wells existing prior to
the effective date hereof. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-10: LOCATION OF SITE NEAR PUBLIC WAYS:
The "controlled drilling site" as defined in Section
13-14A-2 of this Article shall not be so located as to include any portion of
any dedicated public alley or street, nor shall it be so located as to include
any area contained within the limits of any street, alley or any other public
area when designated as such in the Master Plan or Official Plan of the City.
(Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-11: SUPPLEMENTAL TO LAND USE PLAN:
The provisions of this Article are supplemental to the Land Use Plan of the
City, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
CHAPTER 15
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
SECTION:
13-15-1: Adoption Of Uniform Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
13-15-1: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the uniform
code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1997 edition, published by the
International Council Of Building Officials is adopted by reference. One true
copy of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, is on file
in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection
as required by law. (Ord. 1535, 12-6-2016)
CHAPTER 16
POSTDISASTER ASSESSMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
13-16-1: Postdisaster Assessment Standards Adopted
13-16-2: Postdisaster Assessment
13-16-1: POSTDISASTER ASSESSMENT STANDARDS ADOPTED:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
procedures for postearthquake safety evaluation of buildings (ATC-20) including
appendices A through F, and addendum (ATC-20-2) including appendices A and B,
published by the Applied Technology Council, is adopted by reference, subject
to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of
ATC-20 and ATC-20-2, are on file in the office of the building official and is
available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1536, 12-6-2016)
13-16-2: POSTDISASTER ASSESSMENT:
Chapter 1 Post Disaster Safety Assessment Placards
Section 1-1 Intent:
This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition
of a structure for continued occupancy after any disaster. The chapter further
authorizes the building safety division, as well as authorized representatives
of the division, to post the appropriate placard at each entry point of a
building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.
Section 1-2 Application Of Provisions:
The provisions of this article are applicable following each disaster for which
a state of emergency has been declared by the city council, state, or federal
government, to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the
city.
Section 1-3 Definition:
Safety Assessment: Means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or
structure for the purpose of determining whether continued occupancy should be
permitted following a disaster.
Section 1-4 Placards:
   A.   The following are descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to
be used to designate whether buildings or structures may be occupied after a
disaster. The format of the placard is provided in the "Post Disaster Safety
Assessment Plan" published by the California governor's office of emergency
services.
      1.   Green "Inspected - Lawful Occupancy Permitted" is to be posted on
any building or structure where no apparent structural hazard has been found.
This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or
structure.
      2.   Yellow "Limited Entry" is to be posted on each building or structure
that has been damaged where the damage has resulted in some form of restriction
to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard shall note in
general terms the type of damage encountered.
      3.   Red “Unsafe - Do Not Enter Or Occupy” is to be posted on each
building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses
a threat to life or safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard
shall not be entered under any circumstances except as authorized in writing by
the building safety department. El Segundo city approved safety assessment
teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is
not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts
this placard shall note in general terms the type of damage encountered.
   B.   The name of the department, its address and phone number shall be
permanently affixed to each placard.
   C.   Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard shall
not be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized
representative of the city of El Segundo building safety division.
Chapter 2 Post-Disaster Demolition
Section 2-1 Intent:
This chapter establishes demolition criteria for all buildings and structures
damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared
by the city council, state, or federal government, to the degree where
demolition is a viable alternative to repair.
Section 2-2 Application Of Provisions:
The provisions of this article are applicable following each disaster for which
a local emergency has been declared by the city council, state, or federal
government, to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the
city.
Section 2-3 Definitions:
Condemn And Condemned: Shall also mean no person shall enter the building or
structure for any reason without the express written permission of the director
of community development or his designee.
Event: Any occurrence, which results in the declaration of an emergency, and
shall include but not limited to, fires, wind storms, earthquakes and floods.
Section 2-4 Demolition Criteria:
   A.   If after the event, and during any state of emergency, the director of
community development determines that any building or structure poses an
imminent threat to public health and safety and that protection of the public
health and safety requires immediate demolition of the building or structure,
or a portion of a building or structure, the director or his designee shall,
without contacting the owner or providing a hearing to the property owner,
order that said building or structure be demolished immediately. Upon the order
of the director or designee, the city shall immediately demolish said building
or structure. Such demolition shall be performed in the interest of public
health and safety without condemnation hearings otherwise required by the El
Segundo municipal code.
   B.   If after the event, the director of community development determines
that any building or structure poses a hazard, but not an imminent threat to
the public health and safety, the director or his designee shall notify the
building owner of such determination, and the reasons thereof by certified mail
return receipt deposited in the United States mail no later than five days
after the determination is made. The notice shall set forth the date, time, and
place of a hearing which the director or his designee shall conduct, and also
state that during the hearing the building owner may present any evidence to
explain why the building or structure should not be condemned. The decision of
the director or his designee to condemn the building or structure unless all
required repairs are made shall be final. In making the final decision, the
director or his designee shall consider: 1) all evidence presented at the
hearing by the owner or his or her representative; 2) the nature of the hazard
presented by the building or structure; and 3) the likelihood of personal
injury or death occurring if the building or structure is not condemned.
   C.   For any building or structure which the owner has decided to demolish
rather than repair, the owner, or owner’s representative, shall follow the
established procedures for securing a demolition permit. (Ord. 1536, 12-6-2016;
amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 17
HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
13-17-1: Adoption Of The Uniform Housing Code
13-17-1: ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM HOUSING CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the uniform
housing code, 1997 edition, published by the International Conference Of
Building Officials ("UHC") is adopted by reference. One true copy of the UHC,
is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public
inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1537, 12-6-2016)
CHAPTER 18
EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
13-18-1: Purpose
13-18-2: Scope
13-18-3: Definitions
13-18-4: Rating Classifications
13-18-5: General Requirements
13-18-6: Administration
13-18-7: Analysis And Design
13-18-8: Materials Of Construction
13-18-9: Information Required On Plan
13-18-10: Tables
13-18-11: Adoption Of Appendix V; Voluntary Seismic Retrofit
13-18-12: Adoption Of Voluntary Prescriptive Provisions For Seismic
Strengthening Of Cripple Walls And Sill Plate Anchorage Of Light, Wood Frame
Residential Buildings
13-18-13: Adoption Of Voluntary Earthquake Risk Reduction In Wood Frame
Residential Buildings With Soft, Weak Or Open Front Walls
13-18-14: Adoption Of Voluntary Earthquake Hazard Reduction In Existing
Concrete Buildings
13-18-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Public Safety: The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety
and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the
effects of earthquakes on unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings
constructed before 1934. Such buildings have been widely recognized for their
sustaining of life hazardous damage as a result of partial or complete collapse
during past moderate to strong earthquakes.
   B.   Seismic Resistance: The provisions of this chapter are minimum
standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the
risk of life loss or injury and will not necessarily prevent loss of life or
injury or prevent earthquake damage to an existing building which complies with
these standards. This chapter shall not require existing electrical, plumbing,
mechanical or fire safety systems to be altered unless they constitute a hazard
to life or property.
   C.   Identification And Classification: This chapter provides systematic
procedures and standards for identification and classification of unreinforced
masonry bearing wall buildings based on their present use. Priorities, time
periods and standards are also established under which these buildings are
required to be structurally analyzed and anchored. Where the analysis
determines deficiencies, this chapter requires the building to be strengthened
or demolished. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-2: SCOPE:
   A.   Application Of Chapter: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
all buildings constructed or under construction prior to March 20, 1933, or for
which a building permit was issued prior to March 20, 1933, which on the
effective date hereof have "unreinforced masonry bearing walls" as defined
herein.
   B.   Exception: This chapter shall not apply to detached one- or two-family
dwellings and detached apartment houses containing fewer than five (5) dwelling
units and used solely for residential purposes. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord.
1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the applicable definitions in sections 2302
and 2312 of the building code of the city, and the following shall apply:
   BUILDING CODE, CITY OF LOS ANGELES: Shall refer to the 1985 Los Angeles city
building code.
   DIVISION OF BUILDING SAFETY: Shall refer to the building and safety division
of the community development department of the city of El Segundo.
   ESSENTIAL BUILDING: Any building housing a hospital or other medical
facility having surgery or emergency treatment areas, and those structures
which are necessary for emergency postearthquake operations.
   HIGH RISK BUILDINGS: Any building not classified an essential building
having an occupant load of one hundred (100) occupants or more.
Exception: A high risk building shall not include the following:
   A.   Any building having exterior walls braced with masonry cross walls or
wood frame cross walls spaced less than forty feet (40') apart in each story.
Cross walls shall be full story height with a minimum length of one and one-
half (11/2) times the story height.
   B.   Any building used for its intended purpose, as determined by the
division, for less than twenty (20) hours per week.
   LOW RISK BUILDING: Any building not classified an essential building having
an occupant load of less than twenty (20) occupants.
   MEDIUM RISK BUILDING: Any building not classified as a high risk building or
an essential building having an occupant load of twenty (20) occupants or more.
   UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL: A masonry wall having all of the
following characteristics:
   A.   Provides the vertical support for a floor or roof.
   B.   The total superimposed load is over one hundred (100) pounds per linear
foot.
   C.   The area of reinforcing steel is less than fifty percent (50%) of that
required by section 2407 of the building code of the city. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-
1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
13-18-4: RATING CLASSIFICATIONS:
   A.   Ratings Established: The rating classifications as exhibited in section
13-18-10, table 88-A of this chapter, are hereby established and each building
within the scope of this chapter shall be placed in one such rating
classification by the division of building safety. The total occupant load of
the entire building shall be used to determine the rating classification.
   B.   Exceptions: For the purpose of this chapter, portions of buildings
constructed to act independently when resisting seismic forces may be placed in
separate rating classifications. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-
2016)
13-18-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Structural Analysis: The owner of each building within the scope of
this chapter shall cause a structural analysis to be made of the building by a
civil or structural engineer or architect licensed by the state, and if the
building does not meet the minimum earthquake standards specified in this
chapter, the owner shall cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such
standards or cause the building to be demolished.
   B.   Time Limits: The owner of a building within the scope of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements set forth above by submitting to the
community development department, building safety division, for review within
the stated time limits:
      1.   Within two hundred seventy (270) days after the service of the
order, a structural analysis shall be made by a civil or structural engineer or
architect licensed by the state. Such analysis, which is subject to approval by
the division of building safety, shall demonstrate that the building meets the
minimum requirements of this chapter; or
      2.   Within two hundred seventy (270) days after the service of the
order, the structural analysis and plans for the proposed structural
alterations of the building necessary to comply to the minimum requirements of
this chapter; or
      3.   Within one hundred twenty (120) days after service of the order,
plans for the installation of wall anchors in accordance with the requirements
specified in subsection
13-18-7C of this chapter; or
      4.   Within two hundred seventy (270) days after the service of the
order, plans for the demolition of the building.
   C.   Obtain Building Permit; Complete Work: After plans are submitted and
approved by the division of building safety, the owner shall obtain a building
permit, commence and complete the required construction or demolition within
the time limits set forth in section
13-18-10, table 88-B of this chapter. These time limits shall begin to run from
the date the order is served in accordance with subsections
13-18-6A and B of this chapter.
   D.   Extended Time Limits: Owners electing to comply with subsection B3 of
this section are also required to comply with subsection B2 or B4 of this
section; provided, however, that the two hundred seventy (270) day period
provided for in such subsections B2 and B4 of this section and the time limits
for obtaining a building permit, commencing construction and completing
construction for complete structural alterations or building demolition set
forth in section
13-18-10, table 88-B of this chapter, shall be extended in accordance with in
section
13-18-10, table 88-C of this chapter. Each such extended time limit, except the
time limit for commencing construction, shall begin to run from the date the
order is served in accordance with subsection
13-18-6B of this chapter. The time limit for commencing construction shall
commence to run from the date the building permit is issued. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-
1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
13-18-6: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Service Of Order: The division shall issue an order, as provided in
subsection B of this section, to the owner of each building within the scope of
this chapter in accordance with the minimal time periods for service of such
orders set forth in section
13-18-10, table 88-C of this chapter. The minimum time period for the service
of such orders shall be measured from the effective date of this chapter. The
division shall, upon receipt of a written request from the owner, order a
building to comply with this chapter prior to the normal service date for such
building set forth in this section.
   B.   Contents Of Order: The order shall be in writing and shall be served
either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as shown on
the last equalized assessment, and upon the person, if any, in apparent charge
or control of the building. The order shall specify that the building has been
determined by the division to be within the scope of this chapter and,
therefore, is required to meet the minimum seismic standards of this chapter.
The order shall specify the rating classification of the building and shall be
accompanied by a copy of section
13-18-5 of this chapter, which sets forth the owner's alternatives and time
limits for compliance.
   C.   Appeal Form Order:
      1.   The owner or person in charge or control of the building may appeal
the division's initial determination that the building is within the scope of
this chapter to the board of examiners and appeals. Such appeal shall be filed
with the building official within sixty (60) days from the service date of the
order described in subsection B of this section. Any such appeal shall be
decided by the board of examiners and appeals no later than sixty (60) days
after the date that the appeal is filed. Such appeal shall be made in writing
upon appropriate forms provided therefor by the division, and the grounds
thereof shall be stated clearly and concisely.
      2.   Appeals or requests for slight modifications from any other
determinations, orders or actions by the division pursuant to this chapter
shall be made in accordance with procedures established in chapter 1 of this
title.
   D.   Recordation:
      1.   At the time that the division serves the aforementioned order, the
division shall file with the office of the county recorder a certificate
stating that the subject building is within the scope of this chapter. The
certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been ordered to
structurally analyze the building and to structurally alter or demolish it
where compliance with this chapter is not exhibited.
      2.   If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the
scope of this chapter, or is structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic
forces required by this chapter as a result of structural alterations or an
analysis, the division shall file with the office of the county recorder a
certificate terminating the status of the subject building as being classified
within the scope of this chapter.
   E.   Enforcement: If the owner or other person in charge or control of the
subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the division pursuant
to this chapter within any of the time limits set forth in section
13-18-5 of this chapter, the division shall order that the entire building be
vacated and that the building remain vacated until such order has been complied
with. If compliance with such order has not been accomplished within ninety
(90) days after the date the building has been ordered vacated or such
additional time as may have been granted by the board of examiners and appeals,
the building official may order its demolition in accordance with the
provisions of section
13-18-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-7: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN:
   A.   General:
      1.   Every structure within the scope of this chapter shall be analyzed
and constructed to resist minimum total lateral seismic forces assumed to act
nonconcurrently in the direction of each of the main axes of the structure in
accordance with the following equation:
         v = IKCSW - - - (88-1)
      2.   The value of IKCSW need not exceed the values set forth in section
13-18-10, table 88-D of this chapter, based on the applicable rating
classification of the building.
   B.   Lateral Forces On Elements Of Structures:
      1.   Equation:
         a.   Parts or portions of structures shall be analyzed and designed
for lateral loads in accordance with subsection A of this section but not less
than the value from the following equation:
         Fp = ICp SWp - - - (88.2)
         b.   For the provisions of this subsection, the product of IS need not
exceed the values as set forth in section
13-18-10, table 88-E of this chapter.
      2.   Exception: Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not having a
rating classification of I may be analyzed in accordance with section
13-18-8 of this chapter.
The value of Cp need not exceed the values set forth in section
13-18-10 , table 88-F of this chapter.
   C.   Anchorage And Interconnection: Anchorage and interconnection of all
parts, portions and elements of the structure shall be analyzed and designed
for lateral forces in accordance with section
13-18-10, table 88-F of this chapter, and the equation Fp = Cp SWp as modified
by section
13-18-10 , table 88-E of this chapter. Minimum anchorage of masonry walls to
each floor or roof shall resist a minimum force of two hundred (200) pounds per
linear foot acting normal to the wall at the level of the floor or roof.
   D.   Level Of Required Repair: Alterations and repairs required to meet the
provisions of this chapter shall comply with all other applicable requirements
of this code unless specifically provided for in this chapter.
   E.   Required Analysis:
      1.   General: Except as modified herein, the analysis and design relating
to the structural alteration of existing structures within the scope of this
chapter shall be in accordance with the analysis specified in chapter 23 of the
building code of the city.
      2.   Continuous Stress Path: A complete, continuous stress path from
every part or portion of the structure to the ground shall be provided for the
required horizontal forces.
      3.   Positive Connections: All parts, portions or elements of the
structure shall be interconnected by positive means.
   F.   Analysis Procedure:
      1.   General: Stresses in materials and existing construction utilized to
transfer seismic forces from the ground to parts or portions of the structure
shall conform to those permitted by the code and those materials and types of
construction specified in section
13-18-8 of this chapter.
      2.   Connections: Materials and connectors used for interconnection of
parts and portions of the structure shall conform to the code. Nails may be
used as part of an approved connector.
      3.   Unreinforced Masonry Walls:
         a.   Except as modified herein, unreinforced masonry walls shall be
analyzed as specified in sections 2406 and 2409 to withstand all vertical loads
as specified in chapter 23 of the building code of the city in addition to the
seismic forces required by this chapter.
         b.   No allowable tension stress will be permitted in unreinforced
masonry walls. Walls not capable of resisting the required design forces
specified in this division shall be strengthened or shall be removed and
replaced.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not classified as a
rating classification I pursuant to section
13-18-10, table 88-A of this chapter, may be analyzed in accordance with
section
13-18-8 of this chapter.
         b.   Unreinforced masonry walls which carry no design loads other than
their own weight may be considered as veneer if they are adequately anchored to
new supporting elements.
   G.   Combination Of Vertical And Seismic Forces:
      1.   New Materials: All new materials introduced into the structure to
meet the requirements of this section which are subjected to combined vertical
and horizontal forces shall comply with the building code of the city.
      2.   Existing Materials: When stresses in existing lateral force-
resisting elements are due to a combination of dead loads plus seismic loads,
the allowable working stress specified in the code may be increased one hundred
percent (100%). However, no increase will be permitted in the stresses allowed
in section
13-18-8 of this chapter and the stresses in members due only to seismic and
dead loads shall not exceed the values permitted by section 2303(d) of the
building code of the city.
      3.   Allowable Reduction Of Bending Stress By Vertical Load: In
calculating tensile fiber stress due to seismic forces required by this
chapter, the maximum tensile fiber stress may be reduced by the full direct
stress due to vertical dead loads. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-
2016)
13-18-8: MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   General: All materials permitted by this code, including their
appropriate allowable stresses and those existing configurations of materials
specified herein, may be utilized to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Existing Materials:
      1.   Unreinforced Masonry Walls:
         a.   Unreinforced masonry walls analyzed in accordance with this
section may provide vertical support for roof and floor construction and
resistance to lateral loads. The bonding of such walls shall be as specified in
section 2403(a) of the building code of the city of El Segundo.
         b.   Tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall may be
neglected if the wall does not exceed the height or length to thickness ratio
and the in-plane shear stresses due to seismic loads as set forth in section
13-18-10, table 88-G of this chapter.
         c.   If the wall height-thickness ratio exceeds the specified limits,
the wall may be supported by vertical bracing members designed in accordance
with chapter 23 of the building code of the city. The deflection of such
bracing member at design loads shall not exceed one-tenth (1/10) of the wall
thickness.
Exception: The wall may be supported by flexible vertical bracing members
designed in accordance with section
13-18-7 of this chapter if the deflection at design loads is not less than one-
fourth (1/4) nor more than one-third (1/3) of the wall thickness.
         d.   All vertical bracing members shall be attached to floor and roof
construction for their design loads independently of required wall anchors.
Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not exceed one-half (1/2)
the unsupported height of the wall nor ten feet (10').
         e.   The wall height may be measured vertically to bracing elements
other than a floor or roof. Spacing of the bracing elements and wall anchors
shall not exceed six feet (6'). Bracing elements shall be detailed to minimize
the horizontal displacement of the wall by components of vertical displacements
of the floor or roof.
      2.   Existing Roof, Floors, Walls, Footings And Wood Framing: Existing
materials, including wood shear walls utilized in the described configuration,
may be used as part of the lateral load resisting system; provided, that the
stresses in these materials do not exceed the values shown in section
13-18-10, table 88-H of this chapter.
   C.   Strengthening Of Existing Materials: New materials, including wood
shear walls, may be utilized to strengthen portions of the existing seismic
resisting system in the described configurations; provided, that the stresses
do not exceed the values shown in section
13-18-10, table 88-I of this chapter.
   D.   Alternate Materials: Alternate materials, designs and methods of
construction may be approved by the division in accordance with the provisions
of section 105 of the uniform building code.
   E.   Minimum Acceptable Quality Of Existing Unreinforced Masonry Walls:
      1.   General Provisions: All unreinforced masonry walls utilized to carry
vertical loads and seismic forces parallel and perpendicular to the wall plane
shall be tested as specified in this subsection. All masonry quality shall
equal or exceed the minimum standards established herein or shall be removed
and replaced by new materials. Alternate methods of testing may be approved by
the division. The quality of mortar in all masonry walls shall be determined by
performing in-place shear tests or by testing eight inch (8") diameter cores.
Nothing shall prevent pointing with mortar of all the masonry wall joints
before the tests are first made. Prior to any pointing, the mortar joints must
be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. Mortar for
pointing shall be type S or N except masonry cements shall not be used. All
preparation and mortar pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection
of a registered special inspector. At the conclusion of the inspection, the
inspector shall submit a written report to the licensed engineer or architect
responsible for the seismic analysis of the building setting forth the result
of the work inspected. Such report shall be submitted to the division for
approval as part of the structural analysis. All testing shall be performed in
accordance with the requirements specified in this subsection by a testing
agency approved by the division. An accurate record of all such tests and their
location in the building shall be recorded and these results shall be submitted
to the division for approval as part of the structural analysis.
      2.   Number And Location Of Tests: The minimum number of tests shall be
two (2) per wall or line of wall elements resisting a common force, or one per
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of wall surface, with a minimum
of eight (8) tests in any case. The exact test or core location shall be
determined at the building site by the licensed engineer or architect
responsible for the seismic analysis of the subject building.
      3.   In-Place Shear Tests: The bed joints of the outer wythe of the
masonry shall be tested in shear by laterally displacing a single brick
relative to the adjacent bricks in that wythe. The opposite head joint of the
brick to be tested shall be removed and cleaned prior to testing. The minimum
quality mortar in eighty percent (80%) of the shear tests shall not be less
than the total of thirty (30) psi plus the axial stress in the wall at the
point of the test. The shear stress shall be based on the gross area of both
bed joints and shall be that at which movement of the brick is first observed.
      4.   Core Tests: A minimum number of mortar test specimens equal to the
number of required cores shall be prepared from the cores and tested as
specified herein. The mortar joint of the outer wythe of the masonry core shall
be tested in shear by placing the circular core section in a compression
testing machine with the mortar bed joint rotated fifteen degrees (15°) from
the axis of the applied load. The mortar joint tested in shear shall have an
average ultimate stress of twenty (20) psi based on the gross area. The average
shall be obtained from the total number of cores made. If test specimens cannot
be made from cores taken, then the shear value shall be reported as zero.
   F.   Testing Of Shear Bolts:
      1.   One-fourth (1/4) of all new shear bolts and dowels embedded in
unreinforced masonry walls shall be tested by a registered special inspector
using a torque calibrated wrench to the following minimum torques:
 
Bolts Or Dowels   Foot-Pounds
1/2 inch diameter 40
5/8 inch diameter 50
3/4 inch diameter 60
 
      2.   No bolts exceeding three-fourths inch (3/4") shall be used. All nuts
shall be installed over malleable iron or plate washers when bearing on wood
and heavy cut washers when bearing on steel.
   G.   Determination Of Allowable Stresses For Design Methods Based On Test
Results:
      1.   Design Shear Values:
         a.   Design seismic in-plane shear stresses shall be substantiated by
tests performed as specified in subsections E3 and E4 of this section.
         b.   Design stresses shall be related to test results obtained in
accordance with section
13-18-10, table 88-J of this chapter. Intermediate values between three (3) and
ten (10) psi may be interpolated.
      2.   Design Compression And Tension Values: Compression stresses for
unreinforced masonry having a minimum design shear value of three (3) psi shall
not exceed one hundred (100) psi. Design tension values for unreinforced
masonry shall not be permitted.
   H.   Rod Anchors; Testing: Five percent (5%) of the existing rod anchors
utilized as all or part of the required wall anchors shall be tested in pullout
by an approved testing laboratory. The minimum number tested shall be four (4)
per floor, with two (2) tests at walls with joists framing into the wall and
two (2) tests at walls with joists parallel to the wall. The test apparatus
shall be supported on the masonry wall at a minimum distance of the wall
thickness from the anchor tested. The rod anchor shall be given a preload of
three hundred (300) pounds prior to establishing a datum for recording
elongation. The tension test load reported shall be recorded at one-eighth inch
(1/8") relative movement of the anchor and the adjacent masonry surface.
Results of all tests shall be reported. The report shall include the test
results as related to the wall thickness and joist orientation. The allowable
resistance value of the existing anchors shall be forty percent (40%) of the
average of those tested anchors having the same wall thickness and joist
orientation.
   I.   Wall Anchorage; Testing: Qualification tests for devices used for wall
anchorage shall be tested with the entire tension load carried on the enlarged
head at the exterior face of the wall. Bond on the part of the device between
the enlarged head and the interior wall face shall be eliminated for the
qualification tests. The resistance value assigned the device shall be twenty
percent (20%) of the average of the ultimate loads. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd.
Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-9: INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLAN:
   A.   General: In addition to the seismic analysis required elsewhere in this
chapter, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic
analysis of the building shall determine and record the information required by
this section on the approved plans.
   B.   Construction Details: The following requirements with appropriate
construction details shall be made part of the approved plans:
      1.   All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at the roof level
by tension bolts through the wall as specified in section
13-18-10, table 88-I of this chapter, or by approved equivalent at a maximum
anchor spacing of six feet (6'). Anchors installed in accordance with section
91.810(q) of the city of Los Angeles building code shall be accepted as
conforming to this requirement.
All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at all floors with tension
bolts through the wall or by existing rod anchors at a maximum anchor spacing
of six feet (6'). All existing rod anchors shall be secured to the joists to
develop the required forces. The division may require testing to verify the
adequacy of the embedded ends of existing rod anchors. Tests when required
shall conform to subsection
13-18-8H of this chapter.
When access to the exterior face of the masonry wall is prevented by proximity
of an existing building, wall anchors conforming to section
13-18-10, table 88-I, items 5 and 6 of this chapter, may be used.
Alternative devices to be used in lieu of tension bolts for masonry wall
anchorage shall be tested as specified in subsection
13-18-8I of this chapter.
      2.   Diaphragm chord stresses of horizontal diaphragms shall be developed
in existing materials or by addition of new materials.
      3.   Where trusses and beams other than rafters or joists are supported
on masonry, ledges or columns shall be installed to support vertical loads of
the roof or floor members.
      4.   Parapets and exterior wall appendages not capable of resisting the
forces specified in this chapter shall be removed, stabilized or braced to
ensure that the parapets and appendages remain in their original position.
      5.   All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall
be pointed with type S or N mortar. Prior to any pointing, the wall surface
must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. All
preparation and pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a
registered special inspector certified to inspect masonry or concrete. At the
conclusion of the project, the inspector shall submit a written report to the
division setting forth the portion of work inspected.
      6.   Repair details of any cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry wall
required to resist forces specified in this chapter.
   C.   Existing Construction: The following existing construction information
shall be made part of the approved plans:
      1.   The type and dimensions of existing walls and the size and spacing
of floor and roof members.
      2.   The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof.
      3.   The extent and type of parapet corrections which were performed in
accordance with the building code of the city.
      4.   Accurately dimensioned floor plans and masonry wall elevations
showing dimensioned openings, piers, wall thickness and heights.
      5.   The location of cracks or damaged portions of unreinforced masonry
walls requiring repairs.
      6.   The type of interior wall surfaces and if reinstalling or anchoring
of ceiling plaster is necessary.
      7.   The general condition of the mortar joints and if the joints need
pointing. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-10: TABLES:
TABLE 88-A   RATING CLASSIFICATIONS
 
Type Of Building     Classification
Essential building   I
High risk building   II
Medium risk building III
Low risk building    IV
 
TABLE 88-B   TIME LIMITS FOR COMPLIANCE
 
Required Action By  Obtain Building Commence Construction Complete Construction
Owner               Permit Within   Within                Within
Complete structural
alterations or      1 year          180 days1             3 years
building demolition
Wall anchor         180 days        270 days              1 year
installation
 
Note:
   1.    Measured from date of building permit issuance.
TABLE 88-C   SERVICE PRIORITIES AND EXTENDED TIME PROVISIONS
Rating Classification But Less Than 7 Years              Minimum Time
Classification        Load          Time If Wall Anchors Periods For Service Of
                                    Are Installed        Order
Rating             But Less Than     7 Years              Minimum Time
Classification
Classification     Load              Time If Wall Anchors Periods For Service
                                     Are Installed        Of Order
I                  Any                  1 year            0
(Highest priority)
II                 100 or more          3 years           90 days
                   100 or more          5 years           1 year
                   More than 50 but     6 years           2 years
III                less than 100
                   More than 19, but    6 years           3 years
                   less than 51
IV                 Less than 20         7 years           4 years
(Lowest priority)
 
TABLE 88-D   HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTORS BASED ON RATING CLASSIFICATION
 
Rating Classification IKCSW
I                     0.186
II                    0.133
III                   0.100
 
TABLE 88-E   HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTORS "IS" FOR PARTS OR PORTIONS OF STRUCTURES
 
Rating Classification IS
I                     1.50
II                    1.00
III                   0.75
 
TABLE 88-F   HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTOR "C" FOR PARTS OR PORTIONS OF BUILDINGS OR
OTHER STRUCTURES
Part Or Portion Of Buildings Direction Of Force Value Of C
Part Or Portion Of Buildings           Direction Of Force            Value Of C
Exterior bearing and nonbearing walls;
interior bearing walls and partitions;
interior nonbearing walls and          Normal to flat surface        0.20
partitions over 10' in height; masonry
fences over 6' in height
Cantilever parapet and other
cantilever walls, except retaining     Normal to flat surface        1.00
walls
Exterior and interior ornamentations   Any direction                 1.00
and appendages
When connected to or a part of a
building; towers, tanks, towers and
tanks plus contents, racks over 8'3"   Any direction                 0.20
in height plus contents, chimneys,
smokestacks and penthouses
When connected to or a part of a
building: Rigid and rigidly mounted
equipment and machinery not required   Any horizontal direction      0.20
for continued operation of essential
occupancies
Tanks plus effective contents resting  Any direction                 0.12
on the ground
Floors and roofs acting as diaphragms  In the plane of the diaphragm 0.12
Prefabricated structural elements,
other than walls, with force applied   Any horizontal direction      0.30
at center of gravity or assembly
Connections for exterior panels or     Any direction                 2.00
elements
 
Notes:
See subsection
13-18-7B of this chapter for use of Cp.
When located in the upper portion of any building with a ratio of 5 to 1 or
greater, the value shall be increased by 50 percent.
For flexible and flexibly mounted equipment and machinery, the appropriate
values for C shall be determined with consideration given to both the dynamic
properties of the equipment and machinery and to the building or structure in
which it is placed.
The Wp for storage racks shall be the weight of the racks plus contents. The
value of C for racks over 2 storage support levels in height shall be 0.16 for
the levels below the top 2 levels.
The design of the equipment and machinery and their anchorage is an integral
part of the design and specification of such equipment and machinery. The
structure to which the equipment or machinery is mounted shall be capable of
resisting the anchorage forces (see also section 2312(g) of the building code
of the city of El Segundo).
Floor and roofs acting as diaphragms shall be designed for a minimum force
resulting from a Cp of 112 applied to Wp unless a greater force results from
the distribution of lateral forces in accordance with section 2312(e) of the
building code of the city of El Segundo.
TABLE 88-G   ALLOWABLE VALUE OF HEIGHT-THICKNESS RATIO OP UNREINFORCED MASONRY
WALLS WITH MINIMUM QUALITY MORTAR
 
                             Buildings With Crosswalls As All Other Buildings
                             Defined By Section 91.8803
Walls of one-story buildings 16                           13
First story wall of multi-   16                           15
story buildings
Walls in top story of multi- 14                           9
story buildings
All other walls              16                           13
 
Notes:
Minimum quality mortar shall be determined by laboratory testing in accordance
with subsection
13-18-8E of this chapter.
This table is not applicable to buildings of rating classification I. Walls of
buildings within rating classification I shall be analyzed in accordance with
subsection
13-18-7E of this chapter.
TABLE 88-H   VALUES FOR EXISTING MATERIALS
New Materials Or Configuration Of Materials Allowable Values
New Materials Or Configuration Of          Allowable Values
Materials
1. Horizontal diaphragms:                   
      Roofs with straight sheathing and
  a. roofing applied directly to the      100 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
      sheathing
      Roofs with diagonal sheathing and
  b. roofing applied directly to the      400 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
      sheathing
  c. Floors with straight tongue and      150 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
      groove sheathing
  d. Floors with straight sheathing and   300 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
      finished wood flooring
  e. Floors and diagonal sheathing and    450 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
      finished wood flooring
      Floors or roofs with straight        Add 50 lbs. per foot to the
  f. sheathing and plaster applied to the allowable values for items 1a and 1c
      joist or rafters
2. Shear walls                             100 lbs. per foot each side for
   Wood stud walls with lath and plaster   seismic shear
3. Plain concrete footings                 f = 1,500 psi unless otherwise shown
                                           by tests
4. Douglas fir wood                        Allowable stress same as no. 1 D. F.
5. Reinforcing steel                       f = 18,000 lbs. per square inch
                                           maximum
6. Structural steel                        f = 20,000 lbs. per square inch
                                           maximum
 
Notes:
Material must be sound and in good condition.
The wood lath and plaster must be reattached to existing joists or rafters in a
manner approved by the division.
Stresses given may be increased for combinations of loads as specified in
subsection
13-18-7G2 of this chapter.
TABLE 88-I   ALLOWABLE VALUES OF NEW MATERIALS USED IN CONJUNCTION WITH
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION
New Materials Or Configuration Of Materials Allowable Values
New Materials Or Configuration Of Materials                                Allowable
                                                                           Values
                                                                           100 lbs. per
                                                                           foot in
                                                                           table 25-
   Horizontal diaphragms: Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing J of the El
1. straight sheathing with ends of plywood sheets bearing on joists or     Segundo city
   rafters and edges of plywood located on center of individual boards     building
                                                                           code for
                                                                           blocked
                                                                           diaphragms
2. Shear walls:                                                             
                                                                           Same as
                                                                           values
      Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing wood studs. No      specified in
  a. value shall be given to plywood applied over existing plaster or     table 25-
      wood sheathing                                                       K of the El
                                                                           Segundo city
                                                                           building
                                                                           code
                                                                           75% of the
                                                                           values
                                                                           specified in
  b. Drywall or plaster applied directly over existing wood studs         table 47-
                                                                           I of the El
                                                                           Segundo city
                                                                           building
                                                                           code
                                                                           331/3% of
                                                                           the values
                                                                           specified in
  c. Drywall or plaster applied to plywood sheathing over existing wood   table 47-
      studs                                                                I of the El
                                                                           Segundo city
                                                                           building
                                                                           code
                                                                           100% of the
                                                                           values for
                                                                           plain
                                                                           masonry
                                                                           specified in
                                                                           table 24-
   Shear bolts: Shear bolts and shear dowels embedded a minimum of 8" into J of the El
3. unreinforced masonry walls. Bolt centered in a 21/2" diameter hole with Segundo city
   drypack or nonshrink grout around circumference of bolt or dowel        building
                                                                           code. No
                                                                           values
                                                                           larger than
                                                                           those given
                                                                           for 3/4"
                                                                           bolts shall
                                                                           be used
   Tension bolts: Tension bolts and tension dowels extending entirely      1,200 lbs.
4. through unreinforced masonry walls secured with bearing plates on far   per bolt or
   side of wall with at least 30 sq. in. of area                           dowel
5. Wall anchors:                                                            
      Bolts extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 21/2" round  600 lbs. per
  a. plate under the head. Install as specified for shear bolts. Spaced   bolt
      not closer than 12" on centers
      Bolts or dowels extending to the exterior face of the wall with a    1,200 lbs.
  b. 21/2" round plate under the head and drill at an angle of 221/2° to per bolt or
      the horizontal. Installed as specified for shear bolts               dowel
                                                                           Same as
                                                                           values
                                                                           specified
6. Infilled walls: Reinforced masonry infilled openings in existing        for
   unreinforced masonry walls with keys or dowels to match reinforcing     unreinforced
                                                                           masonry
                                                                           walls
                                                                            
                                                                           Same as
                                                                           values
                                                                           specified in
7. Reinforced masonry: Masonry piers and walls reinforced per section 2407 table 14-
   (c) of the El Segundo city building code                                H of the El
                                                                           Segundo city
                                                                           building
                                                                           code
                                                                           Same as
                                                                           values
   Reinforced concrete: Concrete footings, walls and piers reinforced as   specified in
8. specified in division 26 of the El Segundo city building code and       table 24-
   designed for tributary loads                                            H of the El
                                                                           Segundo city
                                                                           building
                                                                           code
                                                                           Calculated
                                                                           existing
                                                                           foundation
                                                                           loads due to
                                                                           maximum dead
                                                                           load plus
                                                                           live load
                                                                           may be
9. Existing foundation loads: Foundation loads for structures exhibiting   increased
   no evidence of settlement                                               25% for dead
                                                                           load, and
                                                                           may be
                                                                           increased
                                                                           50% for dead
                                                                           load plus
                                                                           seismic load
                                                                           required by
                                                                           this chapter
 
Notes:
Bolts and dowels to be tested as specified in subsection
13-18-8F of this chapter.
Bolts and dowels to be 1/2 inch minimum in diameter.
Drilling for bolts and dowels shall be done with an electric rotary drill.
Impact tools shall not be used for drilling holes or tightening anchor and
shear bolt nuts.
TABLE 88-J   ALLOWABLE SHEAR STRESS FOR TESTED UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS
 
80 Percent Of Test Results Average Test Results Of Seismic In-Plane Shear Based
In psi Not Less Than       Cores In psi            On Gross Area
30 plus axial stress       20                      3 psi1
40 plus axial stress       27                      4 psi1
50 plus axial stress       33                      5 psi1
100 plus axial stress or   67 or more              10 psi maximum1
more
 
Note:
   1.    Allowable shear stress may be increased by addition of 10 percent of
axial stress due to the weight of the wall directly above.
(Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-11: ADOPTION OF APPENDIX V; VOLUNTARY SEISMIC RETROFIT:
§ 13-18-V100: Voluntary Earthquake Hazard Reduction In Existing Reinforced
Concrete And Reinforced Masonry Wall Buildings With Flexible Diaphragms.
§ 13-18-V101: Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing
the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on
reinforced concrete and masonry wall buildings with flexible diaphragms
designed under the building codes in effect before January 1, 1995. These
buildings are potentially hazardous and prone to significant damage, including
possible collapse, in a moderate to major earthquake. These structures
typically shelter large numbers of persons and property for retail, food
markets, food distribution centers, warehousing, aerospace, industrial/
manufacturing and general business and office use. Their continued use after an
earthquake is also essential to the local economy and its post- earthquake
recovery.
The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for structural seismic
resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of loss of life or injury
on both subject and adjacent properties and will not necessarily prevent all
earthquake damage to an existing building which complies with these standards.
This chapter cannot require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire
safety systems to be altered unless they constitute a hazard to life or
property.
This chapter provides voluntary retrofit standards for deficient wall anchorage
systems on structures that are not subject to the mandatory provisions of this
chapter. When fully followed, these standards will strengthen the portion of
the structure that is most vulnerable to earthquake damage.
§ 13-18-V102: Scope.
The voluntary provisions of this chapter apply to existing buildings of the
following types:
      1.   Cast-in-place reinforced concrete or masonry wall buildings with
flexible diaphragms designed under building codes in effect before January 1,
1995.
      2.   Tilt-up concrete wall buildings with flexible diaphragms designed
under the building codes in effect before January 1, 1995, but after January 1,
1976.
All existing reinforced masonry or concrete buildings with flexible diaphragms,
including tilt-up concrete wall buildings, designed under the building code in
effect on or after January 1, 1995, must be designed in conformance with
chapter 16 of the CBC.
§ 13-18-V103: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the applicable definitions in chapter 2,
chapter 16, chapter 19 and chapter 23 of this code; chapter 1, chapter 3,
chapter 4, chapter 5, chapter 6 and chapter 11 of ASCE 7, and the following
apply:
Anchorage System is the system of all structural elements and connections,
which support the concrete or masonry wall in the lateral direction, including
diaphragms and subdiaphragms, wall anchorage and continuity or cross tie
connectors in subdiaphragms and main diaphragms.
Commenced Construction is construction pursuant to a valid building permit that
has progressed to the point that one of the called inspections as required by
the department has been made and the work for which the inspection has been
called has been judged by the department to be substantial and has been
approved by the department.
Existing Building is an erected building for which a legal building permit and
a certificate of occupancy have been issued.
Flexible Diaphragm is any diaphragm constructed of wood structural panel,
diagonal or straight wood sheathing, metal decking without a structural
concrete topping, or horizontal rod bracing.
Historical Building is any building designated or currently in the process of
being designated as a historical building by an appropriate federal, state or
city jurisdiction.
Reinforced Concrete Wall is a concrete wall that has 50 percent or more of the
reinforcing steel required for reinforced concrete in chapter 19.
Reinforced Masonry Wall is a masonry wall that has 50 percent or more of the
reinforcing steel required by chapter 21.
Retrofit is strengthening or structurally improving the lateral force resisting
system of an existing building by alteration of existing or addition of new
structural elements.
Tilt-Up Concrete Wall is a form of precast concrete panel construction either
cast in the horizontal position at the site and after curing, lifted and moved
into place in a vertical position, or cast off-site in a fabricator's shop.
§ 13-18-V104: Analysis And Design.
V104.1. Wall Panel Anchorage. Concrete and masonry walls must be anchored to
all floors and roofs which provide lateral support for the wall. The anchorage
must provide a positive direct connection between the wall and floor or roof
construction capable of resisting a horizontal force equal to 30 percent of the
tributary wall weight for all buildings, and 45 percent of the tributary wall
weight for essential buildings, or a minimum force of 250 pounds per linear
foot of wall, whichever is greater. The required anchorage must be based on the
tributary wall panel assuming simple supports at floors and roof.
Exception: An alternate design may be approved by the building official when
justified by well-established principles of mechanics.
V104.2. Special Requirements For Wall Anchors And Continuity Ties. The steel
elements of the wall anchorage systems and continuity ties must be designed by
the allowable stress design method using a load factor of 1.7. The 1/3 stress
increase permitted by chapter 16 cannot be permitted for materials using
allowable stress design methods. The strength design specified in chapter 19
using a load factor of 2.0 in lieu of 1.4 for earthquake loading, must be used
for the design of embedment in concrete. Wall anchors must be provided to
resist out-of-plane forces, independent of existing shear anchors.
Exception: Existing cast-in-place shear anchors may be used as wall anchors if
the tie element can be readily attached to the anchors and if the engineer or
architect can establish tension values for the existing anchors through the use
of approved as-built plans or testing, and through analysis showing that the
bolts are capable of resisting the total shear load while being acted upon by
the maximum tension force due to seismic loading. Criteria for analysis and
testing must be determined by the building official.
Expansion anchors are not allowed without special approval of the building
official. Attaching the edge of plywood sheathing to steel ledgers is not
considered as complying with the positive anchoring requirements of the code;
and attaching the edge of steel decks to steel ledgers is not considered as
providing the positive anchorage of this code unless testing and analysis are
performed, which establish shear values for the attachment perpendicular to the
edge of the deck.
V104.3. Development Of Anchor Loads Into The Diaphragm. Development of anchor
loads into roof and floor diaphragms must comply with chapter 12 of ASCE 7.
Exception: If continuously tied girders are present, then the maximum spacing
of the continuity ties is the greater of the girder spacing or 24 feet (7315
mm). In wood diaphragms, anchorage cannot be accomplished by use of toe nails
or nails subject to withdrawal, nor must wood ledgers, top plates or framing be
used in cross-grain bending or cross- grain tension. The continuous ties
required by chapter 12 of ASCE 7 must be in addition to the diaphragm
sheathing. Lengths of development of anchor loads in wood diaphragms must be
based on existing field nailing of the sheathing unless existing edge nailing
is positively identified on the original construction plans or at the site. At
reentrant corners, continuity collectors may be required for existing return
walls not designed as shear walls, to develop into the diaphragm a force equal
to the lesser of the rocking or shear capacity of the return wall, or the
tributary shear but not exceeding the capacity of the diaphragm. Shear anchors
for the return wall must be commensurate with the collector force. If a truss
or beam other than rafters or purlins is supported by the return wall or by a
column integral with the return wall, an independent secondary column is
required to support the roof or floor members whenever rocking or shear
capacity of the return wall is governing.
V104.4. Anchorage At Pilasters. Anchorage of pilasters must be designed for the
tributary wall anchoring load per section V104.1 of this code, considering the
wall as a two-way slab. The edge of the two-way slab must be considered "fixed"
when there is continuity at pilasters, and considered "pinned" at roof or floor
levels. The pilasters or the walls immediately adjacent to the pilasters must
be anchored directly to the roof framing such that the existing vertical anchor
bolts at the top of the pilasters are by-passed without causing tension or
shear failure at the top of the pilasters.
Exception: If existing vertical anchor bolts at the top of the pilasters are
used for the anchorage, then additional exterior confinement must be provided.
The minimum anchorage at a floor or roof between the pilasters must be that
specified in section V104.1 of this code.
V104.5. Symmetry. Symmetry of connectors in the anchorage system is required.
Eccentricity may be allowed when it can be shown that all components of forces
are positively resisted and justified by calculations or tests.
V104.6. Minimum Roof Member Size. Wood members used to develop anchorage forces
to the diaphragm must be of minimum nominal width for new construction and
replacement. All such members must be designed for gravity and earthquake
forces as part of the wall anchorage system. For existing structural members,
the allowable stresses must be without the 1/3 stress increase per section
V104.2.
V104.7. Combination Of Anchor Types. To repair and retrofit existing buildings,
a combination of different anchor types of different behavior or stiffness is
prohibited. The capacity of the new and existing connectors cannot be added.
V104.8. Prohibited Anchors. Usage of connectors that were bent or stretched
from the intended use is prohibited.
V104.9. Crack And Damage Repairs, Evaluation Of Existing Structural
Alterations. The engineer or architect must report any observed structural
conditions and structural damage that have imminent life safety effects on the
buildings and recommend repairs. This includes alterations such as openings cut
in existing wall panels without a building permit. Evaluations and repairs must
be reviewed and approved by the building official.
V104.10. Miscellaneous. Existing mezzanines relying on the concrete or masonry
walls for vertical or lateral support must be anchored to the walls for the
tributary mezzanine load. Walls depending on the mezzanine for lateral support
must be anchored per sections V104.1, V104.2 and V104.3 of this code.
Exception: Existing mezzanines that have independent lateral and vertical
support need not be anchored to the concrete or masonry walls. Existing
interior masonry or concrete walls not designed as shear walls, which extend to
the floor above or to the roof diaphragm must also be anchored for out-of-
plane forces per section V104.1, V104.2 and V104.3 of this code. In the in-
plane direction, the walls may be isolated or must be developed into the
diaphragm for a lateral force equal to the lesser of the rocking or shear
capacity of the wall, or the tributary shear but not exceeding the diaphragm
capacity.
V104.11. Historical Buildings. Qualified historical buildings must be permitted
to use alternate building standards or deviations from this chapter in order to
preserve their original or restored architectural elements and features.
§ 13-18-V105: Materials Of Construction.
All materials permitted by this code.
§ 13-18-V106: Information Required On Plans.
V106.1. General. In addition to the seismic analysis required elsewhere in this
chapter, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic
analysis of the building must record the information required by this section
on the approved plans.
V106.2. Information Required. The plans must accurately reflect the results of
the engineering investigation and design and show all pertinent dimensions and
sizes for plan review and construction. The following must be provided:
      1.   Floor plans and roof plans must show the existing framing
construction, diaphragm construction, proposed wall anchors, cross-ties and
collectors. Existing nailing, anchors, ties and collectors must also be shown
on the plans if these are part of the design, and these structural elements
need to be verified in the field.
      2.   At elevations where there is alterations or damage, the details must
show the roof and floor heights, dimensions of openings, location and extent of
existing damage, and proposed repair.
      3.   Typical concrete or masonry wall sections with wall thickness,
height, and location of anchors must be provided.
      4.   Details must include the existing and new anchors and the method of
development of anchor forces into the diaphragm framing; existing and new
cross-ties, existing and new or improved support of the roof and floor girders
at pilasters or walls.
V106.3. Engineer's Or Architect's Statement. The responsible engineer or
architect must state on the approved plans, the following:
      1.   "I am responsible for this building's seismic strengthening design
of the tilt-up concrete wall anchorage system in compliance with the minimum
seismic resistance standards of chapter V1 of the California Building Code, as
adopted by the El Segundo Municipal Code." or when applicable:
      2.   "The Registered Deputy Inspector, required as a condition of the use
of structural design stresses requiring continuous inspection, will be
responsible to me, the California Licensed Engineer or Architect, as required
by Section 1704 of the California Building Code, as adopted by the El Segundo
Municipal Code."
§ 13-18-V107: Required Building Maintenance.
Every building within the scope of this chapter which has been analyzed to
demonstrate compliance or structurally altered to comply with the minimum
earthquake standards in this chapter must be maintained in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter in effect at the time of such analysis or
structural alteration.
TABLE NO. V1-A   RATING CLASSIFICATIONS
 
Classification Occupant Load
Essential      n/a
Group I        300 or more
Group II       100 to 299
Group III      50 to 99
Group IV       Less than 50
 
(Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-12: ADOPTION OF VOLUNTARY PRESCRIPTIVE PROVISIONS FOR SEISMIC
STRENGTHENING OF CRIPPLE WALLS AND SILL PLATE ANCHORAGE OF LIGHT, WOOD FRAME
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
§ 13-18-V200: VOLUNTARY PRESCRIPTIVE PROVISIONS FOR SEISMIC STRENGTHENING OF
CRIPPLE WALLS AND SILL PLATE ANCHORAGE OF LIGHT, WOOD-FRAME RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS.
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, chapter A3
of the latest edition of the California Existing Building Code ("CEBC"),
published at title 24, part 10, of the California Code of Regulations, is
adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set
forth below. One true copy of the CEBC is on file in the office of the Building
Official and is available for public inspection as required by law.
(Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1607, 11-19-2019)
13-18-13: ADOPTION OF VOLUNTARY EARTHQUAKE RISK REDUCTION IN WOOD FRAME
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS WITH SOFT, WEAK OR OPEN FRONT WALLS:
§ 13-18-V300: VOLUNTARY EARTHQUAKE RISK REDUCTION IN WOOD-FRAME RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS WITH SOFT, WEAK OR OPEN FRONT WALLS. Pursuant to California
Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, chapter A4 of the latest edition
of the California Existing Building Code ("CEBC"), published at title 24, part
10, of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference, subject to
the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of the
CEBC is on file in the office of the Building Official and is available for
public inspection as required by law.
(Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1607, 11-19-2019)
13-18-14: ADOPTION OF VOLUNTARY EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING
CONCRETE BUILDINGS:
§ 13-18-V400: VOLUNTARY EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING CONCRETE
BUILDINGS. Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8,
chapter A5 of the latest edition of the International Existing Building Code
("IEBC"), published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference,
subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. Sections
A502 through A507 are amended as follows: All references to "International
Building Code" shall be amended to read "latest Edition of the California
Building Code ("CBC") as amended by the El Segundo Municipal Code". One true
copy of the IEBC is on file in the office of the Building Official and is
available for public inspection as required by law.
(Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1607, 11-19-2019)
CHAPTER 19
SOLAR, HYDRONICS, AND GEOTHERMAL CODE
SECTION:
13-19-1: Adoption Of Uniform Solar, Hydronics, And Geothermal Code, 2021
Edition
13-19-2: Expedited Permit Process For Small Residential Rooftop Solar Systems;
Purpose
13-19-3: Definitions
13-19-4: Applicability
13-19-5: Solar Energy System Requirements
13-19-6: Duties Of The Director
13-19-7: Permit Review And Inspection Requirements
13-19-1: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM SOLAR, HYDRONICS, AND GEOTHERMAL CODE, 2021
EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the Uniform
Solar Hydronics, and Geothermal Code (“USHGC”), 2021 Edition, promulgated and
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials, adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and
deletions set forth below. One true copy of the USHGC is on file in the office
of the Building Official and is available for public inspection as required by
law.
(Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1608, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
13-19-2: EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS;
PURPOSE:
This chapter implements the solar rights act as codified at Government Code
section 65850.5 to achieve timely and cost effective installations of small
residential rooftop solar energy systems. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539,
12-6-2016)
13-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning
set forth in this code, the act, or regulations promulgated in accordance with
applicable law.
   ACT: The solar rights act as codified at Government Code section 65850.5.
   DIRECTOR: The city manager, or designee. In the absence of a different
designation by the city manager, the director of community development, or
designee, is the director.
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL: Utilization of office equipment and software used for
communicating including, without limitation, telephone, facsimile machine,
office automation equipment (computer terminals or personal computers,
including laptops) and communications software applications such as electronic
mail and internet browsers.
   INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES OR IT: Any system, device, hardware, software, or
other equipment designed and used for transmitting or receiving communications
by any form of electronic mail (e-mail) or any network of interconnected
computers, including, without limitation, the internet, as used for such
purposes.
   INTERNET OR WORLD WIDE WEB: A global network connecting multiple information
technologies from schools, libraries, businesses, or private homes, using a
common set of communication protocols.
   REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS: On a solar energy system are those restrictions
that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly
decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an
alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation
benefits.
   RESTRICTIONS THAT DO NOT SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THE COST OF THE SYSTEM OR
DECREASE ITS EFFICIENCY OR SPECIFIED PERFORMANCE:
   A.   For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: An
amount exceeding ten percent (10%) of the cost of the system, but in no case
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the
solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent (10%), as originally
specified and proposed.
   B.   For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a
decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent (10%) as
originally specified and proposed.
   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: All of the following:
   A.   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.
   B.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire,
structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the
city and all state and local health and safety standards.
   C.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family
dwelling.
   D.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal
building height as defined by the city.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Either of the following:
   A.   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose
is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.
   B.   Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is
to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. (Ord.
1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022)
13-19-4: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop
solar energy systems in the city.
   B.   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or
permitted before the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are
undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small
rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine
operation and maintenance or like kind replacements do not require a permit.
(Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-5: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All solar energy systems must meet applicable legal health and safety
standards and requirements.
   B.   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and
for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications must be certified
by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California plumbing and
mechanical codes, as adopted by this code.
   C.   Solar energy systems for producing electricity must meet all applicable
safety and performance standards established by the California electrical code,
the Institute Of Electrical And Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing
laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of
the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1510,
8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-6: DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR:
   A.   All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy
system application must be made available on the internet.
   B.   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents
by information technologies is available to all small residential rooftop solar
energy system permit applicants. All forms, applications, and other documents
may be signed electronically in accordance with Government Code section 16.5.
   C.   The director must develop a standard plan and checklist of all
requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must
comply to be eligible for expedited review.
   D.   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard
plan(s), and checklist(s) must substantially conform to recommendations for
expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in
the most current version of the "California Solar Permitting Guidebook" adopted
by the governor's office of planning and research.
   E.   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop
solar energy systems must comply with Government Code sections 65850.55, 66015,
and 66016; along with Health And Safety Code section 17951. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-
2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-7: PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The director must implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review
process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems.
The director must issue a ministerial building permit on the same day for over
the counter applications or within three (3) business days for electronic
submittals, upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements
of the approved checklist and standard plan. The director may require an
applicant to apply for an administrative use permit if the director finds,
based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a
specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions must
be in writing and may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with
this code.
   B.   Review of the application is limited to whether the application meets
applicable law.
   C.   If an administrative use permit is required, the director may deny an
application for the use permit if the director makes written findings based
upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would
have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse
impact. Such findings must include the basis for the rejection of the potential
feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be
appealed to the planning commission in accordance with this code.
   D.   Any condition imposed on an application must be designed to mitigate
the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible
cost.
   E.   The director cannot condition approval of an application on by
requiring formation of an association.
   F.   If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice
detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or
documentation required to be eligible for issuing an expedited permit must be
sent to the applicant for resubmission.
   G.   Only one inspection is required and must be performed by the director
for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited
review.
   H.   The inspection must be done in a timely manner and should include
consolidated inspections.
   I.   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a
subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
CHAPTER 20
SECURITY CODE
SECTION:
13-20-1: Purpose
13-20-2: Scope
13-20-3: Definitions
13-20-4: Enforcement Provisions
13-20-5: Certificate Of Occupancy
13-20-6: Right Of Entry
13-20-7: Violations And Penalties
13-20-8: Administrative Relief
13-20-9: Life Safety Factors
13-20-10: Alternate Materials And Methods Of Construction
13-20-11: Keying Requirements
13-20-12: Frames; Jambs; Strikes; Hinges
13-20-13: Special Residential Building Provisions
13-20-14: Special Nonresidential Building Provisions
13-20-15: Special Parking Facilities Provisions
13-20-16: Emergency Access
13-20-17: Special Recreational Spaces Provisions
13-20-18: Commercial/Retail Provisions
Appendix A: El Segundo Police Department Approved Security Hardware
13-20-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard property
and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction,
quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of
buildings and structures subject to the provisions of this code within the City
of El Segundo, as specified in Section 14051 of the California Penal Code
relating to building safety. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-2: SCOPE:
   A.   The provisions of this code shall apply only to new construction and to
buildings or structures to which additions, alterations, or repairs are made,
except as specifically provided by this code. When additions, alterations, or
repairs made within any 12-month period exceed 50 percent of the value of the
existing building or structure, such building or structure shall be made to
conform to the requirements for new buildings and structures. When additions,
alterations, and repairs do not exceed 75 percent or less of the value of an
existing building, then only the new construction would have to meet the
standards set forth by this code.
   B.   Existing multiple dwelling units that are converted to privately-owned
family units (condominiums) shall comply with the provisions of the "Special
Residential Building Provisions."
   C.   Any existing structure which converts from its original occupancy group
as designated in the Uniform Building Code, shall comply with the provisions of
this code.
   D.   Any building, as defined in the California Building Code and Title 24,
California Code of Regulations, requiring special type releasing, latching, or
locking devices, other than described herein, shall be exempt from the
provisions hereof relating to locking devices of interior and exterior doors.
(Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this code, certain terms are defined as follows:
ALLEY: Any roadway not exceeding 25 feet in width which is primarily used for
access to the rear or side entrances of abutting property.
APPROVED: Certified as meeting the requirements of this code by the enforcing
authority or its authorized agents, or by other officials designated by law to
give approval on a particular matter dealt with by the provisions of this code
with regard to a given material, mode of construction, piece of equipment or
device.
ASTRAGAL: A device, either fixed or movable, which eliminates the vertical
opening between a pair of doors when in the closed position.
BOLT: A metal bar which, when actuated, is projected (or thrown) either
horizontally or vertically into a retaining member, such as a strike plate, to
prevent a door or window from moving or opening.
BOLT PROJECTION or BOLT THROWN: The distance from the edge of the door, at the
bolt center line, to the farthest point on the bolt in the projected position.
BURGLARY RESISTANT GLAZING: Those materials as defined in Underwriters'
Laboratories Bulletin 972.
COMMON AREA: An area of space, a building or portion of a building, which is
legally accessible to the owners or users of a multi-tenant property.
CYLINDER: The subassembly of a lock containing the cylinder core, tumbler
mechanism and the keyway. A double cylinder lock is one, which has a key-
actuated cylinder on both the exterior and interior of the door.
CYLINDER GUARD: A tapered or flush metal ring or plate surrounding the
otherwise exposed portion of a cylinder lock to resist cutting, drilling,
prying, pulling or wrenching with common tools.
DEADBOLT: A lock bolt which does not have a spring action. The bolt shall be
actuated by a key and a knob or thumb-turn, and when projected becomes locked
against return by end pressure.
DEAD LATCH or DEADLOCKING LATCH BOLT: A spring-actuated latch bolt having a
beveled end and incorporating a plunger which, when depressed, automatically
locks the projected latch bolt against return by end pressure.
DOOR: A swinging, sliding, rolling overhead, or solid overhead door.
DOUBLE CYLINDER DEADBOLT: A deadbolt lock which can be activated only by a key
on both the interior and exterior.
DOUBLE DOOR: A doorway equipped with a glazed door hinged at the jambs. The
glazing may consist of one or more glazed panels.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential
occupancy, including single-family and multiple-family dwellings.
FLUSH BOLT: A manual, key or turn-operated metal bolt normally used on inactive
door(s), and is attached to the top and bottom of the door and engages in the
head and threshold of the frame.
FULLY TEMPERED GLASS: Those materials meeting or exceeding Section 2406 of the
currently adopted edition of the California Building Code ("CBC").
GLAZING: All glass, plastics, and fiberglass utilized as an exterior window,
vision panel, light, or pane within any type of door.
HOURS OF OPERATION: The time period when any activity requires the presence of
employees or workers within or about the affected business.
HOURS OF DARKNESS: Any time from one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour
after sunrise and any other time when the illumination level is less than the
required lighting for uses as designated in this chapter.
JAMB: The vertical members of a door frame to which the door is secured.
JAMB/WALL: That component of a door assembly to which a door is attached and
secured; the wall and jamb used together are considered a unit.
LATCH OR LATCH BOLT: A beveled, spring-actuated bolt, which may or may not have
a deadlocking device.
LIGHT PANEL: Any glazed opening whether glazed with glass, plastic, metal,
wood, or composition sheets or panels, or similar materials and shall include
windows, skylights, view ports or view panels and similar openings.
LOCK (OR LOCKSET): A keyed device (complete with cylinder, latch or deadbolt
mechanism, and trim such as knobs, levers, thumb turns, escutcheons, etc.) for
securing a door in a closed position against forced entry. For the purposes of
this code, a lock does not include the strike plate.
LOCKING DEVICE: A part of a window assembly, which is intended to prevent
movement of the moveable sash, which may be the sash lock or sash operator.
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting device consisting of a light source together
with its direct appurtenances, such as globe, reflector refractor, housing and
such support as is integral with the housing. The pole, post or bracket is not
considered a part of the luminaire.
MINIMUM MAINTAINED FOOT-CANDLES OF LIGHT: The amount of light falling on that
point of a surface with the least illumination, calculated through application
of a maintenance factor, which is a multiplier applied to account for aging of
the lamp and for dirt build-up on the luminaire during the period for which a
lamp is in place.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy
by two or more families living independently of each other, including hotels,
motels, apartments, duplexes and townhouses.
NONRESIDENTIAL: Any building, parking lot and associated areas used for any
purpose other than a dwelling.
PANIC HARDWARE: A latching device on a door assembly for use when emergency
egress is required due to fire or other threat to life safety. Devices designed
so that they will facilitate the safe egress of people in case of an emergency
when a pressure not to exceed 15 pounds is applied to the releasing device in
the direction of exit travel. Such releasing devices are bars or panels
extending not less than one-half of the width of the door and placed at heights
suitable for the service require, not less than 30 nor more than 44 inches
above the floor.
PRIMARY LOCKING DEVICE: The single locking system on a door or window unit
whose primary function is to prevent unauthorized intrusion.
RAIL: The horizontal member of a window or door. A meeting rail is one which
mates with a rail of another sash or a framing member of the door or window
frame when the sash is in the closed position.
RECREATIONAL SPACE: Any public or private park, community common open space or
paseo, bike trail, community swimming pools and associated sidewalks and
parking lots.
SAFE: A combination-locked steel chest or money safe designed to offer a
limited degree of protection against expert burglary by common hand tools.
SASH: An assembly of stiles, rails, and sometimes, mullions assembled into a
single frame, which supports the glazing material. A fixed sash is one which is
not intended to be opened. A moveable sash is intended to be opened.
SILL: The lowest horizontal member of a window frame.
SINGLE CYLINDER DEADBOLT: A deadbolt lock, which is activated from the outside
by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumb-turn, lever, or similar
mechanism.
SOLID CORE DOOR: A door composed of solid wood or composed of compressed wood
equal in strength to solid wood construction.
STILE: A vertical framing member of a window or door.
STRIKE: A metal plate attached to or mortised into a door or door jamb to
receive and to hold a projected latch bolt and deadbolt in order to secure the
door to the jamb.
SWINGING DOOR: A door hinged at the stile or at the head and threshold.
UNDERWRITERS' LABORATORIES LISTED: Tested and listed by Underwriters'
Laboratory, Inc.
VANDAL RESISTANT LIGHT FIXTURE: Has a lens constructed of materials meeting or
exceeding U.L. Bulletin 972 (Burglary Resistant Glazing) and a housing meeting
or exceeding U.L. Bulletin 1572 (Wet Locations.)
WINDOW ASSEMBLY: A unit, which includes a window and the anchorage between the
window and the wall.
WINDOW FRAME: The part of a window, which surrounds and supports the sashes and
is attached to the surrounding wall. The members include side jambs (vertical),
head jamb (upper, horizontal), sill and mullions. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-4: ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS:
Enforcement of this code shall be the responsibility of the City's Building
Safety Division and the Police Department. All building officials and
administrative authority determinations required by this code shall be made
jointly by the responsible representatives of each function charged with
administration of this code or individually as charged. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the applicant for such
certificate has complied with this chapter. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this code, or whenever the Chief Building Official, or his
authorized representative, or an El Segundo Police Department representative,
has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any
premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Chief Building Official or his authorized
representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Chief Building
Official by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied,
he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such
building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or
premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building official or
his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by
law to secure entry.
   B.   When the Chief Building Official, or his authorized representative, or
an El Segundo Police Department representative, shall have first obtained a
proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no
owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care of control of any
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Chief Building
Official or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and
examination pursuant to this code. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-7: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, move, improve, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure in the City of El Segundo or cause same to
be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-8: ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF:
In order to prevent or lessen the unnecessary hardship or practical
difficulties in exceptional cases where it is difficult or impossible to comply
with the strict letter of this code, the owner or his designated agent shall
have the option to apply for an exemption from any provision of this code to
the designated representative of the El Segundo Police Department and the
Official. The reviewing authority shall exercise its powers on these matters in
such a way that the public welfare is secured, and substantial justice done
most nearly in accord with the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 1540, 12-
6-2016)
13-20-9: LIFE SAFETY FACTORS:
No portion of this code shall supersede any local, state, or Federal law,
regulation, or codes dealing with life safety factors. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-10: ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code,
provided any such alternate has been approved by the enforcing authority, nor
is it the intention of this code to exclude any sound method of structural
design or analysis not specifically provided for in this code. Materials,
methods of construction, or structural design limitations provided for in this
code are to be unless an exception is granted by the enforcing authority.
   B.   The enforcing authority may approve any such alternate provided they
find the proposed design to be satisfactory and the material and method of work
is for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed in this
code in quality, strength, effectiveness, burglary resistance, durability and
safety. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-11: KEYING REQUIREMENTS:
Upon occupancy by the owner or proprietor, each single unit in a tract or
commercial development, constructed under the same general plan, shall have
locks using combinations which are interchange free from locks used in all
other separate dwellings, proprietorships or similar distinct occupancies.
(Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-12: FRAMES; JAMBS; STRIKES; HINGES:
Installation and construction of frames, jambs, strikes and hinges for exterior
swinging doors and door leading from garage into dwelling unit shall be as
follows:
   A.   Door jambs shall be installed with solid backing in such a manner that
no voids exist between the strike side of the jamb and the frame opening for a
vertical distance of six inches each side of the strike.
   B.   In wood framing, horizontal blocking shall be placed between studs at
door lock height for three stud spaces each side of the door openings. Trimmers
shall be full length from the header to the floor with solid backing against
sole plates.
   C.   Door stops on wooden jambs for in-swinging doors shall be of one-piece
construction with the jamb. Jambs for all doors shall be constructed or
protected so as to prevent violation of the strike.
   D.   The strike plate for deadbolts on all wood framed doors shall be
constructed of minimum 16 U.S. gauge steel, bronze, or brass, and secured to
the jamb by a minimum of two screws, which must penetrate at least three inches
into solid backing beyond the surface to which the strike is attached.
   E.   Hinges for out-swinging doors shall be equipped with non-removable
hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the
exterior by removing the hinge pins.
   F.   When pairs of doors are utilized in residential structures, a one-piece
assembly attached to the full-length edge of the inactive door leaf,
incorporating an astragal and flush-bolts for the header and threshold, will be
accepted as a strike plate, provided the assembly is constructed of aluminum or
steel a minimum of one-eighth inch in thickness.
   G.   All exterior doors equipped with lever-handled locking devices which
operate the deadbolt shall have thresholds designed and installed so as to
prevent the passing of rigid materials between the door and threshold to the
interior. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-13: SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this section shall apply only to multiple-family dwelling
units.
   A.   Except for vehicular access doors, all exterior swinging doors of any
residential building and garages, including the door leading from the garage
area into the dwelling unit shall be equipped as follows:
      1.   All wood doors shall be of solid core construction with a minimum
thickness of 1 3/4 inches, or with panels not less than 9/16 inch thick.
      2.   Main entry doors constructed of glass shall not be permitted in
residential applications. Glass panels in the top eighth of the door may be
permitted upon submission and review.
      3.   Main entry doors where windows are set alongside the entry door
shall either reverse the swing of the door, OR reverse the position of the
window to be opposite the locking mechanism.
      4.   A single or double door shall be equipped with a single cylinder
deadbolt lock. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one inch and be
constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an
embedment of at least 3/4 inch into the strike receiving the projected bolt.
The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five-pin tumblers, and
shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at
least one-fourth inch in diameter.
      5.   The inactive leaf of double door(s) shall be equipped with metal
flush bolts having a minimum embedment of 5/8 inch into the head and threshold
of the door frame.
      6.   Door hardware shall comply with the El Segundo Police Department
Approved Security Hardware shown at end of the document.
      7.   Glazing in or around exterior doors, shall be a minimum distance of
20 inches from any locking mechanism and shall be of fully tempered glass or
rated burglary resistant glazing.
      8.   All front exterior doors shall be equipped with a wide-angle (190-
200 degrees) door viewer, not to be mounted more than 58 inches from the bottom
of the door.
   B.   Multiple family buildings shall display a street address number
conforming to the following specifications:
      1.   Each individual unit within the complex shall display a prominent
identification number not less than four inches in height, contrasting in color
to the background to which it is affixed and clearly visible to approaching
vehicles and/or pedestrians.
      2.   Numerals shall be no less than four inches in height and illuminated
during the hours of darkness. The numerals and light source shall be contained
with a single, weather-resistant fixture. The light source shall be provided
with an uninterruptible A.C. power source or controlled only by a photoelectric
device. Nothing in this section shall preclude the requirement for circuit
protection devices where applicable. An illuminated fixture is not required
when the address number can be lighted by an area.
      3.   Complexes with two or more buildings with the same address or
buildings containing a minimum of six separate street addresses, shall display
minimum six-inch high identification numbers noting the address number and
range of unit and/or building numbers within the building. They shall be placed
on the building between eight and ten feet from ground level, and visible to
approaching vehicles and/or pedestrians from all building sides. Identification
numbers shall be of a color contrasting to the background to which they are
attached and be illuminated during the hours of darkness. The light source
shall be provided with an uninterruptible A.C. power source or controlled only
by a photoelectric device.
      4.   Driveways servicing more than 20 individual dwelling units shall
have minimum four-inch high identification numbers, noting the range of unit
numbers, placed at the entrance to each driveway at a height between 36 and 42
inches above grade. The light source shall be provided with an uninterruptible
A.C. power source or controlled only by a photoelectric device.
      5.   There shall be positioned, at each entrance of a multiple family
dwelling complex with more than four buildings, an illuminated diagrammatic
representation of the complex, which depicts the location of the viewer and the
unit designations within the complex. It shall be lighted during the hours of
darkness utilizing a light source, which is constructed of weather and vandal
resistant materials and provided with an uninterruptible A.C. power source or
controlled by a photoelectric device. Nothing in this section shall preclude
the requirement for circuit protection devices where applicable.
      6.   In multiple family complexes, garages or carports not directly
attached to the dwelling unit or placed next to the dwelling unit and
discernible as being associated with one addressed dwelling unit shall not use
corresponding dwelling unit addresses to identify the garage or carport.
      7.   Address identification numbers and/or letters shall not be affixed
to a surface using two-sided tape or any material not resistant to weather
conditions.
      8.   Any building which affords vehicular access to the rear through a
public or private alley shall display, in a clearly visible location, a highly
reflective address number a minimum of four inches in height.
   C.   Multiple-family buildings, carports, parking areas, driveways, and
walking surfaces shall conform to the following lighting standards:
      1.   All vehicular drive surfaces, open parking areas and carports shall
be illuminated with a minimum maintained 1.25 foot-candles of light at ground
level during the hours of darkness.
      2.   All exterior common area pedestrian walkways and recreation areas
shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained 0.50 foot-candle of light at
ground level during the hours of darkness.
      3.   Enclosed common area corridors shall be illuminated with a minimum
maintained 0.50 foot-candles of light on all landings and stair treads during
the hours of darkness. Open and enclosed stairways shall be illuminated at all
times with a minimum maintained one foot-candle of light on all landings and
stair treads.
      4.   Trash enclosures/areas, mailboxes, vending machines, and public
phones located on the exterior shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained
one foot-candle, measured within a five-foot radius at ground level, during the
hours of darkness.
      5.   Mailboxes shall be placed in a highly visible, secured location
(i.e. behind the security gate). Mailboxes and mail receptacles shall both be
locking.
      6.   Recessed areas of building or fences, which have a minimum depth of
two feet, a minimum height of five feet, and do not exceed six feet in width
and are capable of human concealment, shall be illuminated with a minimum
maintained 0.25 foot-candles of light at ground level during the hours of
darkness. This requirement applies to defined recessed areas which are within
six feet of the edge of designated walking surface with an unobstructed pathway
to it, not hindered by walls or hedge row landscaping a minimum of two feet in
height.
      7.   Accessible luminaires utilized to meet the requirements of this
section shall have vandal resistant light fixtures and be not less than three
feet in height from the walking surface when used to illuminate walkways and a
minimum of 78 inches in height above the driving surface when illuminating
surfaces associated with vehicles. Light fixtures shall be deemed accessible if
mounted within 15 feet vertically or six feet horizontally from any accessible
surface or any adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform or
similar structure.
      8.   A site plan shall be provided showing buildings, parking area,
walkways, detailed landscaping and a point-by-point photometric calculation of
the required light levels. Landscaping shall not be planted so as to obscure
required light levels. Foot-candles shall be measured on a horizontal plane and
conform to a uniformity ratio of four to one (4:1 maximum/minimum). The
photometric study shall be provided for approval prior to issuing the Building
Permit.
      9.   The light source shall be controlled by a photocell device or a
time-clock with an astronomic feature.
      10.   Landscaping around the perimeter of the structure shall not provide
access to any portion of the structure unless the accessible point is protected
as described in subsection H. hereinabove.
      11.   All landscaping shall be low profile around perimeter windows,
doors and entryways. Floral or grass ground cover is recommended. Bushes shall
be trimmed to 2 to 3 feet and away from buildings. Dense bushes shall not be
clumped together; this provides a hiding place for criminal activity.
      12.   Trees shall be trimmed up to 7 feet.
      13.   Trees/bushes/shrubs shall not be planted next to or near light
fixtures or light standards. When grown to maturity this landscaping will block
the light and reduce lighting on the ground surface.
   D.   Common-area laundry rooms in multiple-family complexes shall be
designed and protected as follows:
      1.   Entry doors shall have:
         a.   A minimum 600 square-inch clear vision panel, in the upper half
of the door.
         b.   Automatic, hydraulic door closures.
         c.   Self-locking door locks equipped with a dead-locking latch,
allowing exiting by a single motion and openable from the inside without the
use of a key or any special knowledge or effort.
         d.   Non-removable hinge pins for out-swinging doors to preclude
removal of the door from the exterior by removing the hinge pins.
         e.   A latch protector consisting of minimum 0.125-inch-thick steel
attached to the door's exterior with non-removable bolts from the exterior. It
shall be two inches wide and extend a minimum of five inches above and below
the strike opening and extend a minimum of one inch beyond the edge of the
door. It shall have a metal anti-spread pin a minimum of 1/2 inch in length.
      2.   The laundry room shall be illuminated at all times with a minimum
maintained five foot-candles of light at floor level, using a non-interruptible
power source. There shall be no light switches inside the room that control
light fixtures used to meet the lighting requirement.
      3.   Any portion of an openable window which is within eight feet
vertically or six feet horizontally from any accessible surface or any
adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform, or similar surface, or
any climbable pole or tree, or any surface providing a foothold, shall be
secured as follows:
Windows shall not provide an opening greater than 96 square inches: or
         a.   Transom windows opening at the top and hinged at the bottom may
be utilized provided the bottom portion is not less than six feet from an
exterior accessible surface.
         b.   The entire laundry room shall be visible from the exterior along
common area walking or driving surfaces. Perimeter windows and interior mirrors
may be utilized to meet this requirement.
         c.   Laundry rooms are to be located in high activity areas with
natural surveillance opportunities, and not in remote or isolated locations.
   E.   Multiple-family complexes shall have wrought iron/tubular steel
security gates and fencing, a minimum of six feet high street side, at all
pedestrian access points enclosing the walkway/common areas and have an
electric mechanical access control system. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-14: SPECIAL NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this section shall apply to nonresidential units and
structures.
   A.   Swinging exterior glass doors, wood or metal doors with glass panels,
solid wood or metal doors shall be constructed or protected as follows:
      1.   Door hardware shall comply with the El Segundo Police Department
Approved Security Hardware shown at end of the document.
      2.   Wood doors shall be of solid core construction with a minimum
thickness of 1 3/4 inches. Wood panel doors with panels less than one inch
thick shall be covered on the inside with a minimum 16 U.S. gauge sheet steel
or its equivalent, which is to be attached with screws on minimum six-inch
centers. Hollow steel doors shall be of a minimum 16 U.S. gauge and have
sufficient reinforcement to maintain the designated thickness of the door when
any locking device is installed; such reinforcement being able to restrict
collapsing of the door around any locking device.
      3.   Except when double cylinder deadbolts are utilized, any glazing
utilized within 40 inches of any door locking mechanism shall be constructed or
protected as follows:
         a.   Fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistant glazing; or
         b.   Iron or steel grills of at least 1/8-inch material with a minimum
two-inch mesh secured on the inside of the glazing may be utilized; or
         c.   The glazing shall be covered with iron bars of at least 1/2 inch
round or one-inch by 1/4-inch flat steel material, spaced not more than five
inches apart, secured on the inside of the glazing.
         d.   Items b. and c., above, shall not interfere with the operation of
opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the Uniform
Building Code.
   B.   All swinging exterior doors shall be equipped as follows:
      1.    A single or double door shall be equipped with a double or single
cylinder deadbolt. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one inch and be
constructed so as to repel a cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an
embedment of at least 3/4 inch into the strike receiving the projected bolt.
The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five-pin tumblers, and
shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at
least 1/4 inch in diameter. The provisions of the preceding paragraph do not
apply where:
         a.   Panic hardware is required; or
         b.   An equivalent device is approved by the enforcing authority.
      2.   Double doors shall be equipped as follows:
         a   The inactive leaf of double door(s) shall be equipped with metal
flush bolts having a minimum embedment of 5/8 inch into the head and threshold
of the doorframe.
         b   Double doors shall have an astragal constructed of steel a minimum
of 0.125 inch thick, which will cover the opening between the doors. The
astragal shall be a minimum of two inches wide, and extend a minimum of one
inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached. The astragal shall be
attached to the outside of the active door by means of welding or with non-
removable bolts spaced apart on not more than ten inches centers. (The door to
which such an astragal is attached must be determined by the fire safety codes
adopted by the enforcing authority.)
   C.   Aluminum frame swinging doors shall be equipped as follows:
      1.   The jamb on all aluminum frame swinging doors shall be so
constructed or protected to withstand 1,600 pounds of pressure in both a
vertical distance of three inches and a horizontal distance of one inch each
side of the strike, so as to prevent violation of the strike.
      2.   A single or double door shall be equipped with a double cylinder
deadbolt with a bolt projection exceeding one inch or a hook-shaped or
expanding deadbolt that engages the strike sufficiently to prevent spreading.
The deadbolt lock shall have a minimum of five-pin tumblers and a cylinder
guard.
   D.   Panic hardware, whenever required by the Uniform Building Code or Title
24, California Code of Regulations, shall be installed as follows:
      1.   Panic hardware shall contain a minimum of two locking points on each
door; or
      2.   On single doors, panic hardware may have one locking point, which is
not to be located at either the top or bottom rails of the doorframe.
      3.   Double doors containing panic hardware shall have an astragal
attached to the doors at their meeting point, which will close the opening
between them, but not interfere with the operation of either door.
   E.   Horizontal sliding doors shall be equipped with a metal guide track at
top and bottom, and a cylinder lock and/or padlock with a hardened steel
shackle which locks at both heel and toe, and a minimum five-pin tumbler
operation with non-removable key when in an unlocked position. The bottom track
shall be so designed that the door cannot be lifted from the track when the
door is in a locked position.
   F.   In office buildings (multiple occupancy), all entrance doors to
individual office suites shall meet the construction and locking requirements
for exterior doors.
   G.   Glazing shall be deemed accessible, if any portion of it is within 40
inches of any door locking mechanism, and shall be constructed of either two
part laminated glazing with a 0.06 inch inner layer or burglary resistant
glazing.
   H.   Cash counting/commercial retail manager's office, rear exit doors and
delivery doors shall be equipped with a wide angle (190-200 degree) door
viewer, not to be mounted more than 58 inches from the bottom of the door.
   I.   Roof openings shall be protected as follows if the roof is accessible
via an exterior ladder or the roof is less than 20 feet from ground level or if
any portion of it is within 12 feet vertically or six feet horizontally from
any exterior accessible surface or any adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair
tread or similar structure:
      1.   All skylights on the roof of any building used for business purposes
shall be provided with:
         a.   Rated burglary-resistant glazing; or
         b.   Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one by 1/4 inch flat
steel material under the skylight and securely fastened; or
         c.   A steel grill of at least 1/8 inch material with a maximum two-
inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened.
      2.   All hatchway openings on the roof of any building or premises used
for business purposes shall be secured as follows:
         a.   If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the
inside with at least 16 U.S. gauge sheet metal, or its equivalent, attached
with screws.
         b.   The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or
slide bolts.
         c.   Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with
non-removable pins when using pin-type hinges.
   J.   Exterior mounted ladders are prohibited except:
      1.   Ladders with a minimum 1/8 inch thick steel plate, securely attached
to the ladder edge on each side and extending to within two inches of the wall
for a height of ten feet above ground level. A door or cover shall be securely
attached to the front of the ladder and be constructed of a minimum 1/8-inch
steel, extending from ground level to at least ten feet high. The ladder door
shall have non-removable hinge pins and be locked tight against the side wall
by a locking mechanism with a minimum five pin tumbler operation, and attached
with non-removable bolts from the exterior; or
      2.   Ladders mounted such that the lowest rung is at least ten feet above
finished grade.
   K.   There shall be no exterior phone panels.
   L.   Buildings, open parking lots, walkways, and accesses thereto shall
conform to the following light standards:
      1.   All types of exterior doors shall be illuminated during the hours of
darkness, with a minimum maintained one foot-candle of light, measured within a
five-foot radius on each side of the door at ground level. The light source
shall be controlled by a photocell device or a time-clock with an astronomic
clock feature and capable of operating during a power outage.
      2.   Recessed areas of buildings or fences, which have a minimum depth of
two feet, a minimum height of five feet, and do not exceed six feet in width
and are capable of human concealment, shall be illuminated with a minimum
maintained 0.25 foot-candles of light at ground level during the hours of
darkness. This requirement applies to defined recessed areas which are within
six feet of the edge of a designated walking surface with an unobstructed
pathway to it, not hindered by walls or hedge row landscaping a minimum of two
feet in height.
      3.   Light poles/standards mounted at 12 to 14 feet shall be used for
walkways and gathering areas for a better spread of light. Bollards cannot
accomplish this as they do not fully illuminate an average adult for positive
facial recognition.
      4.   Stairways shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained one foot-
candle of light on all landings and stair treads, during the hours of
operation, including one hour thereafter.
      5.   All interior or exterior corridors, passageways and walkways in any
hotel, motel or inn shall be illuminated at all times with a minimum maintained
one foot-candle of light on the walking surface.
      6.   All exterior pedestrian walkways, interior common corridors, and
open parking lots shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained one foot-
candle of light on the walking or driving surface during the hours of operation
and one hour thereafter.
      7.   Accessible luminaires utilized to meet the requirements of this
section have vandal resistant light fixtures and be not less than three feet in
height from ground level when used to illuminate walkways and a minimum of
eight feet in height from ground level when illuminating surfaces associated
with vehicles. Light fixtures shall be deemed accessible if mounted within
fifteen feet vertically or six feet horizontally from any accessible surface or
any adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform or similar
structure.
      8.   A site plan shall be provided showing buildings, parking area,
walkways, detailed landscaping and a point-by-point photometric calculation of
the required light levels. Foot-candles shall be measured on a horizontal plane
and conform to a uniformity ratio of 4:1 average/minimum. Landscaping shall not
be planted so as to obscure required light levels. The photometric study shall
be provided prior to issuing the Building Permit.
      9.   Landscaping around the perimeter of the structure shall not provide
access to any portion of the structure unless the accessible point is protected
as described in subsection H. hereinabove.
      10.   All landscaping shall be low profile around perimeter windows,
doors and entryways. Floral or grass ground cover is recommended. Bushes shall
be trimmed to 2 to 3 feet and away from buildings. Dense bushes shall not be
clumped together; this provides a hiding place for criminal activity.
      11.   Trees shall be trimmed up to 7 feet.
      12.   Trees/bushes/shrubs shall not be planted next to or near light
fixtures or light standards. When grown to maturity this landscaping will block
the light and reduce lighting on the ground surface.
   M.   Nonresidential buildings shall display a street address number
conforming to the following specifications:
      1.   Numerals shall be located where they are clearly visible from the
street on which they are addressed. They shall be of a color contrasting to the
background to which they are affixed. Method of attachment shall not include
the use of two-sided tape or any material not resistant to weather conditions.
      2.   Numerals shall be no less than six inches in height, if located less
than 100 feet from the center line of the addressed street or 12 inches in
height if placed further than 100 feet from the center line of the addressed
street. The numerals shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness using a
light source provided with an uninterruptible A.C. power source or controlled
only by a photoelectric device.
      3.   The rear doors of all building shall have address numbers not less
than six inches in height and be of a color contrasting to the background to
which they are affixed.
   N.   Elevators shall be designed as follows:
      1.   Elevator cabs, the interiors of which are not completely visible
when the door is open from a point centered on and 36 inches away from the
door, shall have shatter resistant mirrors or other equally reflective material
so placed as to make visible the entire elevator cab from this point. The
elevator cab shall be illuminated at all times with a minimum maintained two
foot-candles of light at floor level.
      2.   Elevator emergency stop buttons shall be so installed and connected
as to activate the elevator alarm when utilized.
   O.   Parking kiosks shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   The landscaping around the island of the booth shall be ground cover
only.
      2.   A mirror shall be installed on the interior of the booth to allow
the attendant to see who is approaching from behind.
      3.   The attendant shall have some form of communication (radio/phone/
panic alarm) in which to make contact with emergency or security personnel.
(Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-15: SPECIAL PARKING FACILITIES PROVISIONS:
A structure, garage or covered parking surface intended primarily for the
storage of motor vehicles for any period of time, except for residential
carports, shall comply with this section.
   A.   Remote or detached parking facilities or any other parking surfaces
which are constructed as a separate entity shall be assigned a street address
number. The numerals shall be displayed at the main entrance using numbers a
minimum of eight inches in height and of a color contrasting to the background
to which they are affixed.
   B.   Restrooms shall not be open to the general public and shall be
continuously locked, with access provided only to authorized individuals. They
shall be located in an area which is highly visible from the parking attendant
kiosk or other area where natural surveillance is afforded.
   C.   Bicycle storage units or racks shall be located in high visibility
areas.
   D.   Solid perimeter walls shall be either full height floor to ceiling or
not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height from the parking surface.
   E.   The number of pedestrian and vehicular access points shall be
minimized. Except at vehicle and primary pedestrian openings, the structure
shall be designed, to the satisfaction of the City, to preclude human entry
from any exterior accessible surface to a height of eight feet. Chain link
fencing shall not be utilized if visible from a public right of way. When
required, fire authority openings in the form of swing-out gates shall be
provided and secured by a padlock with a minimum 3/8-inch diameter shackle and
five-pin tumbler operation.
   F.   Exterior pedestrian doors which provide access into the parking
facility, shall be constructed and equipped as follows:
      1.   A minimum 18 gauge steel and equipped with automatic hydraulic
closure device.
      2.   A minimum 100-square-inch vision panel, with the width not less than
five inches, to provide visibility into the area being entered. Vision panels
shall meet requirements of the Uniform Building Code.
      3.   Vision panels shall preclude manipulation of the interior locking
device from the exterior.
      4.   No openings within twenty-four inches of the locking device which
would allow a piece of metal, 1/16-inch diameter or greater to be inserted and
access gained to the interior side of the door.
      5.   When panic hardware is required, it shall have a self-locking
mechanism and be constructed/equipped as follows:
         a.   Panic hardware on pairs of doors shall contain a minimum of two
locking points on each door; or
         b.   On single doors, panic hardware may have one locking point, which
is not located at either the top or bottom of the doorframe. When mortise
hardware is utilized, a protective astragal consisting of a minimum 0.125 inch
thick steel shall be attached to the exterior of the door and rendered non-
removable from the exterior. It shall be two inches wide and extend a minimum
of five inches above and below the strike opening and extend a minimum of one
inch beyond the edge of the door.
         c.   Double doors containing panic hardware shall have an astragal
attached to the doors at their meeting point, which will close the opening
between them, but not interfere with the operation of either door. Fire rated
astragals, meeting specifications of the Uniform Building Code, shall be
utilized when required. Astragals are not required when panic hardware is
utilized with push pads offset a minimum of three inches from the door edges.
      6.   Emergency exits not intended, as a primary entrance shall have no
exterior handles, knobs, or levers.
      7.   Hinges shall be equipped with non-removable hinge pins or a
mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by
removing the hinge pins.
   G.   Stairways shall be designed as follows:
      1.   Interior doors shall have glazing panels a minimum of five inches
wide and 20 inches in height and meet requirements of the Uniform Building
Code.
      2.   Areas beneath stairways at or below ground level shall be fully
enclosed or access to them restricted.
      3.   Stairways shall be designed to be completely visible from either the
interior or exterior or both, unless mandated by the Uniform Building Code to
be enclosed.
      4.   Fully enclosed interior or exterior stairways with solid walls, when
required, shall have shatter resistant mirrors or other equally reflective
material at each level and landing and be designed or placed in such a manner
as to provide visibility around corners.
   H.   Elevator cabs and lobbies shall be designed as follows:
      1.   Elevators which serve more than two floors, above ground level, with
at least one shaft wall exposed to the exterior or interior shall have clear
glazing installed in one wall to provide visibility into the elevator cab.
      2.   Elevator cabs, the interiors of which are not completely visible
when the door is open from a point centered on and 36 inches away from the
door, shall have shatter resistant mirrors or other equally reflective material
so placed as to make visible the entire elevator cab from this point. The
elevator cab shall be illuminated at all times with a minimum maintained two
foot-candles of light at floor level.
      3.   Elevator emergency stop buttons shall be so installed and connected
as to activate the elevator alarm when utilized.
      4.   Elevator lobbies, if enclosed, shall be constructed of glazing, the
maximum amount allowed by the Uniform Building Code.
   I.   Lighting of driveways, parking areas, walkways and doors shall conform
to the following standards:
      1.   All parking, driving, and walking surfaces, except stairways, shall
be illuminated at all times with a minimum maintained 1.25 foot-candles of
light. Exception: Parking facilities which have physically precluded pedestrian
and vehicle access during non-business hours may provide a minimum maintained
0.25 of light on the parking, walking and driving surfaces.
      2.   Stairways shall be illuminated at all times with a minimum
maintained two foot-candles of light on all landings and stair treads.
      3.   All types of exterior doors shall be illuminated, during the hours
of darkness, with a minimum maintained one foot-candle of light, measured
within a five-foot radius of each side of the door at ground level.
      4.   Recessed areas of buildings or fences, which have a minimum depth of
two feet, a minimum height of five feet, and do not exceed six feet in width
and are capable of human concealment, shall be illuminated with a minimum
maintained 0.25 foot-candles of light at ground level during the hours of
darkness. This requirement applies to defined recessed areas which are within
six feet of the edge of a designated walking surface with an unobstructed
pathway to it, not hindered by walls or hedge row landscaping a minimum of two
feet in height.
      5.   All luminaires utilized to meet the requirements of this section
shall have vandal resistant light fixtures, if on the exterior, with no portion
of the fixture placed less than 72 inches above the walking or driving surface.
      6.   A site plan shall be provided showing buildings' parking area,
walkways, detailed landscaping and a point-by-point photometric calculation of
the required light levels. Foot-candles shall be measured on a horizontal plane
and conform to a uniformity ratio of 4:1 average/minimum. Landscaping shall not
be planted so as to obscure required light levels. The photometric study shall
be provided prior to issuing the Building Permit.
      7.   The light source shall be controlled by a photocell device or a
time-clock with an astronomic feature and capable of operating during a power
failure.
   J.   Landscaping around the perimeter of the structure shall not provide
access to any portion of the structure unless the accessible point is protected
as described in subsection H. hereinabove.
   K.   All landscaping shall be low profile around perimeter windows, doors
and entryways. Floral or grass ground cover is recommended. Bushes shall be
trimmed to 2 to 3 feet and away from buildings. Dense bushes shall not be
clumped together; this provides a hiding place for criminal activity.
   L.   Trees shall be trimmed up to 7 feet.
   M.   Trees/bushes/shrubs shall not be planted next to or near light fixtures
or light standards. When grown to maturity this landscaping will block the
light and reduce lighting on the ground surface.
   N.   Perimeter fencing shall be a minimum of 6 feet high street side. Wood
fence horizontal rails shall be on the interior of the perimeter. Where wrought
iron or steel tubular fencing is used, the rails members shall run along the
top and bottom portion of the fence. Chain-link fencing shall not have plastic
or metal slats weaved within it. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-16: EMERGENCY ACCESS:
   A.   Private roads and parking areas or structures controlled by unmanned
mechanical parking type gates shall provide for police emergency access
utilizing an approved key switch device and designed as follows:
      1.   A control pedestal consisting of a metal post/pipe shall be
installed at a height of 42 inches and a minimum of 15 feet from the entry/exit
gate. It shall be located on the driver's side of the road or driveway and
accessible in such a manner as to not require a person to exit their vehicle to
reach it; nor to require any back-up movements in order to enter/exit the gate.
      2.   A control housing consisting of a heavy gauge metal, vandal and
weather resistant square or rectangular housing which shall be installed on the
top of the control pedestal. Key switch is to be mounted on the side facing the
roadway.
   B.   All lockable pedestrian gates to residential recreation areas serving
six or more dwelling units, and gates or doors to common walkways or hallways
of residential complexes where the there are four or more dwelling units within
the complex, shall provide for police emergency access utilizing an approved
key switch device or approved key vault which shall be installed as follows:
      1.   Pedestrian gates/doors using an electromagnetic type lock shall
install a key switch within a telephone/intercom console or in a control
housing as described in section (a)(2) above.
      2.   Pedestrian gates/doors utilizing mechanical locks shall install a
key vault adjacent to each gate/door, securely attaching it to a fence or wall.
   C.   Nonresidential multi-tenant buildings utilizing electronic access
control systems on the main entry doors, and enclosed retail shopping centers
shall provide police emergency access utilizing an approved key switch-device
or approved key vault which shall be installed as follows:
      1.   All doors using an electromagnetic type lock shall install a key
switch device within the building's exterior telephone/intercom console or in a
control housing as described in section (a)(2) above, located within close
proximity and in a visible area near the door.
      2.   Exterior main entry doors of an enclosed shopping center utilizing
mechanical door locks shall install a key vault within close proximity and in a
visible area near the door. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-17: SPECIAL RECREATIONAL SPACES PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this section shall apply to community buildings, parks, open
spaces, trails, community swimming pools, and associated sidewalks and parking
lots.
   A.   Structures shall comply with all provisions of the El Segundo Security
Code Conditions of Approval, except section Special Nonresidential Building
Provisions, subsection L, regarding lighting standards.
   B.   Exterior lighting shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   All types of exterior doors shall be illuminated during the hours of
darkness with a minimum maintained one foot-candle of light at ground level,
measured within a five-foot radius from the center of the door.
      2.   Recessed areas of buildings or fences, which have a minimum depth of
two feet, a minimum height of five feet, and do not exceed feet in width and
are capable of human concealment, shall illuminated with a minimum maintained
0.25 foot-candles of light at ground level during the hours of darkness. This
requirement applies to defined recessed areas which are within six feet of the
edge of a designated walking surface with an unobstructed pathway to it, not
hindered by walls or hedge tow landscaping a minimum of two feet in height.
      3.   Stairways shall be illuminated with a minimum one foot-candle of
light on all landings and stair treads, during the hours of operation,
including one hour thereafter.
      4.   Parking lots and walkways accessing buildings and parking areas
shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained one foot-candle of light on the
driving or walking surface during the hours of operation and one hour
thereafter.
      5.   Bike trails not incorporated in the roadway shall be illuminated
with a minimum maintained 0.25 foot-candles of light at ground level during the
hours of darkness, except that any bike trail or recreational facility within
the designated Natural Community Conservation Plan/Habitat Conservation Plan,
Central Coastal Sub region reserve area shall be exempt from the requirements
of this subsection.
      6.   Paved walkways in open space areas, not directly serving buildings
or parking areas, shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained one foot-
candle of light on the walking surface during the hours of operation and one
hour thereafter.
      7.   Swimming pool decks and other hard surface recreation activity areas
shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained one foot-candle of light on the
walking surface during the hours of operation and one hour thereafter.
      8.   Luminaires utilized to meet the requirements of this section shall
have vandal resistant light fixtures, if accessible, and be not less than eight
feet in height from ground level. A luminaire not less than 42 inches may be
utilized to illuminate a walkway if adjacent landscaping is of a variety which
does not mature higher than two feet, and it does not interfere with the
required light distribution for a distance of 16 feet along the walkway. Light
fixtures shall be deemed accessible if mounted within 15 feet vertically or six
feet horizontally from any accessible surface or any adjoining roof, balcony,
landing, stair treads, platform or similar structure.
      9.   Activation of the required exterior lighting shall be either by a
photocell device or a time clock with an astronomic clock feature.
      10.   A site plan shall be provided showing buildings, parking area,
walkways, detailed landscaping and a point-by-point photometric calculation of
the required light levels. Foot-candles shall be measured on a horizontal plane
and conform to a uniformity ratio of 4:1 average/minimum. Landscaping shall not
be planted so as to obscure required light levels. The photometric study shall
be provided for approval prior to issuing the Building Permit.
      11.   Landscaping around the perimeter of the structure shall not provide
access to any portion of the structure unless the accessible point is protected
as described in subsection H. hereinabove.
      12.   All landscaping shall be low profile around perimeter windows,
doors and entryways. Floral or grass ground cover is recommended. Bushes shall
be trimmed to 2 to 3 feet and away from buildings. Dense bushes shall not be
clumped together; this provides a hiding place for criminal activity.
      13.   Trees shall be trimmed up to 7 feet.
      14.   Trees/bushes/shrubs shall not be planted next to or near light
fixtures or light standards. When grown to maturity this landscaping will block
the light and reduce lighting on the ground surface.
   C.   Swimming pools shall be secured as follows:
      1.   Restroom doors and pool gates shall be equipped with automatic
closure devices, dead latches, and a latch protector consisting of minimum
0.125-inch-thick steel, two inches wide and six inches long.
      2.   The pool equipment room or enclosure to be secured with either a
deadbolt lock or padlock with a minimum five-pin tumbler operation, minimum
three-eighths-inch thick shackle, and heel and toe locking.
      3.   The on and off switch for the spa is to be keyed.
      4.   Perimeter fencing, using either tubular steel or aluminum, is to be
installed at a minimum height of six feet. Vertical fence pickets are to be
spaced not more than four inches on-center and be designed to discourage
climbing.
      5.   Emergency access to locked gates is to be provided through
installation of a Knox box key vault which shall contain all keys required to
enter the pool area at any time. The box is to be installed within eight feet
of the gate and placed between four and five feet above ground level.
      6.   Selection of landscaping is to consider height of plants regarding
providing needed visibility into the pool area from adjacent uses, buildings,
and streets.
      7.   Lighting shall conform to Special Non-residential section regarding
lighting fixtures.
      8.   All entrances to nonpublic pools/spas shall have signage indicating
it is private property and no trespassing allowed.
   D.   Landscaping guidelines are as follows:
      1.   Plant materials utilized shall take into consideration the need for
users of the space to easily view their surroundings as well as police patrols
to monitor the area from adjacent streets.
      2.   Trees shall be positioned to avoid interfering with required
lighting levels and take into consideration the height of canopies from ground
level regarding surveillance opportunities by users of the space and police
patrols.
      3.   Planting of wide hedge rows and narrow vertical plants adjacent to
solid fences is encouraged. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
13-20-18: COMMERCIAL/RETAIL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Security cameras shall be installed in all new commercial/retail
establishments if the Police Department deems it necessary due to the type of
business, hours of operation, location and propensity to crime.
      1.   The Police Department shall determine the monitoring and recording
location of the security cameras, which include, but are not limited to:
shipping/receiving dock areas, cash handling/counting areas, the manager's
office, the safe, all access doors and any other areas deemed necessary by the
Police Department. Monitor and recording equipment shall be stored in a secure
area (ex. manager's office).
      2.   Monitoring and recording equipment shall be stored in a secured
area.
      3.   Cameras recording driveways and driving surfaces shall monitor and
record vehicle occupants and the license plate number as they enter/exit.
      4.   Landscaping shall not be planted so as to obscure required
monitoring and recording.
      5.   The Police Department's minimum camera requirements shall be listed
after the Camera Specifications.
Camera Specifications:
         a.   All security cameras shall be in color.
         b.   Cameras, especially those viewing customers as they enter the
business or stand at cash registers, shall capture the individual from the
waist to the top of the head, straight on.
         c.   If storefront windows and entry doors are constructed of glass,
cameras shall be positioned to face away from them to prevent glare.
         d.   Cameras facing Point of Sale shall be slightly off set so the
employee at the register does not block full view of the customer.
         e.   Cameras shall be situated low enough so that caps/hats or other
disguises (typically used when committing a crime) will not obstruct the view
of the individual's face. This will provide the best possible picture for
identification during the investigation process.
         f.   The maximum mounting height shall be 8 feet.
         g.   Cameras shall have a two terabyte minimum hardware with the
recording device set to motion recording.
         h.   Cameras shall be one mega pixel minimum resolution.
         i.   The recording device shall be set to a minimum of 12 frames per
second per camera.
         j.   There shall be a monitor connected to the recording equipment to
play back and review the video. The equipment shall be stored in a secure area
(ex. manager's office).
         k.   Security camera recordings shall be made available to law
enforcement
      6.   A schematic plan of the security camera system shall be submitted
and approved by the El Segundo Police Department prior to issuing the Tenant
Improvement Building Permit, and shall be included on a page in the stamped set
of plans.
   B.   Safes shall be installed in all commercial retail businesses and shall
be equipped with suitable anchors in concrete blocks or to the premises in
which located. (Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
APPENDIX A: EL SEGUNDO POLICE DEPARTMENT APPROVED SECURITY HARDWARE
   HARDWARE LISTED ARE EXAMPLES. HOWEVER, ANY EQUAL GRADE IS ACCEPTABLE AFTER
CUT SHEETS ARE PROVIDED AND MEETS WITH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT APPROVAL.
Single or Double Swing / Hollow Metal and Wood Doors Only:
   • Schlage L9453 or equal lockset (Grade 1 lockset with 1" throw bolt)
      ° with the equivalent of an MS 4043 cylinder guard.
   • Electrified L9453 or equal (Grade 1 lockset with 1" throw bolt)
      ° with the equivalent of an MS 4043 cylinder guard.
      ° A latch bolt by itself is not acceptable
   • A latch guard shall be placed over single swing entry doors. If the door
is recessed, a recessed latch guard shall be installed.
Hollow Metal Double Door Only:
   • Must have a full length steel astragal (Pemko 357 or equal), not aluminum.
Inactive door is to have auto-releasing flush bolts, header and threshold, with
a min ½" embedment.
Single Or Double Swing Doors where panic hardware is required (wood, hollow
metal and aluminum):
   • Von Duprin or equal vertical rod panic hardware [panic bar shall be offset
on both sides - Adams Rite is not acceptable for this application on aluminum
doors only.
   • There shall be no mail slot located within 40" of the door, where the push
bar can be manipulated by reaching through.
Single Door Alternative where panic hardware is required:
   • Rim Panic with the installation of an exterior 12 inch astragal. If
astragal cannot be installed a vertical rod panic device will be required.
Aluminum/Glass Doors only where panic hardware is not required:
   • Single Swing: Adams Rite MS1890 Hook bolt with an Adams Rite 4002 Flat
Armored Trim Strike plate, or, Keedex surface mounted armored strike or equal
(meeting a minimum 1500 pound sheer force) with a MS 4043 Cylinder Guard or
equal.
   • Double Swing: MS 1850 Laminate Swing Bolt (1 ¾") and:
      ° An MS 4043 Cylinder Guard or equal.
      ° An Adams Rite 4085 header bolt or equal; and
      ° An Adams Rite MS 4002 Radius Armored Trim Strike plate designed for
double doors or equal.
Hinges:
   • All exterior hinges, whether off a common corridor or to the exterior of
the building will require that all three hinges have an NRP designation (non-
removable pin) set screw.
   • HARDWARE LISTED ARE EXAMPLES. HOWEVER, ANY EQUAL GRADE IS ACCEPTABLE AFTER
CUT SHEETS ARE PROVIDED AND MEETS WITH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT APPROVAL.
(Ord. 1540, 12-6-2016)
CHAPTER 21
PERMIT PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
SECTION:
13-21-1: Purpose
13-21-2: Definitions
13-21-3: Applicability
13-21-4: Electric Vehicle Charging Station Requirements
13-21-5: Application And Documents
13-21-6: Permit Review Requirements; Appeals
13-21-7: Fees
13-21-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to provide an expedited, streamlined permitting process
for electric vehicle charging stations, as defined, that will encourage the
timely and cost-effective installation of such stations, in compliance with
Government Code section 65850.7. This chapter is intended to achieve these
goals while protecting public health and safety. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
   BUILDING OFFICIAL OR OFFICIAL: The City's building official or designee.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION OR CHARGING STATION: An electric vehicle
supply equipment station, of any level, that delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle and is designed and
built in compliance with 24 California Code of Regulations section 625.1, et
seq., as it reads on the effective date of this chapter, or as it may be
amended.
   NONCONFORMING CHARGING STATION: Any charging station that was lawfully
established and in compliance with all applicable laws at the time it was
installed, but which, due to enactment of this chapter, no longer complies with
all the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the property
is located.
   SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT: A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
City found the electric vehicle charging station application complete. (Ord.
1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Except for any charging station located on publicly-owned property,
this chapter applies to the permitting of all charging stations in the City.
   B.   Unless modified after the effective date of this chapter, a
nonconforming charging station is exempt from this chapter. The routine
operation and maintenance of such nonconforming charging station, or like-kind
replacements, do not require a permit. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-4: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All electric vehicle charging stations must meet all applicable health
and safety standards and requirements, as set forth in Federal, State, County,
and Municipal codes and regulations.
   B.   Electric vehicle charging stations must meet all applicable safety and
performance standards established by applicable law including, without
limitation, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as
Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities
Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-5: APPLICATION AND DOCUMENTS:
   A.   All documents required for the submission of a charging station
application will be made available on the City's website and at City Hall.
   B.   Applicants may submit the required permit application and documents by
submitting them either via electronic mail or the internet or by delivering
them to the Community Development Department. An applicant's electronic
signature will be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in
lieu of a wet signature.
   C.   The building official, or designee, will adopt a checklist of all
requirements with which the charging stations must comply to be eligible for
expedited review. The electric vehicle charging station permit process,
standard(s) and checklist(s) must substantially conform to recommendations for
permitting of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness
Guidebook" published by the Office of Planning and Research, including the
checklist and standards contained in the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Permitting Checklist".
   D.   If the building official deems the application incomplete, a written
correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any
additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited
permit issuance must be sent to the applicant within ten (10) days after
submission of the application. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
13-21-6: PERMIT REVIEW REQUIREMENTS; APPEALS:
   A.   Review of an electric vehicle charging station permit application is
limited to whether the application meets local, State, and Federal health and
safety requirements, and whether the charging station poses any specific,
adverse impact on public health or safety. If the application meets the
requirements of the approved checklist and standards, and the proposed charging
station does not pose any specific, adverse impact upon public health or
safety, the building official must approve the application and issue any
required, nondiscretionary permits.
   B.   If the building official determines, based on the application, that the
proposed charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public
health and safety, the building official may require an "electric vehicle
charging station use permit". The permit may include conditions designed to
mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest
possible cost.
   C.   The building official must notify an applicant whether the application
has been approved and that a nondiscretionary permit will be issued, or,
alternatively, whether the applicant must obtain an electric vehicle charging
station use permit, within thirty (30) days after the submission of a complete
application.
   D.   An application for an electric vehicle charging station can only be
denied if the building official finds that: 1) the proposed installation would
have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety, and 2) there is
no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact.
These findings must be presented in writing, must include the basis for the
rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse
impact, and must be based upon substantial evidence in the record.
   E.   A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific,
adverse impact may include, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method,
condition, or mitigation imposed by the City on a prior successful application
for an electric vehicle charging station use permit, where the proposed
charging station is similarly situated to the charging station in that prior
successful application.
   F.   Any decision by the building official made pursuant to this chapter may
be appealed to the Board of Appeals in accordance with the California Building
Code, as adopted and amended by chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-7: FEES:
The applicant must pay to the City an application fee. Such fee will be fixed
and established by the City Council from time to time by resolution. (Ord.
1555, 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER 22
FALSE FIRE ALARMS
SECTION:
13-22-1: Purpose
13-22-2: Definitions
13-22-3: Alarm Registration
13-22-4: Alarm Testing
13-22-5: Fees Imposed
13-22-6: City Council Sets Fees
13-22-7: Fee Collection
13-22-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted in accordance with California Constitution article XI,
§ 7 to protect public health, safety, and well-being by reducing the waste of
City Fire Department resources in responding to excess false fire alarms and
establishing a mechanism for reasonable City cost recovery to safeguard City
resources. Pursuant to California Constitution article XIIIC, § 1(e)(3), the
fees authorized in this chapter do not constitute a "tax" as they concern City
regulation enforcement and investigation performance associated with a
regulatory program. (Ord. 1640, 10-18-2022)
13-22-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
ALARM: The giving, signaling, or transmission to the Department, or any
Department employee or designee, whether by telephone, e-mail, or other medium,
information to the effect that a fire or emergency situation exists at or near
the place indicated by the person giving, signaling, or transmitting such
information.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM: An integrated system of underground and
overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection standards that is
activated by hear from fire, or other similar mechanism, and discharges water
over the fire area.
CHIEF: The El Segundo Fire Department Chief.
DEPARTMENT: The El Segundo Fire Department.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm requiring Department response where a fire or emergency
situation does not exist.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: A system designed to detect and announce the presence of
fire or fire byproducts.
NOTICE: Written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee, or given
by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be
notified. at the last known address. Service of such notice will be effective
upon the completion of personal service, or upon the placing of the same in the
custody of the United States Postal Service.
PERSON: Any company, firm, partnership, limited liability company, joint
venture, unincorporated organization, corporation, corporation, government
agency, or natural person. (Ord. 1640, 10-18-2022)
13-22-3: ALARM REGISTRATION:
Any person that owns or operates a business in the City must notify the
Department of any installation of any automatic fire sprinkler system or fire
alarm system. Such notice must be in writing, delivered to the City within ten
(10) days of installation, and include the following information: name,
address, and telephone number of the associated alarm business or its agent and
the name, address, and telephone number of the best contact person for the
business. (Ord. 1640, 10-18-2022)
13-22-4: ALARM TESTING:
A person must notify the Department at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to
any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alterations, or
installations of an automatic fire sprinkler system or fire alarm system that
may activate a false alarm. Any alarm activated where such prior notice has not
been duly given to the Department will constitute a false alarm for this
chapter's purposes. (Ord. 1640, 10-18-2022)
13-22-5: FEES IMPOSED:
The owner or lessee of any premises containing an automatic fire sprinkler
system or fire alarm system will be assessed a fee under this chapter for each
false alarm more than two, occurring within any calendar year. (Ord. 1640, 10-
18-2022)
13-22-6: CITY COUNCIL SETS FEES:
The City Council will, by resolution, establish the amount of all fees imposed
under this chapter. (Ord. 1640, 10-18-2022)
13-22-7: FEE COLLECTION:
It is the Department's duty to collect fees pursuant to this chapter. (Ord.
1640, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 23
HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
13-23-1: Adoption of California Historical Building Code, 2022 Edition
13-23-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE, 2022 EDITION:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the
California Historical Building Code (“CHBC”), 2022 Edition, published at Title
24, Part 8, of the California Code of Regulations is adopted by reference. One
true copy of the CHBC is on file in the office of the Building Official and is
available for public inspection as required by law.
(Ord. 1641, 11-15-2022)
TITLE 14
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
General Provisions; Definitions   1
Vesting Tentative Maps   2
Merger Of Parcels   3
Lot Line Adjustments   4
Waiver Of Parcel Map   5
General Urban Lot Splits   6
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-1-1: Authority
14-1-2: Definitions
14-1-3: Parcel Maps Required
14-1-4: Filing Of Tentative Map
14-1-5: Tentative Map Processing Fee
14-1-6: Findings For Denial
14-1-7: Conditions Of Approval
14-1-8: Appeals
14-1-9: Soils Report
14-1-10: Improvement Security
14-1-11: Supplemental Improvements; Funding; Hearing
14-1-12: Expiration Of Tentative Map Approval
14-1-13: Final Map; Monuments
14-1-14: Condominium Conversions
14-1-1: AUTHORITY:
The purpose of this title is to regulate and control the design and improvement
of subdivisions in conformance with the California Government Code. State law
allows cities to not only adopt local standards applicable to their
jurisdictions, but also requires adoption of provisions which reflect existing
state law. This title is therefore intended to highlight significant local
provisions which will be useful for the citizens of El Segundo and future
developers. However, all the provisions of this title shall not be construed as
the only requirements for subdivisions, but are intended to be used in
conjunction with the applicable provisions of state law and, as such, shall not
supersede those provisions. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them:
   ADVISORY AGENCY: A designated official or an official body charged with the
duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of
proposed divisions of real property, the imposing of requirements or conditions
thereon, or having the authority by local ordinance to approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove maps. The city has charged the planning commission with
this role.
   SUBDIVIDER: A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided, real property into a
subdivision for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of
such persons or entities acting in such capacity are not "subdividers".
   SUBDIVISION: The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of
improved or unimproved land or any portion thereof, shown on the latest
equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the
purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, except for
leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be
considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets,
utility easement or railroad rights of way. "Subdivision" includes a
"condominium project", as defined in section 1351 of the California Civil Code,
a "community apartment project", as defined in section 11004 of the California
Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five (5) or more existing
dwelling units to a "stock cooperative", as defined in section 11003.2 of the
California Business and Professions Code. As used in this section "agricultural
purposes" means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of
livestock.
   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP: A tentative map which has been filed, processed and
approved in accordance with the vesting tentative map statute, and this
chapter, and which has printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting
Tentative Map". (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. 2000 Code)
14-1-3: PARCEL MAPS REQUIRED:
   A.   Filing And Recording: A parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any
subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the
subdivision map act 1  except for subdivisions created by short term leases
(terminable by either party on not more than 30 days' notice in writing) of a
portion of an operating right of way of a "railroad corporation" defined as
such by section 230 of the California Public Utilities Code; provided, however,
that upon a showing made to the director of community development, based upon
substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a map, this
exception shall not apply.
   B.   Requirements: Such maps shall meet all the requirements of the
subdivision map act, and of this title. Each such parcel map shall show all
dedications or offers of dedication thereon and the director of public works
may require in addition or substitution thereof at the director of public
work's option, such dedication or offers of dedication to be made by deed.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18- 2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. Gov.C. § 66410 et seq.
14-1-4: FILING OF TENTATIVE MAP:
   A.   Map Filing: Tentative maps, including vesting tentative maps, shall be
filed with the director of community development in accordance with city
requirements and the California Government Code.
   B.   Public Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on
the tentative map and tentative parcel map, and notice thereof shall be given
as provided in subsections C and D of this section, consistent with sections
65090 and 65091 of the California Government Code. Any interested person may
appear at such a hearing and shall be heard. The planning commission is
empowered to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative maps and
tentative parcel maps.
   C.   Hearing Notice: Whenever a public hearing is held pursuant to this
title, notice of the time and place of the public hearing, the identity of the
hearing body or officer, a general explanation of the matter to be considered
and a general description, in text or diagram of the location of the property,
if any, shall be provided. This notice shall be given by at least one
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than
ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing.
   D.   Public Hearing Notification: The public hearing notice shall also be
mailed or delivered to the following people/entities at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing:
      1.   Either the owner of the subject real property or the owner's duly
authorized agent;
      2.   The project applicant;
      3.   Each agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads,
schools or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability
to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected; and
      4.   All owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized
assessment roll within three hundred feet (300') of the real property that is
the subject of the hearing.
   E.   Residential ten (10)-lot subdivision: Notwithstanding the above,
residential subdivision requests for up to ten (10) lots must be approved by
the Community Development Director if said subdivision requests comply with the
provisions and applicable requirements specified in ESMC Chapter 15-4
(Residential Zones) and Government Code section 66499.41. No public hearing or
public hearing notification shall be required.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord.
1657, 5-7-2024)
14-1-5: TENTATIVE MAP PROCESSING FEE:
Every person submitting a tentative map shall pay a processing fee established
by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1334, 4-17-2001)
14-1-6: FINDINGS FOR DENIAL:
The planning commission shall deny approval of a tentative map, vesting
tentative map or a parcel map for which a tentative map was not required, if it
makes any of the following findings consistent with section 66474 of the
California Government Code:
   A.   That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and
specific plans as specified in section 65451 of the California Government Code.
   B.   That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not
consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
   C.   That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development.
   D.   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of
development.
   E.   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
   F.   That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements are likely
to cause serious public health problems.
   G.   That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements will
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or
use of property within the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
14-1-7: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
Upon approval of a tentative map or parcel map, the city shall determine
whether to apply the following conditions:
   A.   Waiver Of Direct Access Rights: The planning commission may, if
applicable, impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of
a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any
property shown on a final map as abutting said street.
   B.   Dedication Of Parcels For Public Ways: The planning commission shall
require the subdivider to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication
of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets,
alleys, including access rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other
public easements. The subdivider shall also improve or agree to improve all
streets, alleys, including access rights, drainage, public utility easements
and other public easements.
   C.   Install Improvements: The subdivider may be required to install
improvements which contain additional size, capacity or number for the benefit
of property not within the subdivision. However, the subdivider shall be
reimbursed for this additional size, capacity or number in a manner prescribed
by the city.
   D.   Reimbursement For Facilities: If a local drainage or sanitary sewer
plan or map has been adopted requiring payment of fees or has established an
area of benefit for bridges or major thoroughfares, the city may impose and
collect a reasonable charge on property within the area benefited. The city may
enter into reimbursement agreements with a subdivider to reimburse said
subdivider for the cost of said facilities.
   E.   Soils Report: A preliminary soils report, prepared by a civil engineer
registered in the state in accordance with section
14-1-9 of this chapter and based upon adequate test borings, shall be submitted
to the director of community development for every subdivision. A preliminary
soils report may be waived by the director of community development, provided
the director of community development finds that due to the knowledge the city
has as to qualities of the soils in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is
necessary.
   F.   Grading And Erosion Control: Every map approved pursuant to this title
shall be conditioned on compliance with the requirements for grading and
erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-
site property set forth in this code.
   G.   Fees: Development-related fees, intended to offset the cost of
providing both map checking and other required public services, may be applied
as warranted by the type and size of the subdivision.
   H.   Local Transit Facilities:
      1.   A requirement may be imposed for the dedication or irrevocable offer
of dedication of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such
as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items which
directly benefit the residents of a subdivision consistent with section 66475.2
of the California Government Code if:
         a.   The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential
for two hundred (200) dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum
density shown on the adopted general plan or contains one hundred (100) acres
or more; and
         b.   The City Council finds that transit services are or will within a
reasonable time period be made available to such subdivision.
      2.   The provisions of this Section do not apply to condominium projects
or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an
existing apartment building which is more than five (5) years old and when no
new dwelling units are added.
   I.   Park And Recreation Areas:
      1.   A requirement may be imposed to reserve those areas of real property
within the subdivision for use as parks, recreational facilities, fire
stations, libraries or other public uses, subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The requirement is based upon an adopted specific plan or an
adopted general plan containing policies and standards for those uses, and the
required reservations are in accordance with those policies and standards.
         b.   An ordinance has been in effect for a period of at least thirty
(30) days prior to the filing of the tentative map.
         c.   The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit the
balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in
an orderly and efficient manner.
         d.   The amount of land reserved will not make development of the
remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible.
      2.   In the event the reserved area is not acquired within the prescribed
period, the subdivider shall make those changes as are necessary to permit the
reserved area to be developed for the intended purpose consistent with good
subdividing practices. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord.
1639, 9-20-2022)
14-1-8: APPEALS:
All appeals of the Planning Commission and necessary actions shall be prepared
consistent with
Title 15, Chapter 25 of this Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-9: SOILS REPORT:
   A.   Expansive Soils: If the City has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils
report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils
problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils
investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the Director of
Community Development prior to approval of the final map or parcel map. The
soils report shall be prepared in accordance with the latest edition of the
Uniform Building Code. Such soils investigation shall be done by a civil
engineer registered in this State, who shall recommend the appropriate
corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each
structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problems
exist consistent with section 66491 of the California Government Code.
   B.   Deleterious Chemicals: If the preliminary soils report indicates the
presence of rocks or liquids containing deleterious chemicals which, if not
corrected, could cause construction materials such as, but not limited to,
concrete, steel, and ductile or cast iron to corrode or deteriorate, a soils
investigation of each potentially affected lot in the subdivision may be
required.
   C.   Recommended Action: The Planning Commission may approve a subdivision
which has soils problems if it determines that the recommended action is likely
to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and the
recommended action can be incorporated into the construction of each structure.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-1-10: IMPROVEMENT SECURITY:
   A.   Options; Approval:
      1.   Options: Whenever the City requires the furnishing of security in
connection with the performance of any act or agreement, the security shall be
one of the following at the option of and subject to the approval of the City
Engineer and consistent with section 66499 of the California Government Code:
         a.   Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties.
         b.   A deposit, either with the City or a responsible escrow agent or
trust company, money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing
deposits of public monies.
         c.   An irrevocable instrument of credit from: 1) an agency of the
State, Federal, or local government when any agency of the State, Federal or
local government provides at least twenty percent (20%) of the financing for
the portion of the act; or an agreement requiring security; or 2) one or more
financial institutions subject to regulation by the State or Federal Government
and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on
deposit and guaranteed for payment; or a letter of credit issued by such a
financial institution.
         d.   A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract
between the owner and the City, provided the City finds that it would not be in
the public interest to require the installation of the required improvement
sooner than two (2) years after the recordation of the map.
         e.   Any form of security, including security interests in real
property, which is acceptable to the City and specified by ordinance thereof.
      2.   Recording:
         a.   Any contract or security interest in real property entered into
as security for performance pursuant to subsection A1d or A1e of this Section,
shall be recorded with the County Recorder. The recorded contract or security
document shall be indexed in the Grantor Index to the names of all record
owners of the real property as specified on the map and in the Grantee Index to
the City.
         b.   The City Engineer may at any time release all or any portion of
the property subject to any lien or security interest created by this
subdivision or subordinate the lien or security interest to other liens or
encumbrances, provided:
            (1)   He determines that security for performance is sufficiently
secured by a lien on other property; or
            (2)   That the release or subordination of the lien will not
jeopardize the completion of agreed upon improvements.
   B.   Amount:
      1.   Types Of Security: All of the following types of improvement
security shall be provided:
         a.   One hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated cost of the
improvement, which shall include all design, construction, and construction
engineering (including 10 percent) or act to be performed conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the act or agreement;
         b.   One hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated cost of the
improvement or act to be performed securing payment to the contractor, the
subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them
for the improvement or the performance of the required act; and
         c.   Twenty percent (20%) of total estimated cost of improvements
necessary to guarantee or warranty the work for a period of one year following
completion or acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or
defective materials furnished.
      2.   Additional Amount: If the improvement security is furnished by a
duly authorized corporate surety, an additional amount beyond that described
above shall be included as determined by the City Engineer as necessary to
cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees, which may be incurred by the
City to enforce the obligation secured. The improvement security shall also
secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work to
the extent that such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent (10%) of
the original estimated cost of the improvement.
   C.   Release: The improvement security required hereunder shall be released
in the following manner:
      1.   Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement
shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work,
subject to the provisions of subsection C2 of this Section.
      2.   City staff may release a portion of the security in conjunction with
the acceptance of the performance of the act or work as it progresses upon
application therefor by the subdivider; provided, however, that no such release
shall be for an amount less than ten percent (10%) of the total improvement
security given for faithful performance of the act or work and that the
security shall not be reduced to an amount less than fifty percent (50%) of the
total improvement security given for faithful performance until final
completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the City
Council authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such
security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the
act or work and any other obligation imposed by this Title, the Subdivision Map
Act or the improvement agreement.
      3.   Security given to secure payment to the contractor, his
subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment shall,
within six (6) months after the completion and acceptance of the act or work,
be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims filed and which
notice has been given to the legislative body. An additional amount determined
by the City Council may be required to assure the performance of any other
obligations secured by the City. The balance of the security shall be released
upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security
was given.
      4.   No security given for the guaranty or warranty of work shall be
released prior to the identified expiration period thereof.
   D.   Forfeiture: Upon the failure of the subdivider to complete any
improvement, acts or obligations within the time specified, the City Council
may determine that the subdivider is in default and cause the improvement
security or such portion thereof as is necessary to complete the work or act
and any other secured obligations of the subdivider to be forfeited to the
City. Prior to such determination, the City shall either serve written notice
upon the person responsible for the performance ten (10) days prior to City
Council action, or by registered mail twenty (20) days prior to City Council
action. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-11: SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS; FUNDING; HEARING:
   A.   Public Hearing: No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district
shall be established unless and until a public hearing is held by the City
Council in accordance with the provisions of Section
14-1-4 of this Chapter and the City Council finds that the fee or charge and
the area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost
of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries
thereof.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: In addition to the notice required by Section
14-1-4 of this Chapter, written notice of the hearing shall be provided to:
      1.   The subdivider and to those who own property within the proposed
area of benefit as shown on the latest equalized assessment role.
      2.   The potential users of the supplemental improvements as can be
ascertained at the time.
   C.   Notice To Engineer: Such notice shall be mailed by the city engineer at
least ten (10) days prior to the date established for hearing. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993)
14-1-12: EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL:
   A.   Expiration: The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map or
tentative parcel map expires twenty four (24) months after the date the map was
first approved or conditionally approved.
   B.   Extension Or Stay: The person filing the tentative map may request an
extension, pursuant to Government Code section 66452.6(e), or stay, pursuant to
Government Code section 66452.6(c), of an approved tentative map by filing a
written application with the director of community development, before the
map's expiration date. The application must state the reasons for requesting
the extension or stay. The planning commission will either approve,
conditionally approve or deny extension requests. Within forty (40) days after
receiving an application for a stay, the planning commission must either
approve the requested stay for a period not exceeding five (5) years or deny
the application.
   C.   Time Limit On Extensions And Stays: Each extension of tentative map
approval or conditional approval may be allowed for a period not exceeding one
year from the anniversary date of the map's original approval. The total time
of extensions cannot exceed five (5) years. The stay may be for the period of
time during which a lawsuit involving the tentative map is or was pending in a
court of competent jurisdiction, not to exceed five (5) years. The ultimate
length of the extension or stay must be consistent with the subdivision map act
(Government Code sections 66410 through 66499.58).
   D.   Effect Of Map Modification On Extension Or Stay: Modifications of a
tentative map after approval or conditional approval cannot extend the time
limits imposed by this section, unless an extension or stay is specifically
granted.
   E.   Hearings, Notices, Fees And Appeals On Map Extensions And Stays: Title
15, chapters 25, "Appeal Or Review", and 27, "Hearings, Notices And Fees", of
this code govern with respect to extension and stay requests made pursuant to
this section. (Ord. 1371, 2-3-2004; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-1-13: FINAL MAP; MONUMENTS:
At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor
shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described
in section 8771 of the California Business and Professions Code, so that
another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. The engineer or
surveyor shall also set the following additional monuments:
   A.   Boundaries:
      1.   Boundary monuments at or near boundary corners and at intermediate
points, approximately one thousand feet (1,000') apart or at such lesser
distances as may be necessary to ensure accuracy in the reestablishment of any
point or line without unreasonable difficulty. The precise position of each
such monument shall be shown on the final map. Such durable monument shall be
not less substantial than an iron pipe of a two inch (2") outside diameter, not
less than two and one-half feet (21/2') in length, with plug and tack, and set
at least two feet (2') into the ground or as may be approved by the city
engineer. For the purposes of this title, a lead and tack set in permanent
concrete or masonry shall be considered a durable monument.
      2.   The approximate elevation of the top of each monument with respect
to the surface of the ground shall be shown on the final map.
   B.   Setting Monuments:
      1.   Street centerline monuments shall be set to mark the intersections
of streets, intersections of streets with the map boundary, or to mark either
the beginning and end of curves or the points of intersection with tangents or
other intermediate points.
      2.   Each monument shall be durable and substantial and conform to the
standards established by the city engineer.
      3.   For each centerline intersection monument set, the engineer or
surveyor shall furnish to the city engineer a set of notes showing clearly the
ties between such monument and a sufficient number (normally 4) of durable
distinctive reference points or monuments. Such reference points or monuments
may be leads and tacks in sidewalks, or two inch by two inch (2" x 2") stakes
set back of the curb line and below the surface of the ground, or such
substitute as appears to be not more likely to be disturbed.
      4.   Such act shall be of such quality, form and completeness and shall
be on paper of such quality and size as may be necessary to conform to the
standardized office records of the city engineer. All such notes shall be
indexed and filed by the city engineer as a part of the permanent public
records of his office.
      5.   All monuments necessary to establish the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision shall be set or referenced prior to recordation of the final map.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-14: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
Conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, a community
apartment project, or a stock cooperative project shall comply with all
provisions of state law, including sections 66427.1 and 66452.51 of the
California Government Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
CHAPTER 2
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
SECTION:
14-2-1: Purpose
14-2-2: Filing Procedures And Documentation
14-2-3: Development Rights
14-2-4: Amendment
14-2-5: Right To Condition Or Deny Approval
14-2-6: Fees
14-2-7: Expiration Of Vesting Tentative Map Approval
14-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for the approval of a
tentative map that provides certain statutorily vested rights to a subdivider
under the vesting tentative maps statute (California Government Code section
66498.1 et seq.). This chapter implements and supplements that statute. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-2: FILING PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION:
   A.   Whenever a tentative map is required, the applicant may file a vesting
tentative map instead.
   B.   A vesting tentative map shall have printed conspicuously on its face
the words "Vesting Tentative Map" before the city may accept it for filing.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this
title shall apply to a vesting tentative map and processed as provided in
section
14-1-4 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
   D.   Such information as is ordinarily required under the provisions of this
title for the filing of a tentative map shall also be required for the filing
of a vesting tentative map. Supplemental information as relates to the vesting
nature of the proposed vesting tentative map may also be required by the
director of community development. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-
18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-2-3: DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS:
   A.   Development Rights Created: The approval of a vesting tentative map
confers a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the city's ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the
city determines the application is complete.
   B.   Duration Of Development Rights: The right to proceed with development,
as set forth in subsection A of this section, accrues from the date of approval
of a vesting tentative map by the planning commission and continues for one
year following the timely recordation of a final map or parcel map. If a
project covered by a single vesting tentative map is divided into phases and
more than one final map is recorded, the one year period begins for each phase
when the final map for that phase is recorded.
   C.   Expiration Of Development Rights:
      1.   The right to proceed with development as set forth in subsection A
of this section accrues from the date of approval of the tentative map by the
planning commission or city council; however, it expires on the date the
vesting tentative map expires unless a final map is approved before then.
      2.   The time within which a final map may be recorded is governed by
section
14-1-12 of this title and California Government Code section 66452.6.
      3.   If the subdivider submits a complete application for building and
has satisfied all requirements for the issuance of a building permit during the
one year specified in subsection B of this section, the right to proceed with
development continues until the building permit, or any extension thereof,
expires.
      4.   If a final map is recorded based upon a vesting tentative map and
the development rights expire, the final map remains in effect without the
development rights.
   D.   Extension Of Time For Exercise Of Development Rights:
      1.   The one year specified in subsection B of this section is
automatically extended by the amount of time necessary to complete processing
of a grading permit, or design or architectural review, if the length of time
necessary for city review exceeds thirty (30) days.
      2.   Before the expiration of the one year period specified in subsection
B of this section, a subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a one
year extension. See
title 15, chapter 25 of this code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-4: AMENDMENT:
A subdivider may apply to the planning commission for an amendment to a vesting
tentative map at any time before the expiration of the vesting tentative map.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-5: RIGHT TO CONDITION OR DENY APPROVAL:
   A.   This chapter does not:
      1.   Enlarge or diminish the types of conditions which the city may
impose on a development; or
      2.   Diminish or alter the city's power to protect against a condition
dangerous to the public health or safety.
   B.   The city may condition or deny a permit, approval, extension, amendment
or entitlement relating to a vesting tentative map if it determines that
either:
      1.   The failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or
the community in a condition dangerous to their health or safety; or
      2.   The condition or denial is required to comply with state or federal
law. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-6: FEES:
Every person submitting a vesting tentative map shall pay a processing fee as
established by resolution. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-7: EXPIRATION OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL:
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map and the
conditions under which an extension of time or stay is granted shall be
consistent with section
14-1-12 of this title. (Ord. 1371, 2-3-2004)
CHAPTER 3
MERGER OF PARCELS
SECTION:
14-3-1: Purpose
14-3-2: Applicability
14-3-3: Application Requirements
14-3-4: Requirements For Merger
14-3-5: Determination Of Ownership
14-3-6: Notice Of Intention To Determine Status
14-3-7: Planning Commission Hearing
14-3-8: Determination Without Hearing; Notice To Owner
14-3-9: Notice Of Merger; Effective Date
14-3-10: Release Of Notice Of Intention To Determine Status
14-3-11: Appeals
14-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a procedure by which two (2) or more
contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner and which do not
conform to minimum development standards of the underlying zoning district may
be merged. This procedure is adopted pursuant to sections 66451.10 et seq., of
the California Government Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Parcels Held By Same Owner: The provisions and procedures set forth in
this Chapter shall be applicable to two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land
held by the same owner, whether that ownership is absolute or "qualified", as
defined by California Civil Code section 680, notwithstanding those provisions
of this Code which exempt older substandard lots, where:
      1.   The parcels were created under the provisions of this Code
regulating subdivisions or any prior ordinance or State law regulating the
division of land or which were not subject to any prior law regulating the
division of land; and
      2.   At least one of the contiguous parcels or units of land held by the
same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size under the City
Zoning Ordinance, Title 15 of this Code.
   B.   Sale Of Contiguous Parcels: Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed
or interpreted to prohibit the sale, lease or financing of such contiguous
parcels of land, or any of them, where the same have not been merged pursuant
to the procedure set forth herein. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Application for a merger of parcels shall be accompanied by the following:
   A.   City application;
   B.   City fees;
   C.   Exhibit displaying properties involved; and
   D.   Any additional materials as required by the Director of Community
Development. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022)
14-3-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR MERGER:
Any two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner
which are subject to the merger procedures set forth herein as provided in
Section
14-3-3 of this Chapter, may be merged if all of the following requirements are
satisfied:
   A.   Undeveloped: At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any
structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit
was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an
accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single
structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a
contiguous parcel or unit.
   B.   Conditions: With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the
following conditions exists:
      1.   Comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the
time of the determination of merger;
      2.   Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in
effect at the time of its creation;
      3.   Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic
water supply;
      4.   Does not meet slope stability standards;
      5.   Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety
equipment access and maneuverability;
      6.   Its development would create health or safety hazards; or
      7.   Is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable
specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. (Ord. 1212,
11-16-1993)
14-3-5: DETERMINATION OF OWNERSHIP:
For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels or units are held by the
same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that a notice of
intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to Section
14-3-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-6: NOTICE OF INTENTION TO DETERMINE STATUS:
Prior to recording a notice of merger, the Director of Community Development
shall:
   A.   Issuance; Contents: Mail by certified mail to the then current record
owner of the property, and mail by first class mail to the owners of abutting
property a notice of intention to determine status. As used in this Title,
"abutting property" means property that is contiguous to the property that is
the subject of the application or is separated from it only by a street or
alley. Such notice shall state that:
      1.   The affected parcels may be merged pursuant to the merger provisions
of this Chapter;
      2.   The owner may file a written request with the Director of Community
Development any time within thirty (30) days after the date the notice of
intention to determine status is recorded for a hearing before the Planning
Commission and may present evidence at the hearing that the property does not
meet the requirements for merger;
      3.   That the notice of intention to determine status was filed for
recording with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office on the same date such
notice was mailed to the property owner and to the owners of the abutting
property; and
      4.   That if a hearing is not requested, the Planning Commission will
proceed to determine whether the parcels should be merged.
   B.   Filing: File the notice of intention to determine status with the Los
Angeles County Recorder's office on the same date that the notice is mailed to
the property owner. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18- 2000; Ord.
1639, 9-20-2022)
14-3-7: PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING:
   A.   Issuance Of Notice: Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing on
the determination of status, the Director of Community Development shall fix a
time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission,
and shall so notify the property owner by certified mail, and the owners of
abutting property by first class mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more
than sixty (60) days following the receipt of the property owner's request
therefor, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the
Planning Commission and the property owner.
   B.   Present Evidence: At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the
opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet
the requirements for merger as set forth in Sections
14-3-3 and
14-3-4 of this Chapter.
   C.   Determination:
      1.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make
a determination as to whether the affected parcels are to be merged and shall
notify the owner of its determination as soon thereafter as practicable.
      2.   The Planning Commission may, at the close of the hearing, determine
that the parcels are not to be merged, notwithstanding the fact that the
affected parcels have met all the requirements set forth in Sections
14-3-3 and
14-3-4 of this Chapter for a merger. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-
18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-3-8: DETERMINATION WITHOUT HEARING; NOTICE TO OWNER:
   A.   Failure To File Request: If the property owner fails to file a request
for hearing within the thirty (30) day period as provided in Section
14-3-6 of this Chapter, the Planning Commission may, at any time thereafter,
make a determination as to whether the affected parcels are to be merged.
   B.   File Notice Of Merger: If the Planning Commission makes a determination
of merger, the Director of Community Development shall file a notice of merger
no later than ninety (90) days after the mailing of the notice of intention to
determine status as provided in Section
14-3-6 of this Chapter, and shall notify the property owner of such
determination by certified mail.
   C.   Determination Not To Merge: If the Planning Commission makes a
determination not to merge the parcels, the Director of Community Development
shall follow the procedure set forth in Section
14-3-10 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000;
Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-3-9: NOTICE OF MERGER; EFFECTIVE DATE:
   A.   Notice To County: If the Planning Commission determines that the
affected parcels are merged, the Director of Community Development shall file
for record with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office a notice of merger
specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real
property to be merged.
   B.   Time Of Filing: Said notice of merger shall be filed no later than
thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing on determination of status
as provided in Section
14-3-7 of this Chapter, unless a timely appeal from the Planning Commission's
determination is filed pursuant to Title 15, Chapter 25 of this Code.
   C.   Effective Date: A merger of parcels becomes effective on the date the
notice of merger is duly filed with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-3-10: RELEASE OF NOTICE OF INTENTION TO DETERMINE STATUS:
If the Planning Commission determines that the affected parcels are not to be
merged, the Director of Community Development shall:
   A.   File With County: File for record with the Los Angeles County
Recorder's office a release of notice of intention to determine status,
recorded pursuant to subsection
14-3-6B of this Chapter, specifying the names of the record owners and
particularly describing the real property; and
   B.   Notify Owner: Mail a copy of the release to the then current owner of
record. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022)
14-3-11: APPEALS:
All appeals shall be processed as provided by Title 15, Chapter 25 of this
Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
CHAPTER 4
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
14-4-1: Purpose
14-4-2: Filing Procedures And Documentation
14-4-3: Processing Procedures
14-4-4: Evaluation Criteria
14-4-5: Conditions Of Approval
14-4-6: Appeals
14-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a procedure by which the size or
configuration of two (2) or more existing parcels may be adjusted, provided:
   A.   Land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel;
   B.   A greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created; and
   C.   The adjustment is approved by the Director of Community Development.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-4-2: FILING PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION:
   A.   Filing Request: All requests for a lot line adjustment shall be filed
with the Director of Community Development on an approved City application
form.
   B.   Filing Documentation: A lot line adjustment request shall include the
required number of copies of the following materials:
      1.   Grant deeds and/or title report for all properties;
      2.   A legal description of each existing and new lot/parcel to be
created;
      3.   A plat map or maps displaying each existing and new lot or parcel;
      4.   City application forms; and
      5.   Processing fees. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996;
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-4-3: PROCESSING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Lot Line Adjustment Request: Once an application has been deemed
acceptable for filing, the Director of Community Development shall distribute
the lot line adjustment request for review and comment to all other appropriate
City departments. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
   B.   Decision Of Director: Within thirty (30) days of accepting the
application as complete, the Director of Community Development shall approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the lot line adjustment.
   C.   Certificate Of Compliance: Upon approval or conditional approval of the
lot line adjustment, the Director of Community Development shall issue a
certificate of compliance indicating the City's acceptance and approval of the
request.
   D.   Grant Deed: The applicant shall have a new grant deed recorded which
reflects the approved lot line adjustment and provide the City with a copy.
   E.   Record Of Survey: A record of survey shall not be required for a lot
line adjustment unless required by section 8762 of the California Business and
Professions Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639,
9-20-2022)
14-4-4: EVALUATION CRITERIA:
The evaluation of a lot line adjustment shall be limited to determining whether
or not the new lot or parcel created conforms to existing zoning and building
codes. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-4-5: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
   A.   Conditions: The Director of Community Development shall not impose
conditions or exactions on the approval of a lot line adjustment, except:
      1.   To conform to local ordinances.
      2.   To facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure,
or easements.
   B.   Maps: No tentative map, parcel map, or final map shall be required as a
condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993;
amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-4-6: APPEALS:
All appeals shall be processed as provided by Title 15, Chapter 25 of this
Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
CHAPTER 5
WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP
SECTION:
14-5-1: Purpose
14-5-2: Filing Procedures And Documentation
14-5-3: Processing Procedures
14-5-4: Evaluation Criteria
14-5-5: Conditions Of Approval
14-5-6: Appeals
14-5-1: PURPOSE:
A waiver of parcel map provides a procedure whereby adequate information and
improvements are already available to forego the need to prepare a final map
and prepare only a tentative map. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-5-2: FILING PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION:
   A.   Filing Request: All requests for a waiver of parcel map shall be filed
with the Director of Community Development on an approved City application
form. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
   B.   Filing Documentation: A request for the waiver of parcel map shall
include the following materials:
      1.   Preliminary title report.
      2.   A tentative map prepared consistently with the filing requirements
for tentative maps.
      3.   City application forms.
      4.   Processing fees. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
14-5-3: PROCESSING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Distribution Of Request: Once an application has been deemed accepted
for filing, the Director of Community Development shall distribute the waiver
of parcel map request for review and comment to the City divisions and
departments.
   B.   Notice And Hearing: The notification, hearing and review process shall
be consistent with that described in Section
14-1-4 of this Title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord.
1639, 9-20-2022)
14-5-4: EVALUATION CRITERIA:
The evaluation of the waiver of parcel map shall include the following
findings:
   A.   Consistency with the provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title.
   B.   The area requirements are consistent with the property's zoning.
   C.   The design of the subdivision and existing level of improvements are
consistent with City standards.
   D.   The flood water drainage control is consistent with City standards.
   E.   All adjoining improved public roads are consistent with City standards.
   F.   Water supply availability and sanitary disposal facilities are
adequate.
   G.   The site provides adequate provisions for environmental protection.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-5-5: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The Planning Commission shall impose those conditions of approval necessary to
ensure the adequate health and safety of future residents or users. (Ord. 1212,
11-16-1993)
14-5-6: APPEALS:
All appeals shall be processed as provided by
Title 15, Chapter 25 of this Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL URBAN LOT SPLITS
SECTION:
14-6-1: Purpose
14-6-2: Parcel Map Required
14-6-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to Government Code section 66452.6, 65852.21,
and 66411.7 for the purpose of implementing the City's regulation of two-unit
residential development and urban lot splits in the City's Single-Family
Residential Zone.
Government Code Section 66411.7(a) requires that the City ministerially approve
a parcel map for an urban lot split, subject to standards set forth in
Government Code section 66411.7. (Ord. 1633, 3-1-2022)
14-6-2: PARCEL MAP REQUIRED:
Any person proposing to subdivide a property in the Single Family Residential
(R1) Zone for the purpose of implementing an urban lot split pursuant to
Government Code section 66411.7 must file a Parcel Map application in
accordance with El Segundo Municipal Code Section
14-1-3. The Parcel Map must be approved by the Development Services Director if
said Parcel Map complies with the provisions and applicable requirement
specified in Article G of Chapter 15-4 of this Code and Government Code section
66411.7. (Ord. 1633, 3-1-2022)
TITLE 15
ZONING REGULATIONS
Subject   Chapter
Title; Interpretation; Definitions   1
General Provisions   2
Zones And Uses   3
Residential Zones   4
Permitted Uses In Residential Zones   4A
Single-Family Residential (R-1) Zone   4B
Two-Family Residential (R-2) Zone   4C
Multi-Family Residential (R-3) Zone   4D
Accessory Dwelling Units   4E
Junior Accessory Dwelling Units   4F
Two-Unit Residential Developments And Urban Lot Splits In Single-Family
Residential (R1) Zones   4G
Commercial Zones   5
Permitted Uses In Commercial Zones   5A
Downtown Commercial (C-RS) Zone   5B
Neighborhood Commercial (C-2) Zone   5C
General Commercial (C-3) Zone   5D
Corporate Office (CO) Zone   5E
Urban Mixed Use North (MU-N) Zone   5F
Urban Mixed Use South (MU-S) Zone   5G
Commercial Center (C-4) Zone   5H
Industrial Zones   6
Permitted Uses In Industrial Zones   6A
Light Industrial (M-1) Zone   6B
Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone   6C
Overlay Districts   7
Medium Density Residential (MDR) Overlay Zone   7A
Multimedia Overlay (MMO) District   7B
Mixed-Use Overlay (MU-O) Zone   7C
Housing Overlay (H-O) Zone   7D
Open Space (O-S) Zone   8
Automobile Parking (P) Zone   9
Public Facilities (P-F) Zone   10
Smoky Hollow Specific Plan (Rep. by Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)   11
Reserved   12
Adult Use Zoning Regulations   13
Assembly Halls   13A
Cannabis-Related Uses And Activities   13B
Micro-Units   13C
Historic Preservation   14
Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces   15
Water Conservation In Landscaping   15A
Developer Transportation Demand Management (TDM)   16
Employer/Occupant Transportation Systems Management   17
Signs   18
Wireless Communication Facilities   19
Transfer Of Development Rights   20
Nonconforming Buildings And Uses   21
Administrative Determinations, Administrative Use Permits, And Adjustments   22
Director Discretionary Decisions   23
Variances And Conditional Use Permits   24
Site Plan Review   25
Coastal Zone Development Permits   26
Amendments   27
Public Hearings   28
Appeals   29
Enforcement; Penalty   30
Right-Of-Way Dedications And Improvements   31
Development Impact Fees   32
Parking In-Lieu Fees   33
Cultural Development   34
Density Bonus      35
Reasonable Accommodations For Individuals With Disabilities   36
Housing Programs   37
Low-Barrier Navigation Centers   37A
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
15-1-1: Purpose; Title
15-1-2: Interpretation
15-1-3: Permissive Ordinance
15-1-4: Enforcement
15-1-5: Severability
15-1-6: Definitions
15-1-1: PURPOSE; TITLE:
A precise land use plan for the City is hereby adopted and established to serve
the public health, safety, and general welfare and to provide the economic and
social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources. This
title shall be known as the ZONING CODE. This title is the primary tool for
implementing the goals, objectives, and policies of the El Segundo General
Plan, pursuant to mandated provisions of the State Planning and Zoning Law 1 ,
the California Environmental Quality Act 2 , and other applicable State and
local requirements. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. GOV § 65000 et seq.
2 2. PRC § 21000 et seq.
15-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to
interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement
between parties. When this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use
of buildings or land or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or
by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall
control. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-1-3: PERMISSIVE ORDINANCE:
This title shall be considered a permissive ordinance, whereby only those uses
or facilities that are listed are hereby allowed, except as provided through an
administrative determination, an administrative use permit, or other
discretionary action. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-1-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The Community Development Director or his/her duly designated representative is
hereby designated as the enforcing agent of this title and any amendments
thereto. The Director or his/her designated representative has the authority to
require recordation of restrictive covenants on a property and/or to deny
permits to prevent unpermitted changes of use and to fulfill the purpose of
this Title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-1-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title
is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction or administrative
body to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this title. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this title and each chapter, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one (1) or more portions of this title might be declared invalid. (Ord.
1245, 2-6-1996)
15-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
   ABUTTING/ABUTTING PROPERTY: Two (2) or more parcels sharing a common
boundary of at least one (1) point. However, as used in chapter 24 of this
title, this definition shall also include property that is separated only by a
street or alley.
   ACCESSIBLE: As pertaining to artworks, see VISIBLE AND ACCESSIBLE.
   ACCESSORY: A building, part of a building or structure, or use which is
subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main
building, structure or use on the same lot.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure that is physically
detached from, on the same lot as, and incidental and subordinate to the
principal building or structure. "Accessory building or structure" includes,
but is not limited to, accessory dwelling units, garages, gazebos, greenhouses,
playhouses, storage and tool sheds, and workshops.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit
which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more
persons. The unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family
dwelling is situated. The term "accessory dwelling unit" includes:
   A.   An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   B.   A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, JUNIOR: A unit that is no more than five hundred
(500) square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-
family structure. A “Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit” may include separate
sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing
structure.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use of a portion of land or building that is customarily
and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building, is located on the same lot as the principal use and is dependent upon
the principal use for the majority of its utilization or activity. Accessory
uses typically are very small in proportion to the principal use.
   ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Advertising structures and signs.
   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: A structure of any kind or character erected or
maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any poster, bill,
printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed,
including statuary.
Neither "advertising structures" nor "signs", as used in this title includes:
   A.   Official notices issued by a court or public body or officer;
   B.   Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty or
by any person in giving legal notice; and
   C.   Directional, warning or information signs or structures required or
authorized by law or by Federal, State or Municipal authority.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON: Any person who testified personally or through a
representative at a public hearing or who informed the staff of the Community
Development Department in writing, prior to a hearing of an interest in the
subject of a hearing; or who, for good cause, was unable to do either; or who
feels the action taken on an application was not consistent with facts as
presented.
   ALLEY: Any public way or thoroughfare more than ten feet (10'), but not
exceeding twenty feet (20') in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the
public for public use.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3705.png]
 
   ALTERATION: Any change or modification of an exterior architectural feature
of a designated cultural resource. Alteration shall include, but not be limited
to, a changing or modification of structure, architectural details or visual
characteristics and the placement or removal of any exterior objects or
ornamentation affecting the exterior visual qualities of a designated cultural
resource. Alterations shall not include ordinary maintenance and repair.
   ALTERNATE TRANSPORTATION: The use of modes of transportation other than the
single passenger motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, car pools,
vanpools, bus pools, public transit, walking and bicycling.
   AMENDMENT: A change in the wording, context or substance of this title, or a
change in the zone boundaries on the zoning map, which map is a part of this
title.
   AMENITIES: Facilities which enhance the operation of a use and make it more
attractive to present and future uses.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical
treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.
   APARTMENT: A residential building designed or used for three (3) or more
dwelling units.
   APPEALABLE AREA: The entire Coastal Zone in El Segundo as established on a
map adopted as part of the El Segundo Local Coastal Program.
   APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT: Any development project that is determined to meet
or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in section
15-16-3 of this title.
   APPLICANT: The owner of the property, a developer or tenant utilizing the
property and seeking the required permits.
   ARBOR: A shelter of shrubs and branches or of latticework intertwined with
plant material usually comprised of climbing vines and flowers.
   ARCHITECTURAL BUILDING FEATURE: A balcony, column, door, eaves, roof,
soffit, window or window trim, shutters or other similar three-dimensional
permanent exterior element of a building or structure that may not create
interior floor area, that provides relief from large flat wall planes, breaks
up building wall mass, and lends to the overall form, context and appearance of
the building or structure.
   ARCHITECTURAL LANDSCAPE FEATURES: Small landscape structures, such as
fountains, arbors, trellises, pergolas, colonnades, statuary, benches, bench
walls, landscape planter walls not exceeding three feet (3') in height, and
other similar features, as well as works of art which do not contain floor
area. Arbors, trellises, pergolas, colonnades, and other similar features, as
well as works of art cannot consist of a roof or side walls greater than twenty
percent (20%) component solid portions when considered as architectural
landscape features. These features are not "structures", as defined in this
section, for setback purposes.
   ARTIFICIAL TURF (Also Referred To As SYNTHETIC GRASS): A surface of
synthetic fibers made to look like natural grass.
   ARTISTIC OR CULTURAL SERVICES: Performances and experiences, including but
not limited to performing arts, literary art, media art, arts education, art
events, temporary artworks and festivals.
   ARTWORK: Original creations of art which is intended for and capable of
being displayed outdoors, including but not limited to, sculpture, murals,
mosaic, fountains, artist-designed landscape features, streetscape features and
earthworks. These categories may be realized through such mediums as steel,
bronze, stained glass, concrete, wood, ceramic tile and stone, as well as other
suitable materials.
   ATTACHED: Having a wall or roof in common with another structure, when
referring to dwelling units or garages.
   ATTIC: The space between the ceiling joists of the top floor or story and
the roof of a building.
   AUTOMOBILE DISMANTLING: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles
or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles
or their parts.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICES: Automobile repair and maintenance, which includes body
and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work,
automobile painting, and car washing. Automobile services also include as
accessory uses: retail sales and services, and storage of tires, car parts and
other automobile supplies; limited automobile sales. Automobile sales cannot
exceed eight (8) automobiles per month; not more than three (3) automobiles can
be displayed at one time.
   AVERAGE VEHICLE RIDERSHIP: The figure calculated by dividing the employee
population (at a given work site) by the number of vehicles which are driven by
employees (to the work site) arriving at the work site in a four (4) hour
window between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M.,
excluding public transit vehicles and buses serving multiple work sites.
   BALCONY: A covered or uncovered platform that can be used as a walking
surface, projecting outward from the vertical surface/facade of a building or
structure, and which is directly accessible from floor area located on the same
level as the balcony.
   BASEMENT: Any floor level below the first story in a building that is more
than four feet (4') below grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
perimeter, or is more than eight feet (8') below "grade" at any point.
   BAY WINDOW: An extension of the wall area into the yard setback area, for
purposes of obtaining additional light and space, but not floor area.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN: Any building containing five (5) or fewer guestrooms
intended or designed to be used, or which are used or rented or which are
occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. Said use shall not contain ancillary
facilities for conferences or personal services, but may provide meals. Guest
stays shall be limited to fourteen (14) consecutive days. One dwelling unit, on
any floor level, in conformance with the requirements of subsection
15-5B-3E of this title shall be allowed for the use of the proprietor of the
bed and breakfast inn.
   BLOCK: Land, or a group of lots, surrounded by streets or other rights-of-
way, other than an alley, or land which is designated as a block on any
recorded subdivision.
   BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy that is permanently affixed to the ground and contains a roof.
Shipping containers are not buildings.
   BUILDING AREA: See definition of floor area (gross).
   BUILDING FACE: Horizontal plane of a building facade which may include
recessed portions of the building.
   BUILDING HEIGHT OR STRUCTURE HEIGHT: Is the vertical distance measured from
the grade plane to the highest point of the roof or parapet. See features
listed in section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3709.png]
 
   BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which the principal use of the site is
conducted.
   BUILDING SITE:
   A.   The ground area of one lot; or
   B.   The ground area of two (2) or more lots when used in combination for a
building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by
this title.
   BUS POOL: A vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a
regular basis to and from work following a relatively fixed route and schedule.
   BUSINESS: An establishment intended for the conduct, service, or
administration by a commercial enterprise, or offices for the conduct of
professional or activities service.
   CAFE: See definition of restaurant, cafe.
   CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) 1 : A statute that requires all
jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of
environmental degradation posed by proposed development.
   CANNABIS: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica,
or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including cannabis infused in foodstuff or any other
ingestible or consumable product containing cannabis. "Cannabis" also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. The term
"cannabis" includes "medical cannabis" for the purposes set forth in the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at section 11362.5 of
the Health and Safety Code. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of
the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of
the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. "Cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by section
11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
   CANNABIS ACCESSORIES: Any equipment, products or materials of any kind which
are used or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, smoking, or vaporizing cannabis, or for
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products
into the human body.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing,
cultivating, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or processing of
cannabis.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION FACILITY: A facility where cannabis is cultivated,
prepared, and packaged for sale to cannabis dispensaries, to cannabis product
manufacturing facilities, or to other cannabis cultivation facilities, but not
to consumers.
   CANNABIS DELIVERY: The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products
to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under
this division, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the
commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of cannabis or cannabis products.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where
cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis are offered,
made available to, or provided, either individually or in any combination, with
or without remuneration, for medical, recreational, or other purposes.
   CANNABIS DISTRIBUTION: The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and
cannabis products between State-licensed entities for commercial use purposes.
   CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT: A cannabis cultivation facility, a cannabis testing
facility, a cannabis product manufacturing facility, or a cannabis dispensary.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURE: To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make
or prepare a cannabis product.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY: A facility where cannabis and
cannabis products are manufactured, prepared and packaged for sale to other
cannabis product manufacturing facilities or to cannabis dispensaries, but not
to consumers.
   CANNABIS PRODUCTS: Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant
material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited
to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis
or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
   CANNABIS-RELATED ACTIVITY: Any commercial cannabis activity, cultivation of
cannabis, delivery of cannabis or cannabis products, distribution of cannabis
or cannabis products, dispensing of cannabis or cannabis products, manufacture
of cannabis or cannabis products, sale of cannabis or cannabis products, and
the operation or establishment of a cannabis or medical cannabis cooperative,
dispensary, delivery service, or provider. "Cannabis-related activity" does not
include the cultivation, planting, harvesting, drying, processing or possession
of up to six (6) cannabis plants at one time by persons twenty one (21) years
of age or older when conducted within a single private residence and in a
manner consistent with Health and Safety Code section 11362.2 and any other
applicable regulations.
   CANNABIS STORAGE FACILITY: A facility used for the storage of cannabis,
cannabis products or cannabis accessories.
   CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY: A facility where cannabis is analyzed and
certified for safety and potency.
   CAR POOL: A vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together
to and from work on a regular basis in a light or medium duty passenger
vehicle.
   CARETAKER UNIT: A dwelling unit in the Smoky Hollow specific plan area used
for a caretaker of the property on which it is located and limited to five
hundred (500) square feet in area.
   CEILING: The upper interior surface of a room, opposite and directly above,
the finish floor or walking surface.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the Planning
Commission approving any proposed alteration, restoration, construction,
removal, relocation, or demolition, in whole or in part, of or to a designated
cultural resource.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: An approval issued by the building official prior
to occupancy of a building or structure, and after compliance with all
applicable codes and ordinances. No building or structure shall be used or
occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of the
building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building
official has issued a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of
occupancy as set forth in the Building Code.
   CHARITABLE INSTITUTION: A nonprofit, tax exempt organization generally
described by the Internal Revenue Service under any of the following
classifications:
   A.   A community chest, corporation, trust fund, or foundation operated for
charitable, religious, educational, scientific, literary purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals;
   B.   War veterans' organizations; and
   C.   Domestic fraternal societies, orders and associations operating under
the lodge system.
   CHURCH: An establishment, the principal purpose which is religious worship
and including accessory uses in the principal structure or in separate
buildings, including Sunday school rooms, assembly rooms, kitchen, library
room, one-family dwelling unit and day nurseries operated by and on the church
site, but excluding facilities for residences of or training of religious
orders.
   CLUB: An association of persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not
including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily
carried on as a business.
   COASTAL ZONE: That area of the City of El Segundo included in the State of
California Coastal Zone as described in the California Coastal Act 2 .
   COMMERCIAL:
      Financial Institutions: Banks and trust companies, credit agencies,
credit unions, investment companies, lending and thrift institutions,
securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers, security and commodity
exchanges, vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies. Financial institutions do
not include check cashing or payday loan facilities.
      Retail Sales: Alcohol sales (off site), building material stores,
convenience stores, general retail stores, and warehouse retail showrooms.
      General Retail Stores: Include sales, without limitation, of appliances,
art gallery, artists' supplies, bakeries (retail only), bicycles, books and
periodicals, cameras and photographic supplies, clothing and accessories,
computer and computer equipment, electronics, department stores, drug and
discount stores, collectible items sales, curio, gift and souvenir shops, dry
goods, fabric and sewing supplies, florists and houseplant stores (indoor),
furniture and home furnishings, grocery stores, hardware, hobby materials,
household and kitchen goods, jewelry, luggage and leather goods, musical
instruments, parts and accessories, newsstands, orthopedic supplies, pet
stores, pet supply stores, pharmacies, religious goods, small wares, specialty
shops, sporting goods and equipment, stationery, and toys and games.
      Retail Services: Personal services and business and consumer support
services.
      Business And Consumer Support Services: Include, without limitation,
establishments primarily providing consumers and businesses with services,
including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, as well as the
following: business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see
definition of vehicle sales and services: maintenance/repair), computer related
services (rental, repair), copying, quick printing, and blueprinting services,
equipment rental businesses within buildings, film processing laboratories,
heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site,
household appliance and equipment repair services, janitorial and maid
services, mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping), photocopying
and photofinishing, protective services (other than office related), window
cleaning.
      Personal Services: Include, without limitation, barbershops and beauty
salons, clothing rental, dry cleaning pick up stores with limited equipment,
hair, nail, facial, and personal care, laundromats (self-service laundries),
photo development, shoe repair shops, tailors, tanning salons.
      Personal services and business and consumer support services may also
include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY: The cultivation, possession, manufacture,
distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling,
transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products.
   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any project which results in
the development of property in any land use categories, except for single- and
multi-family residential projects designed for long-term occupancy.
   COMMISSARY: A building, part of a building, or structure, which is utilized
primarily in the preparation of food and purveying it to off site locations.
Commissaries within the Multimedia Overlay (MMO) District shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development that each commissary
provides primary service to the multimedia industry.
   COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of El Segundo, California.
   COMMUTER MATCHING SERVICE: Any system, whether by computer, manual, or
mapping methods, which matches commuters residing in one (1) common area,
working in another common area, and having approximately the same work starting
and stopping times.
   CONDOMINIUM: A single dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling or
structure, which is separately owned and which may be combined with an
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the property.
   CONGREGATE LIVING HEALTH FACILITY: A residential home that provides
inpatient care to not more than six (6) persons, including, but not limited to,
basic services such as: medical supervision, twenty four (24) hour skilled
nursing and supportive care, pharmacy, dietary, and social recreation. The
primary need of congregate living health facility residents shall be for
availability of skilled nursing care on a recurring, intermittent, extended, or
continuous basis. This care is generally less intense than that provided in
skilled nursing facilities.
   CONSTRUCTION: The building of additions to an exterior architectural feature
of a designated cultural resource, or the erection of a new principal or
accessory building or structure contiguous to a designated cultural resource.
   CONSTRUCTION YARD: An open or predominantly open area used for the purpose
of storing building materials and related equipment for use in the construction
of buildings or structures.
   COURT: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade
level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3711.png]
 
   COURTYARD: A court that is open to the sky and is adjacent to or within a
building mostly or entirely surrounded by walls and/or buildings on all four
(4) sides.
   CRAFTS SHOPS (Sales, Lease, And Rentals): An outdoor or indoor area,
building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area which is utilized
primarily for the manufacture, production, sales, lease, storage, and/or rental
of materials utilized in media related production or in their construction, or
other activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community Development
are similar.
   CULTURAL RESOURCE: On site improvements, buildings, structures, signs, and/
or features (including significant trees or other landscaping located thereon)
having cultural, architectural or historical significance to the citizens of
the City of El Segundo.
   DAYCARE CENTER: Any type of group daycare programs, including nurseries for
children of working parents, nursery schools for children under minimum age for
education in public schools, parent cooperative nursery schools, playgroups for
preschool children and programs covering after school care for school children;
provided, the establishment is licensed by the State and the City and is
conducted in accordance with State and City requirements.
   DAYCARE, LARGE FAMILY: A home which provides family daycare to seven (7) to
twelve (12) children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who
reside at the home.
   DAYCARE, SMALL FAMILY: A home which provides family daycare to six (6) or
fewer children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside
at the home.
   DECK: An outdoor platform that can be used as a walking surface and outdoor
gathering/activity area, typically extending outward from a house, structure,
or other building.
   DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys in part, or in whole, a
designated cultural resource.
   DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCE: On site improvements, buildings, structures,
signs, features (including significant trees or other landscaping), places,
place names, exterior architecture features, landmark sites, historic sites,
area (including significant trees or landscaping located thereon) having
cultural, architectural or historical significance to the citizens of the City
that has been designated a cultural resource pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   DETACHED: Not having a wall or roof in common with another structure, when
referring to dwelling units or garages.
   DEVELOPER: The builder who is responsible for the planning, design and
construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be
responsible for implementing the provisions of chapter 16 of this title as
determined by the property owner.
   DEVELOPMENT: The construction or addition of new building square footage.
All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.
   DIGITAL ARTIST: An individual or group whose primary focus is related to the
preparation of computer generated product.
   DIRECTOR: The City’s Director of Community Development.
   DISPLAY SURFACE: The area made available by the sign structure for the
purpose of displaying the advertising message.
   DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, drive- through.
   DWELLING:
      Multiple-Family: A building or portion of a building containing three (3)
or more dwelling units designed or arranged for occupancy by three (3) or more
households living independently in which they may or may not share common
entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units may be owned as
condominiums, or offered for rent.
      Primary (Or Main Structure): The principal dwelling on a residential lot,
which existed prior to the establishment of a secondary ("second unit") or
accessory dwelling unit.
      Single-Family: A building containing no more than one (1) dwelling unit
designed for occupancy by not more than one (1) household.
      Two-Family: A building containing no more than two (2) dwelling units,
designed or arranged for occupancy by two (2) households living independently.
      Unit: Any building or portion thereof that is used as a complete,
independent living facility for one (1) or more persons containing permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, as required
by the California Building Code.
      Unit, Accessory: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit
which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more
persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is
situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:
         A.   An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of Health and
Safety Code.
         B.   A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health
and Safety Code.
   EAVE: The overhanging lower edge of a roof plane that extends up to eighteen
inches (18") beyond the facade of a wall attached to said roof plane.
   EMERGENCY SHELTER: Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless
persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless
person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of
an inability to pay in accordance with Health and Safety Code section 50801(e).
EMPLOYEE HOUSING: Employer-owned and/or operated living quarters provided for
the employer's employees in connection to their employment that ensures the
employee residents' health, safety, and welfare, as authorized under Health and
Safety Code § 17000 et seq., i.e., the State Employee Housing Act.
   EMPLOYEE PARKING AREA: The portion of total required parking at a
development used by on site employees. Unless specified in the City Zoning/
Building Code, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:
 
Type Of Use                 Percent Of Total Required Parking Devoted To
                            Employees
   Commercial            30 percent
   Office/professional   85 percent
   Industrial/manufacturi90 percent
 
   EMPLOYEE TRANSPORTATION COORDINATOR: An employee, tenant, property owner,
property manager, contracted service, or an employer organization whose
function is to promote car pools, vanpools and alternate commute modes. The
coordinator shall have a permanent mailing address, daytime telephone and
office convenient to the appropriate employment center.
   ENTERTAINMENT (Live): Any act, play, revue, pantomime, scene, dance act, or
song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or more
persons whether or not they are compensated for the performance.
   ERECTED: The construction of any building or structure or the structural
alteration of a building or structure, the result of which would be to change
the exterior walls or roof, to increase the square foot floor area of the
interior of the building or structure or to increase the height.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: All of the outer surfaces of an improvement,
building or structure, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and
texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors,
lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement, building or
structure.
   EXTERIOR PERIMETER WALL HEIGHT: The existing exterior perimeter wall
consisting of the framing members, from and including the foundation and any
basement walls, to and including the uppermost floor and top plate of a
building. Any portions of the exterior wall for any floor level that is
horizontally offset are also included.
   FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons living together as a single
household in a dwelling unit.
   FAMILY CARE HOME, FOSTER HOME, OR GROUP HOME: Any residential facility,
licensed by the State, providing twenty four (24) hour care for six (6) or
fewer foster children, including children who have mental disorders or
developmental or physical disabilities and who require special care and
supervision as a result of their disabilities, and children who require
nonmedical care in a structured environment that is owned, leased or rented and
is the residence of the foster parent or parents, including their family, in
whose care the foster children have been placed. Such services may be provided
at least in part by staff employed by the licensee.
   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, fast food.
   FENCE, TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION: "Temporary construction fence" means a fence
not exceeding six feet in height, as measured from the adjacent existing grade,
which is erected around a portion of a lot or parcel, or around the perimeter
of a lot or parcel, to secure said lot or parcel during construction activity.
   FITNESS CENTER (Also Known As A FITNESS CLUB, HEALTH CLUB And Commonly
Referred To As A GYM): A place which houses exercise equipment for the purpose
of physical exercise.
   FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of government, political subdivision, or
other entity used as a signalizing device and usually displayed hanging free
from a staff or halyard to which it is attached by one edge.
   FLAT ROOF: A roof surface which slopes ten percent (10%) or less.
   FLOOR: The horizontal, base surface of a room.
   FLOOR AREA: The total horizontal area on all floors, stories or levels, as
measured to the interior of a building's perimeter walls, including all floors,
stories or levels of the primary dwelling, attached and detached accessory
dwelling units, habitable attic space, and accessory buildings. See subsection
15-4A-6F of this title for additional details when calculating "floor area".
   FLOOR AREA (GROSS): The area included within the surrounding exterior walls
of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of garages, vent shafts and courts.
The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding
exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the
roof or floor above.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3713.png]
 
   FLOOR AREA (NET): The total horizontal area of all floors, stories or
levels, as measured to the interior of a building’s perimeter walls. Unless
specified in otherwise individual zoning district, space devoted to the
following shall not be included when determining the total net floor area
within a building or structure:
   A.   Elevator shafts.
   B.   Stairwells and stairway enclosures.
   C.   Courts or atriums.
   D.   Rooms exclusively holding building operating equipment.
   E.   Parking spaces and parking structures.
   F.   That portion of any structure that is devoted exclusively to parking.
   G.   Restrooms and hallways in common areas of nonresidential buildings.
In the M-1 Zone only, the total space devoted to high or medium bay labs may be
multiplied by a factor of 0.5 to determine the net floor area.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area or net floor area of all buildings on a
lot, divided by the lot area.
   FOOD TO GO: See definition of restaurant, food to go.
   FREEWAY: A highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no
right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands, or in respect to
which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access.
   FREIGHT FORWARDING: An establishment primarily engaged in undertaking the
transportation of goods from shippers to receivers for a charge covering the
entire transportation, and in turn, making use of the services of other
transportation establishments as instrumentalities in effecting delivery.
   FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, full service.
   GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS/PUBLIC USES: Government buildings/public uses include,
but are not limited to, City offices, police and fire stations, parking, post
offices, libraries, and related buildings.
   GRADE: The elevation of the surface of the ground of a property.
   GRADE DIFFERENTIAL: The difference in ground elevation between the grade
plane and the lowest point of the finished grade adjacent to the exterior walls
of the building. A grade differential is exempt when measuring the height of a
building or structure. Any portion below the grade plane which exceeds the
maximum permitted grade differential for the zoning district is included in
calculating the vertical height of the building. See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   GRADE, EXISTING: The surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location
as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a project at the site.
   GRADE, FINISHED: The elevation after the land is cleared, cut, filled,
graded, or construction improvements are completed, including but not limited
to, pathways, pavements, hardscape or landscaping are complete.
   GRADE, NATURAL: The ground elevation which existed prior to excavation, cut,
fill, or landscaping improvements. The Director may assist in establishing the
existing natural grade, based on the surrounding undisturbed existing grade on
other portions of the site, or based on adjacent properties to the site, or the
level of the finished sidewalk.
   GRADE PLANE: Is a horizontal reference plane representing the average
elevation between the highest and lowest point of the natural grade prior to
excavation, fill or construction, measured immediately below or adjacent to the
exterior perimeter walls of a building or structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3715.png]
 
   GREENHOUSE WINDOW: A window projecting out from a building wall, typically
with glass on four (4) sides, which does not provide additional floor area.
   HABITABLE AREA: As defined by the California Building Code.
   HABITABLE VEHICLE: Any mobile home, camper, house trailer, travel trailer,
recreational vehicle or any other vehicle utilized for human habitation, on a
temporary or permanent basis. Habitable vehicle does not include those vehicles
located in an authorized mobile home park.
   HARDSCAPE: Any durable material (pervious and nonpervious) that is comprised
of solid manmade and natural materials used in the built environment such as:
stone, tile, wood, crushed rock, gravel, granite, brick, metal, glass, bitumen,
concrete, and masonry. Hardscape projects may include paved areas, walkways,
patios, statuary, walls, pools, fountains, fireplaces, fire pits, stone
benches, and architectural landscape features.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES (OFF SITE): Independent off site
facilities used for, but not limited to, the transfer, storage, treatment,
recycling or land disposal of hazardous waste which has been produced at a
separate facility. Hazardous waste is any waste or combination of wastes, which
because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious nature
may exhibit one or more of the following characteristics: toxicity,
corrosivity, flammability or reactivity.
   HEAVY MANUFACTURING: Those industrial activities involving the processing,
handling and manufacturing of products and research and technological processes
which are not compatible with uses allowed in other zones and largely
contribute to nuisance factors, such as noise, vibration, glare, heat, dust,
humidity, odor or any type of potential air or waste pollution and have a
potential to be hazardous beyond the site's property lines.
   HELICOPTER LANDING FACILITY (HELISTOP): Any landing area used for landing or
taking off of private helicopters for the purpose of picking up and discharging
of passengers or cargo. No fueling, refueling or service facilities are
permitted.
   HIGH AND MEDIUM BAY LABS: Any establishment, building or structure, or
portion thereof, used for the assembly, packaging, fabrication, testing and
processing of materials into large and bulky finished products, such as
spacecraft. The process may also include the research and development and
prototype production of a product. The interior of the building, or portion
thereof used for high and medium bay labs, shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20') in height as measured from the floor to the lowest projection. The number
of employees per square foot of net floor area shall not exceed one per one
thousand (1,000).
   HIGH OCCUPANCY VEHICLE (HOV): A bus pool, car pool or vanpool vehicle used
for employee commuting purposes.
   HIGH POINT OF NATURAL GRADE: Is the highest point of the natural grade
adjacent to the exterior walls of a building, planned or built, where it is
situated on a sloping lot.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT: Any geographically definable small or large area
containing buildings, structures, sites and objects linked historically through
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association.
The significance of a district is the product of the sense of time and place in
history that individual components collectively convey. This significance may
relate to developments during one period or through several periods in history.
   HISTORIC SITE: Any parcel or portion of real property which has special
character or special historical, cultural, architectural, archaeological,
community or aesthetic value.
   HOME OCCUPATION: The partial use of a dwelling unit for commercial or
nonresidential uses by a resident thereof which is subordinate and incidental
to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, in compliance with all of
the following conditions:
   A.   Not more than two hundred (200) square feet located in the dwelling
shall be devoted to the home occupation;
   B.   There shall be no display of inventory, supplies, materials or
merchandise on the premises;
   C.   No person shall be employed other than the immediate members of the
family who reside on the premises;
   D.   No signs in connection with the home occupation, lighted or unlighted,
shall be placed on the premises;
   E.   The home occupation shall not preempt the required off street parking
spaces;
   F.   The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic not normally
associated with residential uses;
   G.   No home occupation shall be permitted that creates noise, odor, dust,
vibration, fumes, smoke, electrical interference or other objectionable
conditions not normally associated with a residential occupancy; and
   H.   Notwithstanding the foregoing limitations on home occupations, until
December 31, 1972, home occupations shall also include home occupations
lawfully in existence on February 28, 1972, pursuant to definition of
"certificate of occupancy" of this section as the same read on February 28,
1972.
   HOME SHARING: Renting, for a period of 30 consecutive days or less, of one
or more bedrooms in a dwelling unit that is the primary residence of the host,
while the host lives on site, in the dwelling unit, throughout the transient
user’s stay.
   HOME SHARING UNIT: A dwelling unit that is made available for home sharing.
A home sharing unit has historically been, and continues to be, included in the
definition of “hotel” for purposes of Title 3, Chapter 4 of this Code.
   HOMELESS PERSON: Has the same definition set forth in 42 USC section 11302.
   HOSPITAL: An institution for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human
illness, which includes surgery, room, board and other services for the ill.
   HOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended or
designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or
which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. Said use may also contain
such ancillary facilities as conference facilities, personal services or food
preparation and dispensing. Said definition shall also apply to a bed and
breakfast operation.
   IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, place, fence, gate, landscaping, tree,
wall, parking facility, work of art, or other object constituting a physical
feature of real property, or any part of such feature.
   INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY/DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED; HABILITATIVE: A state
licensed facility that provides twenty four (24) hour personal care,
habilitation, developmental, and supportive health services to developmentally
disabled persons who have intermittent recurring needs for nursing services,
but have been certified by a physician and surgeon as not requiring
availability of continuous skilled nursing care.
   INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY/DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED; NURSING: A state
licensed facility that provides twenty four (24) hour personal care and nursing
supervision for developmentally disabled persons who have intermittent
recurring needs for skilled nursing care but have been certified by a physician
and surgeon as not requiring availability of continuous skilled nursing care.
The facility shall serve medically fragile persons who have developmental
disabilities or demonstrate significant developmental delay that may lead to a
developmental disability if not treated.
   INTERMODAL TRANSIT FACILITY: A facility which provides safe and convenient
automobile, bus, van, bicycle, and pedestrian access to a metro rail station by
providing, among other things, park and ride, kiss and ride, and van pool
facilities, motorcycle and bicycle parking, special bus loading areas, and
other passenger amenities such as transit information kiosks, telephones, and
bicycle racks.
   JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: See "Accessory Dwelling Unit, Junior."
   KENNEL: A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats or any combination
thereof, are kept, whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by persons
providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog or
cat is one of either sex, altered, or unaltered, that has reached the age of
four (4) months.
   KITCHEN: Any room or portion of a room within a building designated and/or
used or intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food, which may
also include a sink, refrigeration, a garbage disposal, and storage.
   LATTICE: A structure of interwoven, crossed strips arranged to form a
regular pattern of open spaces that is usually made of wood or metal.
   LIGHT ASSEMBLY AND PROCESSING: See definition of Light Industrial.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL: Light manufacturing, research and development, and office.
"Light manufacturing" is defined as the assembly, packaging, fabrication, and
processing of materials into finished products, rather than the conversion or
extraction of raw materials.
   LIVE/WORK: The partial use of a dwelling unit for the following commercial
uses: artists’ studios and workspace for artists and artisans, illustrators,
painters, sculptors, photographers, or other activities related to fine arts
(except musicians); and architectural, engineering, industrial design and
drafting and other construction design activities.
   LIVES ON-SITE: Maintains a physical presence in the dwelling unit including,
all of the following: the storing of one’s clothes and other personal effects,
sleeping overnight, preparing and eating meals, and engaging in other
activities of the type typically engaged in by a person residing in a dwelling
unit.
   LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more
than five (5) guestrooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or
without meals, for compensation for more than one week. Guestrooms numbering
six (6) or greater shall be considered a hotel.
   LOT: A single legally created parcel, tract or area of land, which abuts a
street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3739.png]
 
   LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3737.png]
 
   LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets,
where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one
hundred twenty eight degrees (128°).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3735.png]
 
   LOT COVERAGE:
   A.   A covered floor area included within and measured from the outside of
the exterior walls of a building, including, but not limited to, dwelling
units, lobby area, and elevators; and
   B.   An area not provided with surrounding exterior walls, if located under
a roof or other covering, including, but not limited to, areas covered by
stairways and walkways which provide ingress and egress. Private balconies and
decks (not providing required ingress and egress) that are five feet (5') or
less in width as measured from the exterior building wall shall not be included
in computing lot coverage. Any portion of private balconies and decks that
extends more than five feet (5') from the building wall shall be included in
lot coverage.
   C.   Uncovered decks and patios, which are thirty inches (30") or more in
height are also included in lot coverage.
   LOT DEPTH: The horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint
of the lot front line and at right angles to such line, connecting with a line
intersecting the midpoint of the lot rear line and parallel to the lot front
line. In the case of a lot having a curved front line, the lot front line, for
purposes of this section, shall be deemed to be a line tangent to the curve and
parallel to a straight line connecting the points of intersection of the lot
side lines of the lot with the lot front line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3733.png]
 
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3731.png]
 
   LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot
from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the lot front line shall be the
line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3729.png]
 
   LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. For the purpose of establishing the lot rear line of a triangular or
trapezoidal lot, or of a lot the rear line of which is formed by two (2) or
more lines, the following shall apply:
   A.   For a triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in length
within the lot and farthest removed from the lot front line and at right angles
to the line comprising the depth of the lot shall be used as the lot rear line;
   B.   In the case of a trapezoidal lot, the rear line of which is not
parallel to the lot front line, the lot rear line shall be deemed to be a line
at right angles to the line comprising the depth of the lot and drawn through a
point bisecting the recorded lot rear line; or,
   C.   In the case of a pentagonal lot, the rear boundary of which includes an
angle formed by two (2) lines, the angles shall be employed for determining the
lot rear line in the same manner as prescribed for a triangular lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3727.png]
 
   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line, a street side
lot line, or a rear lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3725.png]
 
   LOT LINE, STREET SIDE: The lot line which separates the lot from the street,
but is not the front lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3723.png]
 
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot in which the street side lot line is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which the
rear of the reversed corner lot abuts.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3721.png]
 
   LOT, THROUGH: A lot having street frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets. Such a lot shall be considered to have two (2)
front yards. The depth of each yard shall be based upon the zoning district in
which each front yard is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3719.png]
 
   LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles at the rear line of the required front yard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3717.png]
 
   LOW BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTERS: A housing-first, low-barrier, service-
enriched shelter focused on moving people into permanent housing that provides
temporary living facilities while case managers connect individuals
experiencing homelessness to income, public benefits, health services, shelter,
and housing. For purposes of this definition, "low barrier" means the best
practices to reduce barriers to entry, including, without limitation: allowing
pets, permitting partners to share living space, and providing storage for
residents' possessions. Low Barrier shelters are permitted in accordance with
Article
15-37A of this code.
   LOW POINT OF NATURAL GRADE: Is the lowest point of the natural grade
adjacent to the exterior walls of a building, planned or built, where it is
situated on a sloping lot.
   MANUFACTURING: The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging or testing of goods or equipment.
   MINI-MART: A commercial establishment which sells food and beverages and is
operated in conjunction with a service station.
   MOBILE HOME: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, greater than three
hundred twenty (320) square feet in gross floor area designed with attached
axles and wheels, which may be used for permanent or semipermanent housing or
human occupancy, and which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. The term
shall also include any vehicle meeting the above description which is used for
an office, a classroom, a laboratory, processing, manufacturing, retail sales
or other use.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land developed and operated as a unit with
individual sites and facilities to accommodate two (2) or more mobile homes.
   MOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended or
designated to be used, or which are used or rented or which are occupied for
sleeping purposes by guests. Said use shall not contain such ancillary
facilities for conferences, personal services, food preparation and dispensing.
   MOVIE AND ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: An outdoor or indoor area, building,
part of a building, structure, or defined area which is utilized primarily for
the public presentation of film, television, music video, multimedia, or other
related activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community Development
are similar when developed in combination with multimedia production
facilities.
Facilities may include as an accessory use retail sales, recreational
activities, ancillary offices, and other uses customary and necessary to a
movie and/or entertainment facility.
   MULTIMEDIA: A combination of film, television, music, music video, world
wide web, or other related activities that in the opinion of the Director of
Community Development are similar.
   MULTIMEDIA ARCHIVE FACILITIES: A building, part of a building, or structure,
which is utilized primarily for the storage of media related documents,
equipment, records and/or historical artifacts related to the entertainment
industry.
   MURAL: A sign consisting of a picture, painting, or other artwork applied to
and made integral with an exterior wall surface of a building, structure,
fence, or garden wall.
   MUSEUM: A land use involving the collection, documentation, preservation,
exhibition, interpretation and public display of objects of historical,
scientific, cultural, or artistic interest for the public benefit. A museum may
include ancillary offices, a library, multimedia presentation rooms and storage
rooms. Museums may also include accessory uses such as retail sales,
restaurants, cafes, recreational uses, and other ancillary uses customarily
associated with museums.
   OFFICE, MEDICAL-DENTAL: A building or group of buildings designed for the
use of, and occupied and used by, physicians, chiropractors, acupuncturists,
physical therapists, and dentists and others engaged professionally in such
healing arts for human beings as are recognized by the laws of the State,
including such accessory uses as the installation and use of therapeutic
equipment, X-ray equipment or laboratories, chemical, biochemical, and
biological laboratories used as direct accessories to the medical-dental
professions; dental laboratories including facilities for the making of
dentures on prescription; and pharmacies limited to the retail dispensing of
pharmaceuticals and sickroom supplies (but not room or orthopedic equipment);
provided there shall be no exterior display windows or signs pertaining to such
accessory uses other than a directory sign.
   OFFICES, GENERAL: Offices maintained and used as a place of business
conducted by persons whose business activity consists principally of services
to the person as distinguished from the handling of commodities. This does not
include medical-dental offices. General offices include, but are not limited
to, the following:
   A.   Administrative/Business: Establishments providing direct services to
consumers, such as credit, lending, and trust agencies, data processing
services, detective agencies, employment, insurance agencies, real estate
offices, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services, government
offices and educational institution offices, union offices and utility company
offices.
   B.   Broadcasting Offices And Studios: Commercial and public communications
uses, including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and
studios, with facilities entirely within buildings.
   C.   Production: Office type facilities occupied by businesses engaged in
the production of intellectual property. Production uses include computer
software production and programming services, media postproduction services,
graphic design, fashion, photography and commercial art studios, writers' and
artists' offices.
   D.   Professional: Professional offices include accounting; advertising
agencies; architectural, engineering, planning and surveying services;
attorneys; auditing and bookkeeping services; consulting; corporate; counseling
services; court reporting services; educational services; literary and talent
agencies; management and public relations services; scientific and research
organizations.
   OFFICES, MULTIMEDIA RELATED: A building, part of a building, structure, or
defined area which is utilized primarily for the office space directly related
to film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Any card, paper, cloth, metal, glass, wooden,
or other display or device of any kind or character whatsoever placed for
outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, rock,
structure, or thing whatsoever.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: A structure of any kind or character erected
or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor
advertising display may be placed.
   PARKING DEMAND STUDY: An analysis of the total number of parking spaces
required in order to accommodate the maximum number of vehicles for parking
purposes by a particular use or site at any given time. The analysis shall
consider parking required for all employees, occupants, clients, and visitors.
   PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   PERGOLA: A structure of parallel colonnades supporting an open roof of beams
and crossing rafters or trelliswork, over which climbing plants are trained to
grow.
   PICTURE EQUIPMENT SALES: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a
building, structure, or a defined area which is utilized primarily for the
sales, lease, storage and/or rental of equipment and materials utilized in
film, television, music video, multimedia, or other action activities that in
the opinion of the Director of Community Development are similar.
   PLAYHOUSE: A structure to be used, or intended to be used, by children for
play purposes.
   PORCH (Sometimes Referred To As A VERANDA): An exterior appendage to a
building forming a covered approach or vestibule to a doorway. The covering may
have a separate roof from the building, and may have railings and/or supporting
columns.
   PORTE-COCHERE: A porch roof projecting over a driveway at or adjacent to the
entrance to a building that shelters those getting in and out of vehicles.
   POSTPRODUCTION FACILITIES: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a
building, structure, or defined area, which is utilized primarily for support
activities necessary and incidental to the multimedia industry subsequent to
production actions.
   PREFERENTIAL PARKING: Parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of
a sign or painted space markings, for car pool and vanpool vehicles which are
provided at a reduced cost and/or are in locations considered to be the best or
most desirable, such as adjacent to a building entrance or within a covered or
shaded area, if such is not provided for single occupant vehicles.
   PRESERVATION: The identification, study, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, or acquisition of cultural resources.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE: A house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other
similar habitable dwelling.
   PROJECT COST: The total value of a project, excluding the land value, as
determined by the Building Official of the City, and indicated on the building
permit that is issued by the City for that project.
   PROPERTY OWNER: The person or persons shown as the record owner of the
property on the latest available assessment roll of the County of Los Angeles.
For the purposes of chapter 16 of this title, "property owner" shall mean the
legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant and/or agent.
The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of
chapter 16 of this title, either directly or by delegating such responsibility
as appropriate to a tenant and/or agent.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any exterior area on public or private property, which is
visible to the general public as described in section 15-34-15.
   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: Any action undertaken by the City or under contract to
the City to construct, alter, repair, or maintain any City structure, utility,
or right-of-way.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES:
   A.   Public: Public recreational facilities are facilities that are operated
by a government agency.
      1.   Indoor: Examples include, without limitation, indoor entertainment,
multipurpose recreational buildings, and studios for dance, art, music,
photography, and martial arts.
      2.   Outdoor: Examples include, without limitation, athletic fields,
ballparks and bleachers, basketball, racquetball, tennis, and volleyball
courts, golf courses, parks and other areas of active or passive recreational
usage, swimming pools, trails and bicycle trails.
   B.   Private/Commercial:
      1.   Indoor: Examples include, without limitation, arcades, billiard/pool
halls, bowling alleys, indoor entertainment, racquetball and tennis courts, and
skating rinks.
      2.   Outdoor: Examples include, without limitation, amusement centers
(arcades, skating rinks, miniature golf, and similar uses), golf courses,
miniature golf, racquetball and tennis courts.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit, other than a mobile home, whose
gross floor area is less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet, which is
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation use,
and which is either self- propelled, mounted on, or pulled by another vehicle.
Examples include, but are not limited to, a travel trailer, camping trailer,
truck camper, motor home, fifth wheel trailer, or van.
   RELOCATION: Any change of the location of a building or structure from its
present setting to another setting.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: A process of experimentation, whereby a physical
product, such as a biological, chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical and/
or optical component is designed, manufactured, tested, and refined. This
process does not include uses/activities that do not lead to the development of
a physical product, such as computer modeling, computer software development,
soils and other materials testing laboratories, or medical laboratories. This
process does not include the general or mass production of the product.
   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A residential care facility (State authorized,
certified or licensed) provides twenty-four (24) hour residential care for
children, elderly persons, people with physical or mental disabilities, or
incompetent persons in need of personal services, protection, supervision,
assistance, guidance, or training essential for sustaining the activities of
daily living or for the protection of the individual. This classification
includes, but is not limited to, intermediate care facilities, developmentally
disabled habilitative or nursing, congregate living health facilities, and
other facilities licensed by the State of California.
   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY FOR THE ELDERLY: Pursuant to California Health and
Safety Code § 1569.2, “resident care facility for the elderly” means a housing
arrangement chosen voluntarily by persons 60 years of age or over, or their
authorized representative, where varying levels and intensities of care and
supervision, protective supervision, personal care, or health-related services
are provided, based upon their varying needs, as determined in order to be
admitted and to remain in the facility.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any family home, group care facility, or similar
facility, licensed by the State, for twenty four (24) hour nonmedical care of
persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for
sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the
individual.
   REST HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME OR NURSING HOME: A facility serving seven (7)
or more persons in which nursing, dietary and/or other personal services are
furnished twenty four (24) hours a day to convalescents, invalids, and aged
persons, but in which are kept no persons suffering from a mental sickness,
disease, disorder, ailment, or from a contagious or communicable disease, and
in which are performed no surgery, maternity, or other primary treatments such
as are customarily provided in sanatoriums or hospitals, or in which no persons
are kept or served who normally would be admittable to a mental hospital.
   RESTAURANT: Any business establishment, building, or structure where food or
drink are prepared and served for consumption either on or off the premises,
which may also include as accessory uses, service to persons over an interior
counter, outside the structure, or from an outdoor service window. Any
restaurant with an automobile service window shall be considered a drive-
through restaurant.
   RESTAURANT, CAFE: An establishment that sells food or beverages for
consumption on or off the premises in conjunction with retail sales of other
goods. A cafe can only be located within a multiuse shopping center, office
development, or the commercial portion of a mixed use development in a multi-
tenant structure. Alternatively, a cafe can exist as an accessory use within a
primary permitted use. A cafe must comply with the following:
   A.   A cafe can only have a limited food and beverage menu. Food sold at
cafes must be generally received by customers in a prepackaged or precooked
state that requires little or no preparation. Limited means for heating food
(such as a microwave oven or toaster oven) are allowed;
   B.   Cafes cannot exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) gross square feet
(including the area for food consumption);
   C.   The interior area for food consumption in cafes must be a maximum of
four hundred (400) gross square feet of the floor area of the primary permitted
on site use;
   D.   Seating areas in cafes must be clearly separated from other portions of
the use as defined by fixed barriers such as full or partial walls, fencing,
planters, corridors, counters, or permanent display fixtures;
   E.   Not more than fifteen (15) seats are allowed within cafes;
   F.   Orders for food or beverages in cafes must be placed and picked up from
an interior counter only. No table service is provided;
   G.   No drive-through window or outdoor service window is allowed;
   H.   No alcoholic beverages can be served; and
   I.   A minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross floor area must be devoted
to the sale of nonfood products.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH: Any business establishment, building, or
structure where food or drink are prepared and served for consumption either on
or off the premises by order from or service to persons at an automobile
service window, and which may also include as accessory uses, service to
persons over an interior counter, outside the structure, or from an outdoor
service window.
   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: A restaurant where customers purchase food and
beverages and either consume the food and beverages on the premises within a
short period of time or take the food and beverages off the premises. Typical
characteristics of a fast food restaurant include, without limitation, the
purchase of food and beverages at a walk-up window or counter; no table service
by a server; payment for food and beverages before consumption; and the
packaging of food and beverages in disposable containers. A restaurant is not
to be considered a fast food or takeout restaurant solely on the basis of
incidental or occasional takeout sales.
   RESTAURANT, FOOD TO GO: A restaurant or other such establishment designed as
a takeout facility in which no food is consumed on the premises and no
provisions are made for that purpose. Provisions for deliveries, catering,
drive-through or walk-up facilities are permitted. Food to go uses must meet
the parking requirements for retail uses.
   RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE: A restaurant where customers purchase food and
beverages and consume the food and beverages on the premises. Typical
characteristics of a full service restaurant, include, without limitation,
table service by a server; payment for food and beverages after consumption;
and serving food and beverages in nondisposable containers. A full service
restaurant may include incidental or occasional takeout sales.
   RESTORATION: The act or process of accurately returning the form and details
of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time,
the removal of later work, or the replacement of missing earlier work.
   RIDESHARING: The cooperative effort of two (2) or more people traveling
together, usually to and from work. Car pools, vanpools, bus pools, and taxi
pools are all methods of ridesharing.
   ROOF: A structural covering over any portion of a building or structure
including the projections beyond the walls or supports of the building or
structure. An open work covering shall not be considered a roof if the upper
horizontal surface area of the component solid portions thereof do not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the area of the covering.
   ROTUNDA: A round, domed feature, building or portion thereof containing high
interior vertical space between the floor and ceiling above.
   SCHOOLS, ELEMENTARY, JUNIOR HIGH AND HIGH: Institutions of learning which
offer instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be
taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State.
   SCHOOLS, PRIVATE: Private schools are educational institutions that include,
without limitation, adult level, business, vocational, and trade schools;
boarding schools; colleges and universities; private preschools, elementary
schools, middle or junior high schools, and high schools; military academies;
professional schools (law, medicine, etc.), seminaries/religious ministry
training facilities. Private schools also include specialized nondegree
granting schools offering instruction in: art, ballet and other dance,
computers and electronics, cooking, drama, driver education, language, and
music.
   SEGMENTED GRADE PLANE: Is multiple horizontal grade planes adjacent to
different portions of the exterior walls of a single building. Segmented grade
planes are used for measuring the height of structures on sites with a
significant natural grade slope.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3743.png]
 
   SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING: A multiple-family development which is restricted to
individuals fifty five (55) years of age or older, and which provides common
facilities, including, but not limited to, kitchen, dining room, game playing
area, library, and restrooms.
   SERVICE STATION: An area which provides for the sale of gasoline, other
fuels and lubricants for motor vehicles, and the fueling of motor vehicles as
the primary use. Accessory services may also be provided, such as retail
minimarts, tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage and sale of
merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, motor
vehicle washing, grease racks, and other minor motor vehicle repairs, excluding
body and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work,
and other similar activities.
   SETBACK: The minimum required distance between the interior lot line or the
edge of public right-of-way and the building line.
   SHARED MOBILITY DEVICE (SMD): Any transportation device by which a person
can be propelled, moved or drawn, that is displayed, offered or placed for rent
in any Public Area, Public Right-of-Way, or Private Property. This includes
Shared Bicycles, Shared Electric Assist Bicycles (Shared E-Assist Bikes),
Shared Electric Scooters, and similar devices as determined by the City. This
definition excludes car share vehicles, taxicabs, and similar motor vehicles.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL: The rental of any portion of any structure for occupancy,
dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes for a period of 30 consecutive calendar
days or less.
   SIGN: Any structure, device, or material, temporary or permanent, fixed or
portable, moving or stationary, whether located inside or outside a building,
that is visible from any property where the primary purpose of the sign is to
convey visual communication. "Sign" does not include the following:
   A.   Interior signs that are located entirely within an enclosed structure
and not visible from the exterior;
   B.   Building features that are only decorative or architectural and do not
include trademarks. Such building features may include minimal lettering or
moving parts.
   C.   Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, without
limitation, religious or political symbols when they are permanently integrated
into the structure of a building;
   D.   Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance
including, without limitation, tattoos or makeup;
   E.   Marks on tangible products that identify the maker, seller, provider or
product, and that customarily remain attached to the product even after
completion of a sale;
   F.   Traffic, directional, emergency, warning or informational signs
required or authorized by a government agency having jurisdiction;
   G.   Public utility signs;
   H.   Advertisements or banners mounted on duly licensed mass transit
vehicles including, without limitation, buses and trains, that legally pass
through the City;
   I.   Insignia located on legal vehicles and watercraft including, without
limitation, license plates, registration insignia, noncommercial messages,
messages relating to the business for which the vehicle is an instrument or
tool, and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of vehicles
or watercraft;
   J.   Building marker signs; and
   K.   Newsracks and newsstands.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3741.png]
 
   SIGN, ABANDONED: Any sign which was lawfully erected, but whose use has
ceased or whose structure has been abandoned for a period of one year. A
lawfully erected sign structure for a vacant property or building which is
actively available for lease is not abandoned unless the Director of Communit y
Development determines the sign is a public nuisance, pursuant to section
15-18-8 of this title.
   SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign with action or motion, flashing, or color changes,
accomplished through manual, electronic, or other means, but not including,
wind actuated elements such as flags, banners, or specialty items, and public
service signs such as time and temperature units.
   SIGN, ANNOUNCEMENT: A temporary sign intended to direct attention to, or
advertise a future development, tenant, or business on a property.
   SIGN AREA: The face or display area of a sign, including its border only
when the border carries or displays part of the message or copy. Supports or
uprights on which such sign is placed are excluded from the sign area
calculation. For signs using individual channel letters, the sign area is
determined by not more than two (2) rectangles, of at least six inch (6")
width, drawn around the entire grouping of letters or words.
   SIGN, BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar flexible material
that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, State or Municipal flags, "POW/MIA" flags, or
the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered
banners.
   SIGN, BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source.
The light source may be fixed, rotate, or give the appearance of movement.
   SIGN, BILLBOARD: Any sign erected for the purpose of advertising a product,
event, business, person, or subject not located on the premises on which the
sign is located and containing a surface or display area of fifty (50) square
feet or more.
   SIGN, BUILDING: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted
to a freestanding sign.
   SIGN, BUILDING MARKER: Any sign indicating the name of a building and/or
date of construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of
bronze or other permanent material.
   SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door,
entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign, or part of a sign, that includes copy that
can be changed through manual or electronic means, regardless of method of
attachment or materials of construction.
   SIGN, COPY: That portion of a sign which contains the letters, words,
numbers, pictures, or logos that convey a message to the viewer.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign that guides or directs pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
   SIGN, DIRECTORY: A sign listing the tenants or occupants and their locations
throughout building or development.
   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS (EMCs): An outdoor sign that displays
words, symbols, figures, or images that can be electronically or mechanically
changed by remote or automated means.
   SIGN, FIN: A sign which is supported wholly by a one-story building of an
open air business or by poles placed in the ground or partly by such a pole or
poles and partly by a building or structure.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign that is part of a structure that is not attached
to a building but is supported from the ground by one or more poles or posts
with or without braces and is permanently mounted in a fixed location.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign with copy that identifies only the business
name, product, or service sold, and/or street address of the building upon
which it is placed.
   SIGN, INFORMATION: A sign that informs people of the purpose of an object or
gives them instruction on the use of something (an example is "air/water", the
location of restrooms or similar information) but does not contain advertising,
brand, trade, or center name information.
   SIGN, LIGHT EMITTING DIODE OR LED: A sign incorporating light emitting
diodes (LED) to display changeable copy. Signs that utilize LEDs for
decorative, artistic or accent purposes, or as the primary source of
illumination behind translucent elements are not included in this definition.
   SIGN, MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the
building and projecting over a public property.
   SIGN, MONUMENT OR GROUND: A sign with a solid base that is not attached to a
building, where the bottom of the sign is in contact with or close to the
ground.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A sign which complied with all applicable regulations
at the time it was installed, but which now is in conflict with the provisions
of this title.
   SIGN, POLE: A freestanding sign that is supported by a pole/post or poles/
posts.
   SIGN, POLITICAL: A temporary freestanding sign with noncommercial copy
erected for an upcoming election.
   SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or permanent
structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to,
signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or
T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-
way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day to day operations of the
business, or is a public transit vehicle designed to carry nineteen (19) or
more passengers.
   SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner
that its leading edge extends more than six inches (6") beyond the surface of
such building or wall. Marquee signs are included in this definition.
   SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof or
parapet of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending
vertically above the roof. Signs that are attached to or painted upon a
structure attached to the roof of a building are included in this definition.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign, banner, pendant, valance, or advertising display
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other
light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited
period of time only.
   SIGN, WALL: Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches (6") of a
wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits
of, an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such
wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
   SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign that is placed within three feet (3') of the inside
of a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior
of the window.
   SOFTSCAPE: Trees, shrubs, flowers, live horticulture plants, vines, ground
covers, grasses, shrubs, trees, and may include high quality artificial plants
and durable synthetic grass or artificial turf which are not made with heavy
metals or lead with completely pervious backing.
   SOLAR ACCESS: The access of a solar energy system to direct sunlight.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for
which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal,
mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A device or structural design feature, a substantial
purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or provide for
the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or
cooling, electricity generation, or water heating.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACTIVE: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is
to harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of energy or
transferring heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical,
electrical, or chemical means.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GRID-INTERTIE: A photovoltaic system that is connected
to an electric circuit served by an electric utility.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED: An Active Solar Energy System that is
structurally mounted to the ground and is not roof-mounted; may be of any size
(small-, medium- or large-scale).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE-SCALE: An Active Solar Energy System that
occupies more than 40,000 square feet of surface area (equivalent to a rated
nameplate capacity of about 250kW DC or greater).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, MEDIUM-SCALE: An Active Solar Energy System that
occupies more than 1,750 but less than 40,000 square feet of surface area
(equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about 10 - 250 kW DC).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF-GRID: A photovoltaic solar energy system in which
the circuits energized by the solar energy system are not electrically
connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric
utility.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PASSIVE: A solar energy system that captures solar
light or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring
the energy via a heat exchanger.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED: An Active Solar Energy System that is
structurally mounted to the roof of a building or structure; may be of any size
(small-, medium- or large-scale).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL-SCALE: An Active Solar Energy System that
occupies 1,750 square feet of surface area or less (equivalent to a rated
nameplate capacity of about 10 kW DC or less).
   SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM: An Active Solar Energy System that uses collectors to
convert the sun's rays into useful forms of energy for water heating, space
heating, or space cooling.
   SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD): The regional authority
appointed by the California State Legislature to meet Federal standards and
otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert
portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties).
   SPACE: The location of automobile parking spaces and other accessory uses
enumerated herein.
   SPECIAL EFFECTS STUDIOS: Space in an outdoor or indoor area, building, part
of a building, structure, or a defined area, which is utilized primarily for
the creation of special effects for film, television, music video, multimedia,
or other related activities.
   STOOP: A raised platform that is approached by steps at the entrance to a
building. A stoop may have a roof projecting out from the building wall over
the building entrance that does not have any columns supporting it.
   STORE FRONT: The facade or entryway of a retail store which faces the street
and is located on the ground floor or street level of a commercial building.
   STORY: That portion of building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above it; or, if there is no floor above,
then the space between such floor and the ceiling above. If the finished floor
level directly above a usable or unused underfloor space is more than six feet
(6') above "grade" as defined herein for more than fifty percent (50%) of the
total perimeter, or is more than twelve feet (12') above "grade" as defined
herein at any point, such usable or unused underfloor space shall be considered
a "story".
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3745.png]
 
   STORY, FIRST: The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a "story",
as defined herein. In a building having only one floor level, said floor level
shall be classified as the first story.
   STREET: Any thoroughfare or public way which exceeds twenty feet (20') in
width and which has been or may be dedicated or deeded to the public for public
use.
   STREET LINE: The boundary line between a street and the abutting property.
   STREET, SIDE: A street which is adjacent to a corner lot which extends in
the general direction of the line determining the depth of the lot.
   STROBE LIGHT: A lighting device that uses a flashtube for high speed
illumination.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists,
girders or rafters, or changes in the exterior dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed
together in some definite manner.
   STUDIO/SOUND STAGES AND SUPPORT FACILITIES: Space in an outdoor or indoor
area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area, which is
utilized primarily for the creation of film, television, music video,
multimedia, or other related activities.
   SUPPORTIVE HOUSING: Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is
occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite
service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing shall be
considered a residential use of property. Supportive housing can take the form
of single-family or multi-family units and shall be subject only to those
restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the
same zone.
   SYNTHETIC GRASS (Also Referred To As ARTIFICIAL TURF): A surface of
synthetic fibers made to look like natural grass.
   TARGET POPULATION: Persons with low incomes who have one or more
disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other
chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided
pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Welfare and
Institutions Code § 4500, et seq.) and may include, among other populations,
adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young
adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from
institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
   TENANT: The lessee or sublessee of a facility space within a development
project.
   THEATER: A place where plays, operas, motion pictures, or similar activities
sanctioned by law or custom are viewed by members of the public.
   THEATER AND PERFORMANCE SPACE: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of
a building, structure, or defined area, which is utilized primarily for
rehearsal or research and development related to the presentation of film,
television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities that in the
opinion of the Director of Community Development are similar. Such areas may or
may not be open to the general public.
   TOP OF BUILDING: Is the highest point of a pitched roof or the parapet on a
building.
   TOWER: A building or structure, usually round or square in plan and
characteristically taller than its diameter, forming a part of a larger
building and is often located at a corner of the building.
   TRANSIT: Transportation service operated by a public or private agency for
use by the general public that utilizes buses or railcars, following a fixed
route and schedule.
   TRANSIT SUPPORT FACILITIES: Facilities, including, but not limited to,
transit shelters, bus transfer centers, bus bays, park and ride lots, and/or
transit operating or fare subsidies to employees.
   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: Buildings configured as rental housing developments
but operated under program requirements that require the termination of
assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program
recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than
six (6) months from the beginning of the assistance. Transitional housing shall
be considered a residential use of property. Transitional housing can take the
form of single-family or multi-family units and shall be subject only to those
restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the
same zone.
   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM): The alteration of travel behavior
usually on the part of commuters through programs of incentives, services, and
policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as car
pooling and van pooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of
the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting
or compressed workweeks).
   TRELLIS (Also Referred To As A PERGOLA): A system of horizontal latticework
supported on posts, designed to support growing vines and plants, or to provide
partial shade for outdoor gathering/activity areas.
   TRIP REDUCTION: Reduction in the number of work related trips made by single
occupant vehicles.
   TURRET: A small, slender ornamental tower that begins above ground level
that usually projects from a corner of the building to which it is attached.
   UNDERGROUND PARKING FACILITIES: A basement equipped, designed, used, or
intended to be used, for parking automobiles.
   USE: The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building
is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be
occupied, including all accessory uses.
   VACANCY: A building or structure that is unoccupied by a use, business, or
individual, except that buildings which are actively available for lease or
occupancy, or are being remodeled, shall not be considered vacant.
   VANPOOL: A vehicle carrying seven (7) or more persons commuting together to
and from work on a regular basis, usually in a van or similar motor vehicle
with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult
passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. Vanpools can be formed using
private vans, company owned vans, or third party vans.
   VEHICLE: Any motorized form of transportation, including, but not limited
to, automobiles, vans, buses, and motorcycles.
   VEHICLE LIFT: A stationary mechanical device with four (4) permanently
anchored posts that vertically lifts a vehicle to allow the storage of a second
vehicle below and must be designed with an automatic locking mechanism for
safety.
   VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICES: The sales, rental, repair, alteration,
restoration, towing, painting, or finishing of automobiles, trucks,
recreational vehicles, boats, and other vehicles as a primary use, including
the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use.
This includes, without limitation, the following categories:
      Accessories Installation: Minor facilities that specialize in the
addition of supplemental convenience items or devices to vehicles that do not
involve the primary operating system of a vehicle (such as motors or
transmissions) or structural features (such as body, chassis, or suspension).
For example, these establishments provide installation of alarms, stereos, and
window tinting.
      Accessory Retail Sales And Services: Includes retail sales and services,
storage of tires, car parts and other automobile supplies, and limited
automobile sales. Automobile sales cannot exceed eight (8) automobiles per
month; not more than three (3) automobiles can be displayed at one time.
      Car Washes: Permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing
establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing
services.
      Impounding/Storage: Facilities that provide impounding and storage of
towed or impounded vehicles. Does not include towing (see definition of Vehicle
Sales And Services: Towing).
      Maintenance/Repair: The installation, replacement, tuning, or maintenance
of the various parts, equipment, or operating systems of a vehicle, which
includes body and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission
work, automobile painting, and car washing.
      Mobile Home And Recreational Vehicle Sales: Retail establishments selling
and/or renting the following new or used vehicles and products: boats, campers/
camper shells, golf carts, jet skis, mobile homes, motor homes, motorcycles,
snowmobiles, travel/recreational trailers, and other recreational vehicles.
      Service Stations: See definition of Service Station.
      Towing: Facilities that provide vehicle towing. Does not include storage
of towed or impounded vehicles (see definition of Vehicle Sales And Services:
Impounding/Storage).
      Vehicle Parts Sales: Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and
accessories. May also include minor parts installation. The term does not
include businesses dealing exclusively in used parts.
      Vehicle Sales/Rental: Retail establishments selling or renting
automobiles, trucks and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of
parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. The term does not
include the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership
(see definition of Vehicle Sales And Services: Vehicle Parts Sales); bicycle
and moped sales (see definition of Commercial: Retail Sales: General Retail
Stores); tire recapping establishments; or "service stations", which are
separately defined.
   VEHICULAR USE AREA: The paved area of a parcel used for parking spaces,
loading areas, driveways, and any other areas generally accessible by vehicles.
   VERANDA: A porch, usually roofed and partly enclosed by a railing, which
extends across the front and sides of a house.
   VISIBLE AND ACCESSIBLE: As pertaining to artworks, means freely accessible
to the public for viewing at least eight (8) hours each day of at least five
(5) days per week.
   WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION: A building or premises in which goods,
merchandise, or equipment are stored for eventual distribution.
   WASTE: The remains from either a manufacturing or assembly process, a
finished product or a product which is no longer useful in its present form and
may or may not be recycled for future use.
   WEB AUTHOR: An individual or group whose primary focus relates to the
preparation of or assistance in the preparation of world wide web (www) related
materials, including, but not limited to, www pages, advertisements,
connections, or other related activities that in the opinion of the director of
community development are similar.
   WORK: Any alteration, construction, demolition, relocation, or restoration
of a designated cultural resource.
   XERISCAPING (Often Incorrectly Spelled ZERO-SCAPING Or XEROSCAPING):
Landscaping and gardening that reduces or eliminates the need for supplemental
water from irrigation. It is promoted in regions that do not have easily
accessible, plentiful, or reliable supplies of fresh water, and is gaining
acceptance in other areas as access to water becomes more limited. Xeriscaping
may be an alternative to various types of traditional gardening.
   YARD: An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is
unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures except as
otherwise provided in this title.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3753.png]
 
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is that minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel thereto.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3751.png]
 
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line or mean high
tide water line and a line parallel thereto.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3749.png]
 
   YARD, REAR LINE OF REQUIRED FRONT YARD: A line parallel to the front lot
line and at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard,
extending across the full width of the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3747.png]
 
   YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear of the required front yard to the
front of the required rear yard, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; Ord. 1250, 4-2-1996; Ord.
1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997; Ord. 1276, 8-19-
1997; Ord. 1283, 11-18-1997; Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998; Ord. 1290, 12-15-1998; Ord.
1307, 4-20-1999; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; 2000 Code; Ord. 1365, 9-2-2003; Ord.
1381, 2-15-2005; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006; Ord. 1397, 8-15-2006; Ord. 1401, 10-3-
2006; Ord. 1405, 1-22-2007; Ord. 1425, 2-3-2009; Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; Ord.
1460, 4-19-2011; Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; Ord. 1483, 11-5-2013; Ord. 1496, 10-14-
2014; Ord. 1497, 10-21-2014; Ord. 1514, 12-1-2015; Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015; Ord.
1547, 2-21-2017; Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; Ord. 1559, 10-17-
2017; Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018; Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018; Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019; Ord.
1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1514, 7-21-2020; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1626, 6-1-
2021; Ord. 1639, 9-20- 2022; Ord. 1646, 3-7-2023; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; Ord.
1654, 12-19-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. PRC § 21000 et seq.
2 1. PRC § 30000 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15-2-1: Regulation Application
15-2-2: Limitation On Land Use; Prohibition
15-2-3: Exceptions To Building Height
15-2-4: Height Restrictions For Walls And Fences
15-2-5: Reserved
15-2-6: Corner And Alley Clearance
15-2-7: Encroachments
15-2-8: Screening
15-2-9: Public Facilities
15-2-10: Temporary Buildings
15-2-11: Driveway Visibility
15-2-12: Carnivals
15-2-13: Conditional Use Permits For Airports Or Heliport Landing Fields
15-2-14: Landscaping
15-2-15: Outdoor Dining Areas
15-2-1: REGULATION APPLICATION:
The following regulations shall pertain to the various zoning districts within
the City. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-2-2: LIMITATION ON LAND USE; PROHIBITION:
Except as provided in this title, it is unlawful to construct, reconstruct, or
structurally alter any building or use any real property for any purpose other
than is specifically permitted in the zone in which the building or land is
located. Using any building or real property for a purpose prohibited by
Federal law, State law, or this Code is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1401, 10-3-2006)
15-2-3: EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHT:
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, solar
panels and related equipment, or mechanical and similar equipment required to
operate and maintain a building, fire escapes, open-work guardrails, skylights,
clock towers, church steeples and other similar architectural elements,
flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, radio antennas, and other similar structures
may be erected above the height limits prescribed in this title. Light
standards or other light fixtures may be mounted on the roof of a parking
structure and must be designed to control glare. Non-permanent accessories,
such as furniture, barbeques, or umbrellas placed on a roof deck may be erected
up to a maximum eight feet (8') above the height limits prescribed in this
title. No such penthouse, structure or accessory is allowed for the purpose of
providing additional floor space. Any such structures in Residential Zones
shall be for noncommercial purposes only.
An increase in the maximum allowable building height, up to five feet (5'), may
be granted by the Director, subject to the approval of an adjustment pursuant
to chapter 24 of this title. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
15-2-4: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS FOR WALLS AND FENCES:
   A.   Residential zones. A wall or fence 42 inches in height may be located
on any part of a lot. On an interior or corner lot, a wall or fence up to six
feet in height may be located anywhere on the lot behind the required front
yard. On a reversed corner lot, a wall or fence up to six feet in height may be
maintained anywhere on the lot behind the required front yard except within the
required triangular open area at the rear constituting a part of the required
side yard of the street side. The provisions of sections
15-2-6 and
15-2-11 of this chapter shall apply to walls and fences adjacent to corners and
driveways.
      1.   Retaining Walls:
         a.   Where a retaining wall protects a cut slope below the natural
grade, as depicted in subsection 15-2-4A-4, the retaining wall may be topped by
a fence or wall of a height equal to that which would otherwise be permitted at
that location This does not apply to retaining walls which protect a fill
slope.
         b.   A retaining wall that protects a cut slope located in a required
front or streetside setback is limited to three feet in height.
         c.   Where a retaining wall contains a fill and is not located in any
required setback, as depicted in subsection 15-2-4A-4, the height of the wall
retaining the fill is considered as contributing to the permissible height of a
fence or wall. If required by the California Residential Code, an open work
fence or guardrail, not more than 42 inches in height, may be erected on top of
a retaining wall. An "open work fence" means a fence in which the component
solid portions are evenly distributed, vertically oriented, and constitute not
more than 25 percent of the total surface area of the fence.
         d.   A retaining wall located in any required setback, as depicted in
subsection 15-2-4A-4, may retain a maximum of three feet of fill. The height of
the retaining wall built to retain the fill is considered as contributing to
the permissible height of a fence or wall.
      In a required side or rear setback, if required by the California
Residential Code, an open work fence or guardrail, not more than 42 inches in
height, may be erected on top of a retaining wall. However, the maximum height
of the fence and/or wall including a required openwork fence or guardrail is
limited to six feet six inches.
      In a required front setback, a six-inch wall or fence may be erected on
top of a wall which retains a maximum of three feet. No open work fence, above
the maximum 42-inch total height, is allowed in the front setback.
      2.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to fences
required by State law to surround and enclose public utility installations or
to chainlink fences enclosing school grounds and public playgrounds.
      3.   Adjustments: A wall or fence up to eight feet in height may be
allowed in residential zones subject to the approval of an adjustment, pursuant
to chapters 22 and 23 of this title. A variance is required for a wall or fence
in a residential zone which exceeds eight feet in height.
      4.   Figures And Diagrams:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6624.png]
   B.   Non-residential zones. Open work fences up to eight feet in height may
be located on any part of a lot. Solid fences or walls up to six feet in height
may be located and maintained on any part of a lot behind the required front
and street side setbacks. Solid fences or walls up to 42 inches in height may
be located in a required front or street side setback.
      Required walls. When abutting properties with a different zoning
designation, a six-foot high masonry wall shall be provided along the common
property lines.
      1.    Retaining walls
         a.    Where a retaining wall protects a cut slope below the natural
grade, as depicted in subsection 15-2-4B-4, the retaining wall may be topped by
a fence or wall of a height equal to that which would otherwise be permitted at
that location. This does not apply to retaining walls which protect a fill
slope.
         b.   A retaining wall that protects a cut slope located in a required
front or streetside setback is limited to three feet in height.
         c.    Where a retaining wall contains a fill and is not located in any
required setback, as depicted in subsection 15-2-4B-4, the height of the wall
retaining the fill is considered as contributing to the permissible height of a
fence or wall. If required by the California Building Code, an open work fence
or guardrail, not more than 42 inches in height, may be erected on top of a
retaining wall. An "open work fence" means a fence in which the component solid
portions are evenly distributed, vertically oriented, and constitute not more
than 25 percent of the total surface area of the fence.
         d.    A retaining wall located in any required setback, as depicted in
subsection 15-2-4B-4, may retain a maximum of three feet of fill. The height of
the retaining wall built to retain the fill is considered as contributing to
the permissible height of a fence or wall.
      In a required side or rear setback, if required by the California
Building Code, an open work fence or guardrail, not more than 42 inches in
height, may be erected on top of a retaining wall. However, the maximum height
of the fence and/or wall including a required openwork fence or guardrail is
limited to eight feet.
      2.    Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to
fences required by state law to surround and enclose public utility
installations or to chainlink fences enclosing school grounds and public
playgrounds.
      3.    Adjustments: If there is a City-verified nuisance, criminal
activity, or extraordinary topographical circumstances, a wall or fence may
exceed the maximum permitted height by up to two feet subject to the approval
of an adjustment by the Director, pursuant to chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
A wall or fence may exceed the permitted height by more than two feet subject
to the approval of an adjustment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
chapters 22 and 28 of this title.
      4.    Figures And Diagrams:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6622.png]
   C.   Temporary Construction Fencing. Construction projects that are
accessible from a street right-of-way or an abutting property and which remain
in operation or expect to remain in operation for over 30 calendar days shall
provide temporary construction fencing, as defined in Section
15-1-6 (Fence, Temporary Construction) of this code. Unless required to protect
against a safety hazard, temporary construction fencing shall not be erected
sooner than 15 days prior to commencement of construction. Once erected,
temporary construction fencing shall be subject to the following standards and
conditions:
      1.   The temporary construction fencing shall surround all safety
hazards, as required by the building official, and shall prevent unauthorized
entry to the subject parcel;
      2.   The temporary construction fencing shall adequately screen outdoor
storage of construction equipment and materials as determined by the Director.
Chain linked fencing with a mesh screen in addition to the material identified
in ESMC Section
15-2-8 may be used as temporary construction fencing;
      3.   During construction, the subject temporary fencing shall be
maintained in a satisfactory condition as determined by the Director; and
      4.   Temporary construction fencing shall be maintained in a satisfactory
condition as determined by the Director, and shall be removed, unless such
removal would create a safety hazard, as determined by the director or the
city's building official, within 30 days of the following occurrences:
         a.    The expiration or withdrawal of the building/grading permit for
development of the fenced parcel; or
         b.    Issuance of the final building/grading permit approval or
certificate of occupancy for the development of the fenced parcel.
      5.   If temporary construction fencing is determined by the director or
the city's building official to be necessary to protect against a safety hazard
or attractive nuisance, the temporary fencing may be erected for a period of
180 days or for a longer period, as permitted by the building official until
the hazard or nuisance is abated, after which the property owner shall either
remove the temporary fencing or replace the temporary fencing with permanent
fencing.
(Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; amd. Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-2-5: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-2-6: CORNER AND ALLEY CLEARANCE:
For the purpose of safe visibility, all corner lots, and reversed corner lots
must maintain a triangular area, described as follows: one angle must be formed
by the front and side property lines, and the sides of this angle must be 15
feet in length, measured along the front and side property lines; the third
side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two (2) other
lines at their endpoints.
Lots located at the intersection of a public street and an alley must maintain
a triangular area, described as follows: one angle must be formed by the
property lines abutting the street and the alley, and the sides of this angle
must be five feet in length. The third side of this triangle must be a straight
line connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. Along alleys that are
more than 15 feet wide, this triangle must be located only on the lot to the
right of the alley as seen from a vehicle exiting the alley to enter the
adjacent street.
Within the area comprising these triangles, no trees, fences, shrubs, retaining
walls, buildings and structures, or other physical obstructions may exceed 30
inches in height from street grade, unless it is a tree which is trimmed to
provide a minimum of 12 feet (of visibility from street grade under the canopy
created by the branches.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3757.png]
 
(Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; amd. Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-2-7: ENCROACHMENTS:
Encroachments are subject to the following provisions in the indicated zones:
   A.   All Zones: Every required yard must be open and unobstructed from the
ground up, except the following intrusions may project two feet into required
yards, provided the required yard cannot be reduced to less than three feet in
width:
      1.   Bay and greenhouse windows, on the first floor in any setback and on
the second floor only in the front yard setback, provided that said window is
not wider than eight feet measured in the general direction of the wall of
which it is a part;
      2.   Cornices, corbels, columns, belt courses, sills, eaves or other
similar architectural building features as defined in section
15-1-6 of this title. Eaves may project six inches into any nonconforming side
or rear yard which is three feet in width;
      3.   Fireplace structures not wider than eight feet measured in the
general direction of the wall of which it is a part;
      4.   Planting boxes or masonry planters not exceeding 42 inches in
height;
      5.   Uncovered porches, platforms and landings which do not extend above
the floor level of the first floor. Ramps, stairs, and safety guardrails
leading to said porches, platforms and landings may encroach further into a
required setback but must maintain at least a three-foot distance to a property
line; and
      6.   "Architectural landscape features" as defined in section
15-1-6 of this title may encroach into setbacks as specified in section
15-2-14 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential Zones: In Residential Zoning Districts:
      1   A porte-cochere (open carport) may be placed over a driveway in the
front 20 feet of one side yard setback, outside of the front yard setback, or
attached to the front 20 feet of one dwelling unit closest to the front lot
line, provided the structure is not more than one story in height; is
unenclosed on three sides; and is entirely open except for the necessary
supporting columns and architectural features.
      2.   Mechanical equipment, such as pool heaters, water heaters, air
conditioners, and solar energy system appurtenances not wider than eight feet
measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part, and
adequately soundproofed, may project two feet into required side and rear
yards, provided the required yard cannot be reduced to less than three feet.
      3.   Detached arbors, pergolas, or trellises that partially cover a
walkway and do not exceed eight feet in overall height, six feet in width, and
five feet in length may have a zero setback in the front and street-side yards.
However, the structures must comply with the requirements of sections
15-2-6, "Corner And Alley Clearance", and
15-2-11, "Driveway Visibility", of this chapter.
      4.   Uncovered porches, platforms and landings which do not exceed 12
inches in height above finished grade may have a zero setback in non-street
fronting side and rear yards.
      5.   Built-in barbeques may have a zero setback in non-street fronting
side and rear yards provided that the structures:
         a.   Have no trellis or similar cover;
         b.   Are placed adjacent to an existing solid wall;
         c.   Do not exceed the maximum height of the adjacent solid wall, up
to a maximum of six feet;
         d.   Are less than 120 square feet in size;
         e.   Are located a minimum of three feet from an adjacent structure;
and
         f.   Are consistent with the California Fire Code.
   C.   Nonresidential Zones: In nonresidential zoning districts, mechanical
equipment and accessory structures that do not contain occupied space, as
defined by the California Building Code adopted by this Code, or that do not
contain net floor area, as defined in section
15-1-6 of this title, may be located within a required interior side or rear
setback area.
      1.   Mechanical equipment includes emergency generators; air conditioning
and heating units; transformers; solar energy system appurtenances; and other
equipment that is accessory to the principal permitted use. Mechanical
equipment does not include electrical substations.
      2.   Accessory structures include trash and recycling enclosures; ground-
mounted and covered parking solar energy systems; and structures that
exclusively house building operating equipment that is accessory to the
principal permitted use.
      3.   Mechanical equipment and non-occupied accessory structures within a
required setback are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The mechanical equipment or accessory structure may not be higher
than 18 feet.
         b.   The mechanical equipment or accessory structure may not be longer
than 60 feet parallel to the line of the property to which it is situated or
longer than 35 percent of the length of such property line to which it is
situated, whichever is less.
         c.   The mechanical equipment or accessory structure may not be
located within a required interior side or rear setback area if the interior
side or rear property line abuts a residentially zoned property or abuts a
public street.
         d.   Operation of the mechanical equipment must not exceed the noise
standards for commercial and industrial property as identified in this Code.
         e.   The mechanical equipment or accessory structure must be set back
from any interior side or rear property line to meet all access, safety, and
screening requirements as specified in title 13 of this Code and this title,
including, but not limited to, adequate ingress and egress for public safety
employees.
   D.   Urban Mixed Use North (MU-N), Urban Mixed Use South (MU-S), Corporate
Office (CO) And Light Industrial (M-1) Zones: In addition to the encroachments
permitted in nonresidential zoning districts generally, patios, decks, and
similar outdoor areas used as gathering spaces; and outdoor dining areas, may
be located within setback areas as follows:
      1.   Stairs, pedestrian ramps, and related safety guardrails must
maintain at least a three-foot distance to a lot line.
      2.   Patios, decks, and similar outdoor areas used as gathering spaces,
and outdoor dining areas must be enclosed by walls, fences, and/or hedges.
These may be up to 42 inches in height and maintain at least a five-foot
distance to a property line. Walls, fences, and/or hedges may exceed 42 inches
in height, provided that the portion exceeding 42 inches in height is of a
transparent or translucent material, subject to the review and approval of the
Director. These areas may be covered by a nonsolid trellis or pergola; or by a
retractable awning, large umbrella or other similar nonpermanent cover which
provides protection from rain, subject to the approval by the Director. (Ord.
1588, 9-3-2019; amd. Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-2-8: SCREENING:
Equipment must be screened in the following manner:
   A.   Electrical Lines; Cables: All electrical, telephone, cable television
and similar service wires and cables which provide direct service to the
property being developed, within the exterior boundary lines of such property,
must be installed underground. Risers on poles and buildings are permitted and
must be provided by the developer or owner onto the pole which provides service
to said property. Utility service poles may be placed on the rear of the
property to be developed only for the purpose of terminating underground
facilities. The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the
requirements of this section and must make the necessary arrangements with the
utility companies for the installation of such facilities.
   B.   Equipment; Appurtenances: Equipment and appurtenances such as, but not
limited to, surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and
meter cabinets, sprinkler manifolds and concealed ducts in an underground
system may be placed above ground, provided that they are located in a fully
enclosed structure or are screened from public view to the satisfaction of the
Director. Screening must sufficiently obstruct view of said equipment from
public rights-of-way surrounding the equipment location. Screening material may
include masonry, metal, wood, vinyl or similar durable material. Screening may
be up to 30 percent open on the vertical surface, for example, perforated,
lattice, louvered, and stacked. Chain link fencing may not be used for
screening equipment. All vent pipes and similar devices which are attached to a
building must be painted to match the building.
   C.   Rooftop Installation: Mechanical equipment installed on rooftops must
be screened from public view to the satisfaction of the Director. Screening
must sufficiently obstruct the view of said equipment from public rights-of-way
surrounding the equipment location. Screening material may include masonry,
metal, wood, vinyl or similar durable material. Screening material and colors
must be compatible with the building on which the equipment is located.
Screening may be up to 30 percent open on the vertical surface, for example,
perforated, lattice, louvered, and stacked. Chain link fencing may not be used
for screening equipment.
   D.   Storage Areas: All outdoor storage areas, including those for cartons,
containers and trash, must be screened from public view to the satisfaction of
the Director. Screening must sufficiently obstruct view of said equipment from
public rights-of-way surrounding the storage area location. Screening material
may include masonry, metal, wood, vinyl or similar durable material. Chain link
fencing may not be used for screening of storage areas.
   E.   Solar energy systems: All solar energy system appurtenances including,
but not limited to, electrical conduit, junction boxes, water tanks, supports,
and plumbing shall be screened to the maximum extent possible without
compromising the effectiveness of the solar collectors, and shall be painted a
color similar to the color of the surface upon which they are mounted. Solar
collectors (modules, inverters and rails) are exempt from the screening and
color provisions of this subsection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6626.png]
 
(Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; amd. Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-2-9: PUBLIC FACILITIES:
The provisions of this title shall not be construed to limit or interfere with
the installation, maintenance and operation of public utility pipelines and
electric or telephone transmission lines or railroads when installed in
compliance with
title 11, chapter 3 of this Code and when located in accordance with the
applicable rules and regulations of the Public Utility Commission of the State
within rights-of-way, easements, franchises, or ownership of the public
utilities; nor shall they, except as provided in
title 11, chapter 3 of this Code, restrict the right of a public utility to
increase the capacity of facilities necessary to and used directly for the
delivery of or distribution of service. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-2-10: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Temporary buildings are prohibited except for the following:
   A.   Temporary Real Estate Offices: One (1) temporary real estate office or
construction trailer/mobile home may be located on any new subdivision or
development site in any zone. The Director of Community Development shall be
responsible for reviewing and approving said offices or trailer/mobile home,
subject to any terms, conditions or special limitations deemed necessary.
   B.   Temporary Construction Buildings: Temporary structures, such as mobile
homes or trailers for the housing of tools and equipment or containing
supervisory offices in connection with a valid building or other permit issued
by the Community Development Department, may be established and maintained as
long as the permit is valid, and shall be removed within sixty (60) days after
completion, or sixty (60) days after cessation of work.
   C.   Other Temporary Structures: Other temporary structures are permitted
only in nonresidential zones, pursuant to section
13-1-2 (appendix chapter 31, division II) of this Code. Temporary structures
installed or constructed for a period of three (3) months or more must be
screened from the public view when required by, and in a manner subject to the
approval of, the Director of Community Development. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-2-11: DRIVEWAY VISIBILITY:
   A.   Triangle Area Required: To provide visibility for pedestrians and
drivers, a visibility triangle must be formed along each side of the driveway
located on the subject property. Within this area fences, walls, and
landscaping must not be allowed to exceed thirty inches (30") in height from
street grade, unless it is a tree which is trimmed to provide a minimum of
twelve feet (12') of visibility from street grade under the canopy created by
the branches.
   B.   Location And Description: The triangular area must be located adjacent
to, but outside the driveway area, and must be described as follows: one (1)
angle must be formed by the intersection of the driveway and the property line
abutting the street, the sides of which must be ten feet (10') in length. The
third side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two (2)
other lines at their endpoints, see section
15-2-6, figure 1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-2-12: CARNIVALS 1 :
   A.   Time Limit; Permit Required: Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this title, carnivals sponsored by local nonprofit organizations shall be
permitted on any property within the City zoned for uses other than
residential, as an incidental or accessory use; provided, that such use does
not exceed seven (7) calendar days, including erection and dismantling, in any
one (1) calendar year; that the applicant applies for and receives a permit
from the City Council to operate such carnival, and complies with all of the
conditions imposed upon the issuance of said permits.
   B.   Operation Restrictions: The City Council shall not approve any such
permit unless it finds that the operation will be conducted in the manner
required by the permit and will not adversely affect the public peace, health,
and safety of persons or property in the vicinity of the property on which the
proposed carnival is to be located. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 4-2-9B of this Code.
15-2-13: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS FOR AIRPORTS OR HELIPORT LANDING FIELDS:
   A.    Exception: The provisions of this section shall apply to all
conditional use permits issued for helicopter landing facilities, with the
following exception: Emergency, medical, police, fire and other public and
private use of helicopter landing facilities with substantial public health and
safety benefits shall be permitted within the City.
   B.   Evidence Required: Conditional use permits for helicopter landing
facilities may be issued after satisfactory evidence has been presented to the
Planning Commission demonstrating that:
      1.   The use of the helicopter landing facility shall not significantly
increase community exposure to adverse health, safety, noise or nuisance
impacts;
      2.   The use of the helicopter landing facility shall be accessory and
incidental to the primary use of property;
      3.   The use of the helicopter landing facility for regularly scheduled
commercial flight operations such as, but not limited to, bank operations and
commuter passenger service operations, shall be prohibited;
      4.   The helicopter landing facility shall not be established within two
thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of an existing permitted facility; and
      5.   The helicopter landing facility shall not be established in the area
west of Sepulveda Boulevard and north of El Segundo Boulevard in the City.
   C.   Conditions: Conditional use permits issued for helicopter landing
facilities shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Flight operations of all helistops shall take place only during the
hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through
Friday, except that operation may be permitted until nine o’clock (9:00) P.M.,
if necessary to accommodate a business emergency. If an operation is conducted
between seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. and nine o’clock (9:00) P.M. Monday through
Friday, for a business emergency, the permittee shall notify the Community
Development Department on the next business day of the circumstances justifying
that operation. Flight operations will not be allowed on New Year’s Day,
Memorial Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas Day.
      2.   The intermittent use of helicopters for maintenance, construction,
moving of equipment and other spot usage on Saturdays and Sundays and outside
of specified operating hours may be allowed subject to prior reasonable
notification and approval by the City.
      3.   Each operator of a helicopter landing facility shall provide to City
and keep current:
         a.   The name and phone number of a contact person available twenty
four (24) hours per day;
         b.   A list of helicopters using the facility, together with their
corresponding identification numbers; and
         c.   The noise and performance specifications of said helicopter.
      4.   A “Fly Neighborly Program” shall be filed with the City prior to the
commencement of operations and approved by the Director of Community
Development and the City’s Noise Abatement Officer. The program shall emphasize
noise abatement and community awareness through actions in at least the
following areas:
         a.   Pilot awareness and sensitivity to community concerns;
         b.   Pilot training and flight operation planning; and
         c.   Public information.
      5.   All helicopters using the landing facility shall have large size
identification (“N”) numbers, a minimum of twelve inches (12") in size on the
bottom of the craft, except for helicopters which use the landing facility less
than five percent (5%) of total operations of the facility per month.
      6.   All helicopters using the landing facility shall be equipped with a
Mode A/3 transponder with Mode C altitude reporting capabilities.
      7.   Helicopter landing facility owners and operators shall enter into an
indemnification agreement with the City and shall provide adequate proof of
liability insurance to the approval and satisfaction of the City Attorney.
      8.   All CUPs for helicopter landing facilities may be reviewed by the
Planning Commission every two (2) years. A monitoring report shall be prepared
by the applicant and submitted to the Community Development Department upon
request of the City. Such report shall consist of data on the types of
helicopters using a facility, hours of operation, performance standards, number
of monthly flights, and all other relevant data as determined by the City.
      9.   Any other conditions reasonably related to the operation of the
helicopter landing facility. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000;
Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-2-14: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Requirement; Purpose: The goal of this section is to ensure that
adequate landscape areas and permanent water efficient irrigation systems are
provided for all nonresidential development. The area extending between a
building and property lines must contain both softscape and hardscape landscape
materials, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking and loading.
All softscape area provided for each project site in nonresidential zoning
districts must be natural plant material, preferably native to the area and not
include artificial turf or synthetic grass except as otherwise provided in this
title. All nonresidential landscape projects must comply with chapter 15A of
this title relating to water conservation in landscaping.
   B.   Components: To achieve these purposes, the landscape criteria is
divided into the following components:
      1.   Vehicular Use Areas: All surface vehicular use areas (VUA) shall
provide landscape areas including shade trees and permanent irrigation systems,
to cover five percent of the VUA. Landscaping shall be distributed uniformly
throughout the VUA, and shall be in addition to the required property perimeter
and building perimeter landscaping. There shall be one tree for every 3,000
square feet of VUA. These trees shall be evenly distributed throughout the
automobile parking area to provide shade and provided around the perimeter of
truck loading/waiting areas to provide screening. Individual tree and planter
areas shall not be less than three feet in width, excluding curbs.
      2.   Building Perimeter: In those instances where setbacks are provided,
all buildings, including parking structures, shall have landscape areas and
permanent irrigation systems around their perimeter. A minimum horizontal depth
of five feet of landscape materials, excluding curbs, shall be provided around
the buildings, except additions to buildings in the rear one-third of a lot,
which do not abut residential property, where landscaping would not be visible
from the public right-of-way need not provide building perimeter landscaping in
the rear. A combination of soft and hard landscape materials may be installed,
provided the use of such materials form a cohesive, attractive and functional
design.
      3.   Property Perimeter: All required setback areas must be landscaped as
required by chapter 15A of this title. In addition, the landscaping must
incorporate the theme utilized for the public rights-of-way and one shade tree
must be provided for every 25 feet of street frontage. The following
encroachments are permitted into the landscaped setback areas:
         a.   Parking spaces, including spaces for automobiles, bicycles, and
shared mobility devices, may encroach into a required street-facing setback up
to a maximum of 50 percent of the required setback area, provided a minimum
landscaped setback of five feet is maintained. These spaces may encroach into a
required interior side and rear setback up to the interior side or rear
property line, provided that the interior side and rear property line does not
abut a public or private street.
         b.   "Architectural landscape features", as defined in section
15-1-6 of this title, may encroach into the landscaped setback area up to a
maximum of 80 percent of the required setback distance, provided a minimum
landscaped setback of five feet is maintained. The features may cover a maximum
of 25 percent of the total setback area, and be a maximum of 20 feet in height.
Encroachments which exceed any of these standards, or which contain an open
roof covering or side walls with greater than 20 percent component solid
portions, requires the approval of an adjustment, as provided in chapter 22 of
this title.
      A combination of soft and hard landscape materials may be installed,
provided the use of such materials will form a cohesive, attractive and
functional design. Such design is to be integrated with and, if appropriate,
physically connected to that provided for the building and VUA areas.
      4.    Minimum sizes for plant material:
         a.    The minimum tree container size for all trees on a site must be
provided as follows:
         (1)   At least 20 percent of the trees must be 36-inch box size or
larger.
         (2)   At least 30 percent of the trees must be 24-inch box size or
larger.
         (3)   The remaining 50 percent must be 15 gallon size or larger.
         (4)   The Director may approve smaller tree container sizes than
required based on site conditions, however no tree may be smaller than a 15
gallon size.
         b.   Shrubs must be planted from a minimum five gallon size container.
One gallon size containers may be allowed for shrubs that are not commonly
available in five gallon size containers, subject to approval by the Director.
(Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996; amd. Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015; Ord.
1551, 8-15-2017; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9- 20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-
2023)
15-2-15: OUTDOOR DINING AREAS:
All outdoor dining facilities on private property must comply with the
following:
   A.   Walkway Width: Any surfaced pedestrian walkway on private property
abutting an outdoor dining area must maintain a minimum width of forty eight
inches (48"), as set forth in section 3325 of title 24 of the California
Administrative Code.
   B.   Blocking Ingress Or Egress: No placement of tables, chairs, umbrellas,
etc., for outdoor dining shall be allowed in areas required for ingress and
egress by the Uniform Building Code (UBC).
   C.   Overhead Elements: All overhead elements of the outdoor dining area,
such as umbrellas, shall provide a minimum vertical height clearance of eight
feet (8'), as set forth in section 3206.4 of the 1997 Uniform Building Code. No
horizontal part of the overhead elements may protrude beyond the outdoor dining
area.
   D.   Outdoor Dining Area: The outdoor dining area shall be kept clean and
free of trash, etc., at all times, pursuant to title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
   E.   Tables And Chairs:
      1.   Maintenance: All tables, chairs, and any other facilities in the
outdoor dining area must be maintained in good repair, subject to the approval
of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, pursuant to
title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
      2.   Closing Hours; Placement Inside: All tables, chairs, and umbrellas
must be placed in a secure area or inside a building or structure when the
business is closed.
   F.   Alcoholic Beverages: Any sales or services of alcoholic beverages in
the outdoor dining area requires prior approval and a license issued by the
city pursuant to chapter 22 of this title, and the State Department of Alcohol
Beverage Control (ABC).
   G.   Entertainment Or Dancing: No entertainment or dancing is permitted in
the outdoor dining area without prior approval from the Chief Financial Officer
and the Director of Community Development, pursuant to title 4, chapter 8 of
this Code.
   H.   Amplified Sound: No amplified sound is permitted in the outdoor dining
area without prior approval of the Director of Community Development, pursuant
to title 7, chapter 2 of this Code.
   I.   Public Property: All outdoor dining facilities on public property shall
comply with all the requirements of title 9 of this Code, as well as any
applicable policies of the City. (Ord. 1279, 10-7-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-
2000; 2000 Code; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-
2023)
CHAPTER 3
ZONES AND USES
SECTION:
15-3-1: Designation Of Zone Names
15-3-2: Specific Plan Zones
15-3-3: Zoning Map
15-3-4: Boundaries; Changes; Uncertainty
15-3-1: DESIGNATION OF ZONE NAMES:
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of lands and
buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings, to
regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and to
regulate the density of population, the classes of use zones are by this title
established, to be known as follows:
R-1  Single-Family Residential Zone
R-2  Two-Family Residential Zone
R-3  Multi-Family Residential Zone
C-2  Neighborhood Commercial Zone
C-3  General Commercial Zone
CO   Corporate Office Zone
MU-N Urban Mixed Use North Zone
MU-S Urban Mixed Use South Zone
C-4  Commercial Center Zone
M-1  Light Industrial Zone
M-2  Heavy Industrial Zone
MDR  Medium Density Residential Overlay Zone
MMO  Multimedia Overlay District
MU-O Mixed-Use Overlay
H-O  Housing Overlay
O-S  Open Space Zone
P    Automobile Parking Zone
P-F  Public Facilities Zone
 
(Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1580, 2-5-2019; Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024; Ord.
1661, 5-21-2024)
15-3-2: SPECIFIC PLAN ZONES:
   A.   In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of
lands and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings,
to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings and to
regulate the density of population, the City has adopted the following specific
plan areas which function as the Zoning Code for specific areas:
      1.   Smoky Hollow Specific Plan: There are four (4) classes of use zones
intended to be used within the boundaries of the Smoky Hollow specific plan.
These zones include:
         SH-W - Smoky Hollow West Zoning District
         SH-E - Smoky Hollow East Zoning District
         P-F - Public Facilities Zoning District
         P - Automobile Parking Zoning District
      2.   124th Street Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be used
within the boundaries of the 124th Street specific plan. This zone is:
         124th Street SP - 124th Street Specific Plan
      3.   Aviation Specific Plan: There is one use zone intended to be used
within the boundaries of the aviation specific plan. This zone is:
         ASP - Aviation Specific Plan Zone
      4.   Downtown Specific Plan: There are four (4) classes of use districts
intended to be used within the boundaries of the downtown specific plan. These
districts include:
         MSD - Main Street District
         RSD - Richmond Street District
         GAD - Grand Avenue District
         CCD - Civic Center District
      5.   Corporate Campus Specific Plan: There is one use zone intended to be
used within the boundaries of the corporate campus specific plan. This zone is:
         CCSP - Corporate Campus Specific Plan Zone
      6.   199 North Continental Boulevard Specific Plan: There is one zone
intended to be used within the boundaries of the 199 North Continental
Boulevard specific plan. This zone is:
         NCBSP - 199 North Continental Boulevard Specific Plan
      7.   540 East Imperial Avenue Specific Plan: There is one zone intended
to be used within the boundaries of the 540 East Imperial Avenue specific plan.
The zone is:
         EIASP - East Imperial Avenue Specific Plan
      8.   222 Kansas Street Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be
used within the boundaries of the 222 Kansas Street specific plan:
         222 KSSP - 222 Kansas Street Specific Plan
      9.   888 North Sepulveda Boulevard Specific Plan: There is one zone
intended to be used within the boundaries of the 888 North Sepulveda Boulevard
specific plan. The zone is:
         888 NSBSP - 888 North Sepulveda Boulevard Specific Plan
      10.   El Segundo South Campus Specific Plan: There is one zone intended
to be used within the boundaries of the El Segundo south campus specific plan.
The zone is:
         ESSCSP - El Segundo South Campus Specific Plan
      11.   The Lakes Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be used
within the boundaries of the Lake Specific Plan. The zone is:
         TLSP - The Lakes Specific Plan
      Further, the Lakes Specific Plan area is comprised of two subareas
identified as PR/OS (Public Recreation/Open Space) and CR/OS (Commercial
Recreation/Open Space).
      12.   Pacific Coast Commons Specific Plan (PCCSP): There are five classes
of use districts intended to be used within the boundaries of the Pacific Coast
Commons Specific Plan. These districts are:
         PCC Mixed-Use-1 (PCC MU-1)
         PCC Commercial-1 (PCC COM-1)
         PCC Commercial-2 (PCC COM-2)
         PCC Commercial-3 (PCC COM-3)
         PCC Mixed-Use-2 (PCC MU-2)
   B.   The foregoing zones are separate zones and cannot be deemed to be more
restrictive or less restrictive than any other zone, but are limited to the
uses permitted in the specified zone. (Ord. 1387, 11-15-2005; amd. Ord. 1441,
4-20-2010; Ord. 1469, 4-3-2012; Ord. 1470, 9-4-2012; Ord. 1494, 4-15-2014; Ord.
1516, 1-19-2016; Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018; Ord. 1592, 11-5-2019; Ord. 1635, 4-19-
2022; Ord. 1661, 5-21-2024)
15-3-3: ZONING MAP:
   A.   Boundaries: The location and boundaries of the various zones are such
as are shown and delineated on the zoning map of the City, which map is a part
of this title when adopted by ordinance passed by the City Council in the
manner prescribed by law.
   B.   Division: The zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts
and each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within
the zoning map, be subdivided into units and the parts and units may be
separately employed for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official
reference to the zoning map. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-3-4: BOUNDARIES; CHANGES; UNCERTAINTY:
   A.   Changes By Ordinance: Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be
made by ordinance adopting an amended zoning map, part of the map or unit of a
part of the zoning map, which amended maps or parts or units of parts, when so
adopted, shall be published in the manner prescribed by law and become a part
of this title.
   B.   Rules Where Uncertainty Exists: Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of any zone shown upon a zoning map or any part or unit thereof, the
following rules shall apply:
      1.   Where the boundaries are indicated as approximately following street
and alley lines or lot lines, the lines shall be construed to be the
boundaries;
      2.   In the case of unsubdivided property and where a zone boundary
divides a lot, the location of the boundaries, unless the same are indicated by
dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning
map;
      3.   Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned,
the area comprising the vacated street or alley shall acquire the
classification of the property to which it reverts; and
      4.   Areas of dedicated streets or alleys and railroad rights-of- way,
other than such as are designated on the zoning map as being classified in one
of the zones provided in this title, shall be deemed to be unclassified and, in
the case of streets, permitted to be used only for purposes lawfully allowed
and, in the case of railroad rights-of-way, permitted to be used solely for the
purpose of accommodating tracks, signals, other operative devices and the
movement of rolling stock. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION:
15-4A-1: Permitted Uses
15-4A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Table No. 1 below contains the uses permitted in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones,
including uses permitted by right, accessory uses, and uses subject to a
conditional use permit.
Table No. 1 - Permitted uses in residential zones
Uses Zones
     R-1 R-2 R-3
Table No. 1 - Permitted uses in residential zones
Uses                               Zones
                                   R-1            R-2            R-3
Residential uses/Hospitality
Accessory dwelling units, per ESMC A              A              A
Article 15-4E
Condominiums and stock
cooperatives converted from
multiple-family dwellings subject                                P
to the requirements of the
Subdivision Map Act
Employee housing serving six or    P
fewer persons
Employee housing serving seven or  CUP
more persons
Lodging houses                                                   P
Micro-unit developments 3                                        P
Mobile home parks, subject to
Building and California Health and CUP            CUP            CUP
Safety Code regulations
Mobile or manufactured homes       P              P              P
Multiple-family dwellings                                        P
Renting of up to two rooms to not
more than four persons per         P              P              P
dwelling unit
Short-term rentals, per ESMC       P              P              P
Chapter 4-16 2
Single-family dwellings            P              P              P
Two-family dwellings, duplexes, or                P              P
two one-family dwellings
Group care uses
Daycare centers                                                  P
Family care home, foster family
home, or group home serving six or P              P              P
fewer children (State authorized,
certified or licensed)
Large family daycare homes         P              P              P
Residential serving six (6) or
fewer persons (State authorized,   CUP            CUP            CUP
certified or licensed)
Residential care facility serving
seven (7) or more persons (state   CUP            CUP            CUP
authorized, certified or licensed)
Senior citizen housing subject to
California Government Code                                       P
sections 65913, 65914 and 65915
Senior housing facilities,
including, but not limited to,                                   P
rest homes, convalescent homes, or
nursing homes
Small family daycare homes         P              P              P
Transitional or Supportive Housing P              P              P
Non-residential uses
Assembly halls                                    CUP            CUP
Home occupations                   P              P              P
Private schools                                   CUP            CUP
Miscellaneous uses
Animals and pets per ESMC Chapter  P              P              P
6-2
Beekeeping per ESMC Chapter 6-2    A
Detached accessory buildings and
structures, including private      A              A              A
garages
Play structures                    A              A              A
Public parking areas abutting lots                               CUP
zoned commercial or industrial
Public parks, playgrounds, and
recreational areas, except
ballparks, bleachers, swimming     P              P              P
pools or similar facilities for
competitive sports or for use/
hiring of public amusement devices
Roof-mounted and small-scale
ground-mounted solar energy        A              A              A
systems
Any use customarily incidental to  A              A              A
a permitted use
Other similar uses approved by the A, P, AUP, CUP A, P, AUP, CUP A, P, AUP, CUP
Director, per ESMC Chapter 15-22
 
Notes:
   1.   P = Permitted use, A = Accessory use, AUP = Use subject to an
administrative use permit (Per ESMC Chapters 15-22 and 15-23), CUP = Use
subject to a conditional use permit (per ESMC Chapters 24 and 28), N =
prohibited
   2.   A short-term rental unit is not a permitted use in the absence of a
valid short-term rental permit per ESMC Chapter 4-16
   3.   Subject to the provisions of ESMC Chapter 15-13C (Micro-units)
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1653, 12-5-2023; Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
ARTICLE B. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) ZONE
SECTION:
15-4B-1: Purpose
15-4B-2: Permitted Uses
15-4B-3: Site Development Standards For Lots Wider Than Twenty-Five Feet
15-4B-3-1: Site Development Standards For Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide Or Less
15-4B-4: Landscaping (All Lots)
15-4B-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces (All Lots)
15-4B-6: Signs (All Lots)
15-4B-7: Vehicular Access (All Lots)
15-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Single-Family on the General
Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is to provide for and
promote the development of single-family homes within a safe and healthy
environment for existing and future residents. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, and uses subject to conditional use
permit for all residential zones are listed in Article 15-4A of this Title.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4B-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOTS WIDER THAN TWENTY-FIVE FEET:
All uses on lots that are wider than 25 feet within the R-1 Zone must comply
with the development standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      3.   An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage or
an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally
integrated and connected to the existing dwelling unit.
      4.   Mobile and manufactured homes are subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   The mobile or manufactured homes has been certified pursuant to
the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
         b.   The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent
foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division
13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety
Code.
   B.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof must
not exceed 32 feet and two stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof
must not exceed 26 feet and two stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The height which exceeds the maximum grade differential is included in
measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane
may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   C.   Lot Area: A minimum of 5,000 square feet.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: Minimum setback of 22 feet. Front yard setbacks for two
car and three car garages located in the front half of a lot must comply with
the standards contained in subsection G of this section.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed
on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front
setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a
dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a
first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also
projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may
not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a
porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24
inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not
greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard
setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater
than 10 feet in height (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the
highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum
of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater
than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of
four feet;
      2.   Side yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum side yard
setback of 10 percent of the width of the lot, but can never be less than three
feet and need not be more than six feet.
      3.   Setbacks for detached accessory structures:
         a.   Detached accessory structures, including garages, must maintain a
minimum side yard setback of 10 percent of the width of the lot, but may not be
less than three feet and need not be more than six feet on the first floor.
         b.   The second floor of a detached accessory structure, including
garages, must maintain a minimum side yard setback of 10 percent of the width
of the lot plus an additional setback of two feet, but must not be less than
five feet and need not be more than eight feet.
         c.   Detached accessory structures, including garages, located in the
rear third of the lot, must maintain a minimum side yard setback of two feet on
the first floor and five feet on the second floor.
         d.   Detached accessory structures must maintain a minimum rear yard
setback of three feet on the first floor and five feet on the second floor.
         e.   Rooftop decks with required railings are permitted on single-
story accessory structures and on top of the single-story portions of two-story
accessory structures. Rooftop decks are not permitted on top of two-story
accessory structures. Rooftop decks must maintain a minimum side yard setback
of 10 percent of the width of the lot, plus an additional setback of two feet
but can never be less than five feet, as measured from the property line to the
required railing of the rooftop deck.
      4.   Side yard, Reversed Corner: Reversed corner lots must have the
following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: One angle must
be formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this
angle must be 15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side
property lines. The third side of this triangle must be a straight line
connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard
setback area is in addition to the other side yard setback requirements
described in subsections D2 and D3 of this section.
      5.   Rear yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback of
five feet.
      6.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection D, the
west side yard of 618 W. Oak Avenue, more particularly described as the north
142.5 feet of the south 285 feet of the east 50.265 feet of Lot 14, Block 9,
Tract No. 1685, commencing 63 feet south of the front lot line and continuing
south a distance of 30 feet, must be three inches in width so long as that
certain structure located along that 30-foot distance which existed on January
11, 1973, remains in existence. Upon the removal or destruction of said
building, this property is no longer exempt from this subsection D.
      Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection D, the south side yard
of 724 Penn Street, more particularly described as the south 55 feet of the
north 110 feet of Lot 8, Block 92, El Segundo Sheet No. 4, commencing 84 feet
east of the front lot line and continuing east a distance of 20 feet, must be
three feet in width so long as that certain structure located along that 20
foot distance which existed on January 11, 1973, remains in existence. Upon the
removal or destruction of said building, this property is no longer exempt from
this subsection D.
   E.   Lot Width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Minimum Unit Size and Floor Area Ratio: The minimum dwelling unit size
shall be 250 square feet and the floor area ratio shall be as follows:
      1.   The maximum total building area on the lot shall not exceed an
overall floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.60. There is no minimum building size.
      2.   The maximum FAR for the second floor of the primary structure shall
not exceed 0.25.
      3.   In calculating the overall FAR, floor area is measured to the
interior of a building’s perimeter walls and shall include all floors of the
primary dwelling (i.e., main structure), attached and detached accessory
dwelling units, habitable attic space, accessory buildings, balconies, decks,
verandas, and porches.
      4.   Areas where the vertical measurement between the floor and ceiling
directly above is 14 feet or more shall be counted on both the first and second
stories for FAR calculations (areas such as rotundas, spaces with vaulted
ceilings, and other similar areas with volume).
      5.   Stairs and elevators are counted once and are applied to the first
floor.
      6.   For purposes of calculating floor area, the following are not
included:
         a.   Basements as defined in section
15-1-6 of this title;
         b.   Up to 500 square feet of interior floor area of an attached or
detached garage;
         c.   Detached accessory structures measuring not more than 120 square
feet;
         d.   First floor decks, verandas and porches under 30 inches in height
(as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface).
         e.   Up to 500 square feet cumulative of first floor decks, verandas
and porches, covered or uncovered, attached or detached, and at least 30 inches
in height (as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface), provided
that the deck, veranda or porch is at least 50 percent open on the sides.
         f.   Second floor balconies and decks that are not covered.
         g.   Up to 12 square feet of second floor decks and balconies that are
covered by roof, lattice or trellis.
         h.   The area of decks, balconies, verandas or porches covered by eave
projections up to 18 inches.
   G.   Placement of buildings and structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between
buildings.
      2.   A detached single-story accessory structure in the rear third of the
lot may be located as described in the requirements for setbacks in subsection
D of this section, unless one of the following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot abuts an alley and the vehicular entrance to the
detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure must be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the
alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot a single-story
detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no
building may be erected closer than five feet to the property line of any
abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular
entrance to the detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a
detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
      3.   A garage that is attached to a dwelling that is located in the front
half of the lot facing the front property line must be set back a minimum of 24
feet from the front property line unless the building has a porch, veranda, or
deck at least eight feet in width by four feet in depth, then a minimum front
setback of 22 feet is permitted.
      4.   An attached three-car garage located in the front half of the lot
that faces the front property line where one of the stalls is not tandem, must
have at least two individual car door openings. The following garage designs
are encouraged:
         a.   Three-car garages constructed as attached or detached structures
at the rear of a lot.
         b.   Tandem for parking provided in excess of a two-car garage.
         c.   Attached three-car garages located on the front of a dwelling
face toward the side property lines.
      5.   Accessory outdoor showers attached to a building wall are permitted,
but must not encroach in a required setback and must not be roofed. They may be
enclosed with walls on three sides and a shower door on one side.
   H.    Entry orientation:
      1.   For street-facing lots, at least one entry door to a residential
unit must face (be parallel to) and be directly visible from the adjoining
street and sidewalk. Alternatively, if the residential unit has an entry door
that takes access from a porch or veranda measuring a minimum of four feet by
four feet that faces and is directly visible from the adjoining street and
sidewalk, the entry door may face the side/interior lot line (be perpendicular
to the street and sidewalk).
   I.   Detached accessory buildings as defined in section
15-1-6 of this Title:
      1. All detached accessory structures may not exceed 1,200 square feet
gross floor area in aggregate per parcel;
      2. Except as permitted in Chapter 15-4E related to accessory dwelling
units, detached accessory buildings are limited to two (2) stories, and may
include an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided that
access to the attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs
are permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are limited
to the minimum required by the California Building Code and California
Electrical Code;
      3. Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory
buildings may not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower
and may not be used for sleeping purposes or as an “R” occupancy, as defined by
the California Building Code, except that they may contain a sink and a toilet;
      4. Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory
buildings may not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit; and
      5. Before the City issues a building permit for a detached accessory
structure, except an accessory dwelling unit, the Director will require that a
covenant running with the land be recorded stating that the accessory structure
may not be used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord.
1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-3-1: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOTS TWENTY-FIVE FEET WIDE OR LESS:
All uses on lots 25 feet wide or less within the R-1 Zone must comply with the
development standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      3.   An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage or
an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally
integrated and connected to the existing dwelling unit.
      4.   Mobile and manufactured homes are subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   The mobile or manufactured homes has been certified pursuant to
the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
         b.   The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent
foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division
13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety
Code.
   B.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof must
not exceed 32 feet and two stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof
must not exceed 26 feet and two stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   C.   Lot area: A minimum of 5,000 square feet.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: A minimum of 22 feet.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed
on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front
setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a
dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a
first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also
projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may
not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a
porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24
inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not
greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard
setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater
than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade
to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a
maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater
than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of
four feet;
      2.   Side yard: A minimum of three feet.
      3.   Detached accessory structures and garages: Detached accessory
structures and attached garages are allowed along the property line on one
interior side lot line, provided that the detached accessory structure or
attached garage is in the rear one-third of the lot.
      4.   Side yard, reverse corner: Reversed corner lots must have a side
yard with a triangular area described as follows: One angle must be formed by
the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle must be 15
feet in length, measured along the rear and street side property lines. The
third side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two other
lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard setback area is in addition
to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsection D2 of this
section.
      5.   Rear yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback of
five feet on the first and second floors.
      6.   Detached accessory structures and garages: Detached accessory
structures and garages are allowed a rear yard setback of zero feet on the
first story and must maintain a rear yard setback of five feet on the second
story.
   E.   Lot Width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be 250 square
feet.
   G.   Placement of buildings and structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between
buildings;
      2.   A detached accessory structure in the rear third of the lot may be
located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the following
conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to
the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure must be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the
alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot a detached accessory
structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building must be
erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the
rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the
detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached
accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
   H.   Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 47 percent of the lot area.
   I.   Entry Orientation:
      1.   For street-facing lots, at least one entry door to a residential
unit must face (be parallel to) and be directly visible from the adjoining
street and sidewalk. Alternatively, if the residential unit has an entry door
that takes access from a porch or veranda measuring a minimum of four feet by
four feet that faces and is directly visible from the adjoining street and
sidewalk, the entry door may face the side/interior lot line (be perpendicular
to the street and sidewalk).
   J.   Building Wall Modulation: In addition to any doors or windows, building
walls must incorporate at least two architectural building features as defined
in section
15-1-6 of this title on all elevations.
   K.   Detached accessory buildings, not including detached accessory dwelling
units as defined in section
15-1-6 of this Title:
      1.   All detached accessory structures may not exceed 1,200 square feet
gross floor area in aggregate per parcel except as permitted in Chapter 15-4D;
      2.   Except as permitted in Chapter 15-4E related to accessory dwelling
units, detached accessory buildings are limited to one floor, but may include
an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided access to the
attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs are
permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are limited to
the minimum required by the California Building Code and California Electrical
Code;
      3.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory
buildings may not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower
and may not be used for sleeping purposes or as an R occupancy, as defined by
the California Building Code, except that they may contain a sink and a toilet;
      4.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory
buildings may not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit; and
      5.   Before the City issues a building permit for a detached accessory
structure, except an accessory dwelling unit, the Director must require that a
covenant running with the land be recorded stating that the accessory structure
may not be used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord.
1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-4: LANDSCAPING (ALL LOTS):
Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front and street side
setback areas. Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must
incorporate a combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape except
for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. They may contain artificial
turf or synthetic grass provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the environment
(such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2) includes a
pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and stormwater
detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive landscaping
design and site plan.
   A.   A minimum of 25 percent of the front yard setback area must be
maintained with permanent landscaping that contains a combination of lawn,
trees, vines, bushes and ground covers, and does not include hardscape
materials for lots less than 50 feet in width.
   B.   A minimum of 35 percent of the front yard setback area must be
maintained with permanent landscaping that contains a combination of lawn,
trees, vines, bushes and ground covers, and does not include hardscape
materials for lots that are 50 feet or greater in width.
   C.   A minimum of one 24-inch box tree with irrigation must be planted and
maintained in the front yard in conjunction with the construction of a new
primary dwelling unit. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES (ALL LOTS):
Off street parking must be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-6: SIGNS (ALL LOTS):
Signs in the R-1 zone must comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this
title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-7: VEHICULAR ACCESS (ALL LOTS):
   A.   Where an R-1 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be
from the alley.
   B.   Where a lot abuts an alley and the vehicular entrance to the structure
is from the alley, such vehicular entrance must be set back a distance measured
from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as
follows:
 
90 degrees 25 feet
75 degrees 21 feet
60 degrees 18 feet
45 degrees 15 feet
 
   C.   Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with ESMC
Section
15-15-5 (Parking Area Development Standards). (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord.
1672, 5-20-2025)
 
ARTICLE C. TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) ZONE
SECTION:
15-4C-1: Purpose
15-4C-2: Permitted Uses
15-4C-3: Site Development Standards
15-4C-4: Landscaping
15-4C-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-4C-6: Signs
15-4C-7: Vehicular Access
15-4C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Two-Family on the General Plan
land use map and in the text. This zone is to provide for and promote the
development of single-family and two-family homes within a safe and healthy
environment for existing and future residents. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, and uses subject to conditional use
permit for all residential zones are listed in Article 15-4A of this Title.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the R-2 Zone shall comply with the development standards contained
in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   Any use permitted in the R-1 Zone, when developed in the R-2 Zone,
shall be constructed in accordance with R-2 site developments standards and
parking requirements.
      3.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      4.   An addition to, or extension of a dwelling unit, except a garage or
an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally
integrated and connected to the existing dwelling unit.
      5.   Mobile and manufactured homes are subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   The mobile or manufactured home has been certified pursuant to
the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
         b.   The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent
foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division
13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety
Code.
   B.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof shall
not exceed 32 feet and two stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof
must not exceed 26 feet and two stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   C.   Lot Area: A minimum of 7,000 square feet. Lots less than 4,000 square
feet in area shall be occupied by only one dwelling unit, provided all other
requirements of this title are met.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: A minimum of 20 feet.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed
on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front
setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a
dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a
first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also
projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may
not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a
porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24
inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not
greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard
setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater
than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade
to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a
maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater
than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of
four feet.
      2.   Side Yard: Structures shall maintain a minimum setback on each side
of the lot of 10 percent of the width of the lot, but shall never be less than
three feet and need not be more than five feet. Any detached accessory
structures, and attached garages on 25-foot wide lots only, located on the rear
one-third of the lot are allowed zero setback on one interior side lot line.
      3.   Side Yard, Reversed Corner: Reversed corner lots shall have the
following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: one angle
shall be formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of
this angle shall be 15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side
property lines. The third side of this triangle shall be a straight line
connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard
setback area shall be in addition to the other side yard setback requirements
described in subsection D2 of this section.
      4.   Rear Yard: A minimum of five feet. Detached accessory structures are
allowed zero setback on the rear property line. A dwelling unit above a garage
where the vehicular entrance is from an alley shall maintain a minimum one-foot
setback.
   E.   Lot width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be 250 square
feet.
   G.   Placement of buildings and structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between
buildings.
      2.   A detached accessory structure in the rear one-third of the lot may
be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the
following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to
the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure shall be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the
alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
            90 degrees - 25 feet
            75 degrees - 21 feet
            60 degrees - 18 feet
            45 degrees - 15 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot, a detached accessory
structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building shall be
erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the
rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the
detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached
accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
   H.   Building wall modulation:
      1.   Lots greater than 4,000 square feet in area: No plane of a building
wall facing a property line shall exceed 24 feet in height or length without at
least a two-foot offset for a minimum length of six feet in the wall plane.
When expanding or adding onto the height or length of an existing building
wall, only the expansion or addition shall not exceed 24 feet without wall
modulation. Below is an example of wall modulation for walls up to 30 feet.
Total Wall Length Or Height Maximum Length Of Unbroken Minimum Length Of 2 Foot
                            Wall Plane                 Offset
Total Wall Length Or Height Maximum Length Of Unbroken Minimum Length Of 2 Foot
                            Wall Plane                 Offset
24 feet                     24 feet                    0 feet
25 feet                     24 feet                    1 foot
26 feet                     24 feet                    2 feet
27 feet                     24 feet                    3 feet
28 feet                     24 feet                    4 feet
29 feet                     24 feet                    5 feet
30 feet                     24 feet                    6 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6614.png]
      2.   Lots 4,000 square feet or less in area: Architectural building
features must be included to modulate the building walls subject to the
approval of the Director.
   I.   Lot coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 50 percent of the area of the lot.
   J.   Detached Accessory Buildings:
      1.   All detached accessory structures shall not exceed 1,200 square feet
in aggregate per parcel.
      2.   Except as permitted in Chapter 15-4E related to accessory dwelling
units, detached accessory buildings shall be limited to one floor, but may
include an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided access
to the attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs are
permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are limited to
the minimum required by the California Building Code and California Electrical
Code.
      3.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory
buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or
shower and shall not be used for sleeping purposes or as an "R" occupancy, as
defined by the California Building Code, except that they may contain a sink
and a toilet.
      4.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory
buildings shall not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit.
      5.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for a detached accessory
structure, except an accessory dwelling unit, the Director shall require the
recording of a covenant to run with the land, which states that the accessory
structure shall not be used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-
2023)
15-4C-4: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front yard and street
side setback areas. Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must
incorporate a combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape, except
for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. They may contain artificial
turf or synthetic grass provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the environment
(such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2) includes a
pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and stormwater
detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive landscaping
design and site plan. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-6: SIGNS:
As required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-7: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where an R-2 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be from the
alley. Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with ESMC
subsection
15-15-5O. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE D. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) ZONE
SECTION:
15-4D-1: Purpose
15-4D-2: Permitted Uses
15-4D-3: Site Development Standards
15-4D-4: Landscaping
15-4D-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-4D-6: Signs
15-4D-7: Vehicular Access
15-4D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Multi-Family on the General
Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is to provide for the
development of multi-family complexes with amenities for children and adults
and promote a safe and healthy environment for existing and future residents.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, and uses subject to conditional use
permit for all residential zones are listed in Article 15-4A of this Title.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   Any use permitted in the R-1 or R-2 Zones, when developed in the R-
3 Zone, shall be constructed in accordance with R-3 site developments standards
and parking requirements.
      3.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      4.   An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage or
an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally
integrated and connected to the existing dwelling unit.
      5.   Mobile and manufactured homes are subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   The mobile or manufactured home has been certified pursuant to
the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
         b.   The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent
foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division
13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety
Code.
   B.   Lot Area: A minimum of 7,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof shall
not exceed 32 feet and two stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof
must not exceed 26 feet and two stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is included
in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade
plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6612.png]
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback of 15 feet.
Entry gates for vehicular access must maintain a minimum setback of 20 feet.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
            (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully
enclosed on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into
the front setback a maximum of six feet;
            (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a
dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a
first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also
projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may
not exceed six feet in depth combined for    both the dwelling structure and a
porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
            (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than
24 inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not
greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard
setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
            (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not
greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent
grade to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard
setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
            (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater
than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of
four feet.
      2.   Side yard facing a side street: 10 percent of the width of the lot,
but not less than three feet and not more than five feet, except if parking
garages or covered parking spaces face a street, then the setback shall be 20
feet.
      3.   Side yard facing an adjacent lot: 10 percent of the width of the lot
on each side of the lot, but not less than three feet and need not be more than
five feet. Detached accessory structures, located in the rear one-third of the
lot, are allowed zero setback on one interior side lot line.
      4.   Side yard, reversed corner: Reversed corner lots shall have a side
yard with a triangular area described as follows: one angle shall be formed by
the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle shall be
15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side property lines. The
third side of this triangle shall be a straight line connecting the two other
lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard setback area shall be in
addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsections
D2 and D3 of this section.
      5.   Rear Yard: A minimum of 10 feet.
      6.   Rear Yard: Detached accessory structures are allowed zero setback on
the rear property line and on one interior lot side line in the rear one-third
of the lot.
   E.   Lot Width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be 250 square
feet.
   G.   Density: The maximum permitted density shall be 30 dwelling units per
acre.
   H.   Placement of buildings and structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between
buildings;
      2.   A detached accessory structure in the rear one-third of the lot may
be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the
following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to
the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure shall be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the
alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot, a detached accessory
structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building shall be
erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the
rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the
detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached
accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
         c.   Notwithstanding the above, a detached accessory dwelling unit
must be set back at least four feet from interior side and rear property lines.
   I.   Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 53 percent of the area of the lot.
   J.   Open space and recreation requirements: The following minimum open
space and recreational facilities must be provided:
 
Number Of Units Private Open Space Common Open Space Per Recreational
                Per Unit           Unit                  Facilities Per Unit
4 or fewer      50 square feet     150 square feet
5 - 9           50 square feet     200 square feet
10 - 20         50 square feet     250 square feet
21 and above    50 square feet     250 square feet       50 square feet
 
         All required open space and recreational facilities are in addition to
the required front and street side setbacks. Interior side and rear setbacks
may be considered as required open spaces and recreation facilities. All
required common open space must: 1) be accessible to all residents, 2) be a
minimum of five feet in both length and width, and 3) include a minimum of 50
percent of softscape landscaping.
      1.   Adjustments: The Director may approve adjustments from the minimum
open space dimensions and landscaping percentage standards as provided in
Chapters 22 and 23 of this Title.
   K.   Building Wall Modulation: No plane of a building wall facing a property
line shall exceed 24 feet in height or length without at least a two-foot
offset for a minimum length of six feet in the wall plane. When expanding or
adding onto the height or length of an existing building wall, only the
expansion or addition shall not exceed 24 feet without wall modulation. Below
is an example of wall modulation for walls up to 30 feet:
Total wall length or height Maximum length of unbroken Minimum length of 2-foot
(in feet)                   wall plane (in feet)       offset (in feet)
Total wall length or height Maximum length of unbroken Minimum length of 2-foot
(in feet)                   wall plane (in feet)       offset (in feet)
24                          24                         0
25                          24                         1
26                          24                         2
27                          24                         3
28                          24                         4
29                          24                         5
30                          24                         6
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6610.png]
   L.   Landscaping:
      1.   Except where not allowed per the placement of existing utilities,
one deciduous or evergreen on-site tree must be provided per 25 feet of street-
facing frontage length along the front-yard, rear-yard, and street-facing side-
yard setbacks.
         a.   Trees must be planted within a maximum of ten feet of the
property line.
      2.   Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a
minimum of 50 percent softscape and a maximum of 50 percent hardscape in the
landscape, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. In addition,
those portions of the property which abut a different zoning classification
must be landscaped with trees and shrubs to provide an effective buffer from
adjoining property.
      3.   The setback areas may contain artificial turf or synthetic grass in
the side and rear yards only, provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the
environment (such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2)
includes a pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and
stormwater detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive
landscaping design and site plan.
      4.   Drought-tolerant plants must be utilized in the landscape.
   M.   Condominium Conversions: Condominiums and stock cooperatives converted
from multiple-family dwellings shall meet all the requirements for condominiums
in effect at the time they were originally constructed. If there were no
condominium standards in effect at the time of construction, the conversion
shall comply with the condominium standards of ordinance 898, adopted January
20, 1976.
   N.   Detached Accessory Buildings:
      1.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit pursuant to article
15-4E of this title, buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchen
facilities, a bathtub or shower and shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
      2.   Detached accessory buildings, except detached accessory dwelling
units, shall not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit or as an “R”
occupancy, as defined by the California Building Code, except that they may
contain a sink and a toilet.
      3.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for a detached accessory
structure, except a detached accessory dwelling unit, the Director shall
require the recording of a covenant to run with the land, which states that the
accessory structure shall not be used as a dwelling unit or used in violation
of this subsection. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-4D-4: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front yard and
street side setback areas.
   B.   Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a
combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape, except for those
portions devoted to vehicular parking. In addition, those portions of the
property which abut a different zoning classification must be landscaped with
trees and shrubs to provide an effective buffer from adjoining property.
   C.   The setback areas may contain artificial turf or synthetic grass
provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the environment (such as containing lead
based or other hazardous materials); 2) includes a pervious surface to address
percolation, drainage, runoff, and stormwater detention requirements; and 3) is
incorporated into a comprehensive landscaping design and site plan. (Ord. 1648,
6-21-2023)
15-4D-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off-street parking shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-6: SIGNS:
Signs in the R-3 Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this
title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-7: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where an R-3 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be from the
alley. Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with ESMC
subsection 15-15-5O. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE E. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
15-4E-1: Purpose; Findings
15-4E-2: General Requirements
15-4E-3: Development Standards
15-4E-4: Development Standards For Government Code Section 66323 ADUs
15-4E-5: Application Process; Fees
15-4E-6: Utility Connections
15-4E-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
   This article is adopted pursuant to Government Code section 66314 for the
purpose of implementing the City’s regulation of accessory dwelling units.
   Government Code section 66323(a) requires the City ministerially approve
certain accessory dwelling units in certain residential or mixed use zones
within the City. On the other hand, Government Code section 66314(a), allows
the designation of areas for accessory dwelling units “based on the adequacy of
water and sewer services and the impact of accessory dwelling units on traffic
flow and public safety.”
   The City Council finds that the conditions that were cited in Ordinance No.
1381 that existed in the City at the time (for example, increased traffic,
relatively high density of housing in a small area, and intense on-street
parking) continue to exist within the City. While the City Council recognizes
that accessory dwelling units present a potential solution to the state’s
housing crisis, the Council continues to believe that accessory dwelling units
increase the volume of vehicle traffic within the City, on-street parking, and
noise, and can introduce pollutants into the City’s storm drains.
   By adopting this chapter, the City Council desires to comply with state law
while reserving its right to conduct studies evaluating the adequacy of water
and sewer services.
(Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; amd. Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4E-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Locations: Accessory dwelling units are permitted by right throughout
any zone where residential uses are permitted. Accessory dwelling units may be:
1) contained within the existing or proposed space of a single-family residence
or attached to a single-family residence, 2) within the space of an existing
accessory structure, or 3) detached from the single-family residence, subject
to the requirements and development standards in this Code and State law.
   B.   Conjunction With Single-Family Or Multi-Family Dwelling: An accessory
dwelling unit may only be constructed in conjunction with either an existing or
proposed single-family dwelling, or an existing or proposed multi-family
dwelling.
   C.   Certificates Of Occupancy: The City shall not issue a certificate of
occupancy for an accessory dwelling unit before a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the primary dwelling or dwellings.
   D.   Separate Sale Prohibited: Accessory dwelling units may not be sold
separately from a primary dwelling, except when the ADU or the primary dwelling
was built or developed by a qualified nonprofit corporation and meets all the
requirements of Government Code section 66341, including any amendments or
successor statutes thereto.
   E.   Minimum Rental Term. Rental of the accessory dwelling unit must be for
a term of thirty (30) consecutive days or longer.
   F.   Release Of Covenant: In the event a covenant was previously recorded
for a permitted accessory structure restricting the structure as non-habitable
pursuant to subsection
15-4B-3(H)(5) of this chapter, before the City issues a building permit for an
accessory dwelling unit, the property owner must record a release of such
covenant with the County Recorder, in a form approved by the Director of
Community Development and the City Attorney.
   G.   The City may not condition its approval of the permit application by
requiring the applicant correct a non-conforming zoning condition, as that term
is defined in Government Code section 66313. This protection applies to a
previously unpermitted accessory dwelling unit constructed before January 1,
2020.
(Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022; Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4E-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise preempted by Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 13 (Accessory
Dwelling Units) of the Government Code, accessory dwelling units must meet the
development standards applicable to accessory structures in the zone in which
they are situated, except as follows:
   A.   Height: Same as residential structures in the R-1 Zone.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Attached To And/Or Within A Primary Dwelling: Same as primary
dwellings in the zone in which they are situated. If the primary dwelling has a
non-conforming setback, the accessory dwelling portion may maintain the same
setback.
      2.   Detached From A Primary Dwelling: The detached accessory dwelling
unit must be set back no less than four feet (4') from the interior side and
rear lot lines.
      3.   Exception: No setback shall apply to a portion of an existing
structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit.
   C.   Building Area:
      1.   Attached to a primary dwelling and/or within the primary dwelling:
Maximum of forty-nine percent (49%) of the total floor area of the combined
dwellings.
      2.   Detached: Maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
      3.   The total area of the primary dwelling and the accessory dwelling
unit may not exceed the maximum permitted floor area of the lot, except an
existing structure is converted to an accessory dwelling unit.
      4.   Nothing in this chapter is meant to prohibit an accessory dwelling
unit up to eight hundred fifty (850) square feet, or one thousand (1,000)
square feet for a two (2) bedroom unit.
   D.   Density:
      1.   Lots with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling:
         a.   One accessory dwelling unit and one junior accessory dwelling
unit per lot within a proposed or existing single-family dwelling or existing
accessory structure, and/or
         b.   One accessory dwelling unit detached from the primary structure
or attached to an accessory structure that may be combined with one junior
accessory dwelling unit per lot.
      2.   Lots with a proposed or existing multifamily dwelling structure:
         a.   One accessory dwelling unit within the portions of existing
multifamily dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, provided
each unit complies with state building standards for dwellings, and multiple
accessory dwelling units up to a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the
existing multifamily dwelling units. For purposes of this subsection, "livable
space" means a space in a dwelling intended for human habitation, including
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, or sanitation. Portions of existing multi-
family dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, include, but are
not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or
garages.
         b.   Not more than eight detached accessory dwelling units on a lot
with an existing multifamily dwelling structure. However, the number of
accessory dwelling units allowable pursuant to this clause shall not exceed the
number of existing units on the lot.
         c.   Not more than two detached accessory dwelling units on a lot with
a proposed multifamily dwelling structure.
   E.   Parking:
      1.   No parking spaces are required for accessory dwelling units.
      2.   When a garage, carport, covered parking structure, or dedicated
uncovered parking space is demolished in conjunction with the construction of
an accessory dwelling unit, or converted to an accessory dwelling unit,
replacement parking for the lost spaces is not required. In addition, removal
of a curb cut and/or driveway rendered nonconforming due to the construction of
an accessory dwelling unit is not required.
   F.   Separate Entrance: If the accessory dwelling unit is attached to or
within the primary dwelling and has independent exterior access from the
proposed or existing primary dwelling, such independent exterior access may not
be an entrance facing the front yard. An independent and separate entrance to
the accessory dwelling unit must be located on the side or at the rear of the
primary dwelling.
   G.   Compliance: The accessory dwelling unit must comply with applicable
Building, Health and Fire Codes except where explicitly exempted by Government
Code section 66314. Fire sprinklers for accessory dwelling units are required
only when they are required for the primary dwelling on the lot.
(Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; Ord. 1668, 2-
18-2025)
15-4E-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR GOVERNMENT CODE SECTION 66323 ADUS:
Notwithstanding Section
15-4E-3, the following ADU types are permitted by right in residential or
mixed-use zones and are subject only to the development and/or design standards
listed in this section as stated in Government Code Section 66323.
   A.   Permitted ADU Types and Standards:
      1.   Single-family dwelling - Attached ADUs. One accessory dwelling unit
and one junior accessory dwelling unit per lot with a proposed or existing
single-family dwelling if all the following apply:
         a.   The accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit is
within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure
and may include an expansion of not more than one hundred and fifty (150)
square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing accessory
structure. An expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the existing
accessory structure shall be limited to accommodating ingress and egress.
         b.   The space has exterior access from the proposed or existing
single-family dwelling.
         c.   The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire and safety.
         d.   The junior accessory dwelling unit complies with the requirements
of the Government Code Section 66333 et seq.
      2.   Single-family dwelling - Detached ADUs. One detached, new
construction, accessory dwelling unit that does not exceed four-foot (4') side
and rear yard setbacks for a lot with a proposed or existing single-family
dwelling. The accessory dwelling unit may be combined with a junior accessory
dwelling unit described in subparagraph (1), above. These detached accessory
dwelling units must meet the following standards:
         a.   The total floor area must not exceed eight hundred (800) square
feet.
         b.   The height must not exceed the maximum permitted height in the
Single-Family Residential (R-1) zone.
      3.   Multifamily dwelling structures - Attached ADUs.
         a.   Multiple accessory dwelling units within portions of existing
multifamily dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including,
but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics,
basements, or garages, if each unit complies with state building standards for
dwellings.
         b.   Density. At least one accessory dwelling unit within an existing
multifamily dwelling and up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing
multifamily dwelling units.
      4.   Multifamily dwelling - Detached ADUs.
         a.   Multiple accessory dwelling units that are located on a lot that
has an existing or proposed multifamily dwelling, but are detached from the
multifamily dwelling. These detached accessory dwelling units must meet the
following standards:
            (1)   The height must not exceed the maximum permitted height in
the Single-Family Residential (R-1) zone.
            (2)   The rear and side yard setbacks must be a minimum of four
feet (4').
            (3)   On a lot with an existing multifamily dwelling, not more than
eight detached accessory dwelling units. However, the number of accessory
dwelling units allowable pursuant to this clause shall not exceed the number of
existing units on the lot.
            (4)   On a lot with a proposed multifamily dwelling, not more than
two (2) detached accessory dwelling units.
         b.   If the existing multifamily dwelling has a rear or side setback
of less than four feet (4'), the existing multifamily dwelling is not required
to be modified to comply with a minimum setback as a condition of approving the
application to construct an accessory dwelling unit that satisfies the
requirements of this subparagraph (4).
   B.   No additional development or design standards are required for any
accessory dwelling unit that meets the requirements of subsection
15-4E-4(A).
   C.   Accessory dwelling units that meet the requirements in subsection
15-4E-4(A) must also comply with the General Requirements in Section
15-4E-2.
   D.   The installation of fire sprinklers is not required in an accessory
dwelling unit if sprinklers are not required for the primary residence. The
construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall not trigger a requirement for
fire sprinklers to be installed in the existing multifamily dwelling.
(Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4E-5: APPLICATION PROCESS; FEES:
   A.   Any application for a building permit to create an accessory dwelling
unit on a lot with an existing single-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling
units shall be ministerially approved or denied within 60 days of the City's
receipt of a completed application. If a completed application is not approved
or denied within 60 days, the application shall be deemed approved. However,
any permit application for an accessory dwelling unit that is submitted with a
permit application to create a single-family dwelling shall be considered
ministerially but is not subject to the 60 day requirement to allow the City
time to act on the permit application to create the new single-family dwelling,
if necessary. If an application for an ADU is denied, staff shall return in
writing a full set of comments to the applicant with a list of items that are
defective or deficient and a description of how the application can be remedied
by the applicant.
   B.   For an accessory dwelling unit of 750 square feet or more, the
applicant must pay development impact fees imposed pursuant to Chapter 32 of
this title, in an amount set by City Council resolution, provided that such
development impact fee is proportional in relation to the square footage of the
primary dwelling unit.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsection B above, a previously unpermitted accessory
dwelling unit constructed before January 1, 2020, shall not be required to pay
impact fees or connection or capacity charges except when utility
infrastructure is required to comply with Section 17920.3 of the Health and
Safety Code regarding substandard buildings.
(Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; Ord. 1668, 2-
18-2025)
15-4E-6: UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
   A.   An accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a new residential
use for purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for
utilities, unless the accessory dwelling unit is constructed simultaneously
with a new single-family dwelling.
   B.   The City may require a new or separate utility connection directly
between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility, and may require the
payment of a connection fee or capacity charge for any accessory dwelling unit,
unless the accessory dwelling unit is an accessory dwelling unit or junior
accessory dwelling unit within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling
or existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure, in which
event no new or separate utility connection may be required. 
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; amd. Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE F. JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
15-4F-1: Purpose
15-4F-2: General Requirements
15-4F-3: Development Standards
15-4F-4: Application Process; Fees
15-4F-5: Utility Connections
15-4F-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to Government Code section 65852.22, for the
purpose of implementing the City's regulation of junior accessory dwelling
units.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020)
15-4F-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit must be obtained to create a junior accessory
dwelling unit.
   B.   Density: One (1) junior accessory dwelling unit per residential lot
zoned for single-family residences with a single-family residence built, or
proposed to be built, on the lot.
   C.   Owner Occupancy Required: The owner must reside in the single-family
residence in which the junior accessory dwelling unit will be permitted. The
owner may reside in either the remaining portion of the structure or the newly
created junior accessory dwelling unit. Owner-occupancy shall not be required
if the owner is another governmental agency, land trust, or housing
organization.
   D.   Recordation Of A Deed Restriction Required: The applicant must record a
deed restriction which includes both of the following:
      1.   A prohibition on the sale of the junior accessory dwelling unit
separate from the sale of the single-family residence, including a statement
that the deed restriction may be enforced against future purchasers.
      2.   A restriction on the size and attributes of the junior accessory
dwelling unit that conforms with this section.
   E.   The City may not condition its approval of the permit application by
requiring the applicant correct a non-conforming zoning condition, as that term
is defined in Government Code section 66313. This protection applies to a
previously unpermitted junior accessory dwelling unit constructed before
January 1, 2020.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; amd. Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4F-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   A permitted junior accessory dwelling unit must be constructed within
the walls of the proposed or existing single-family residence.
   B.   Separate Entrance Required: A junior accessory dwelling must include a
separate entrance from the main entrance to the proposed or existing single-
family residence.
   C.   Efficiency Kitchen Required: A junior accessory dwelling unit must
include an efficiency kitchen, which shall include all of the following:
      1.   A cooking facility with appliances.
      2.   A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of
reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.
   D.   Parking: No additional parking is required for a junior accessory
dwelling unit.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020)
15-4F-4: APPLICATION PROCESS; FEES:
   A.   Any application for a building permit to create a junior accessory
dwelling unit on a lot with an existing single-family shall be ministerially
approved within sixty (60) days of the City's receipt of a completed
application. Any permit application for a junior accessory dwelling unit that
is submitted with a permit application to create a new single-family dwelling
shall be considered ministerially but is not subject to the sixty (60) day
requirement to allow the City time to act on the permit application to create
the new single-family dwelling, if necessary.
   B.   The applicant must pay any applicable fees.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020)
15-4F-5: UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a new residential use
for purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020)
ARTICLE G. TWO-UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND URBAN LOT SPLITS IN SINGLE-
FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R1) ZONES
SECTION:
15-4G-1: Purpose
15-4G-2: General Requirements; Eligibility
15-4G-3: General Urban Lot Split Development Standards
15-4G-4: Development Standards For Lots Wider Than Twenty-Five Feet
15-4G-5: Development Standards For Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide Or Less
15-4G-6: Landscaping (All Lots)
15-4G-7: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces (All Lots)
15-4G-8: Signs (All Lots)
15-4G-9: Vehicular Access (All Lots)
15-4G-10: Application Process; Fees
15-4G-11: Tenancy
15-4G-1:PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to Government Code section 65852.6, 65852.21,
and 66411.7 for the purpose of implementing the City’s regulation of two-unit
residential development and/or urban lot splits in the City’s Single-Family
Residential Zone.
Government Code section 65852.21(a) requires the City ministerially approve
certain housing developments containing no more than two residential units
within a single-family residential zone. Government Code section 66411.7(a)
requires that the City ministerially approve a parcel map for an urban lot
split, subject to standards set forth in Government Code section 66411.7(a)(1),
(2), and (3). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; ELIGIBILITY:
   A.   Notwithstanding the standards outlined in this Article G of Chapter 4
of Title 15 of this code, all other standards provided in Articles A and B of
Chapter 4 of Title 15 of this code will apply, unless prohibited by state law.
   B.   A parcel proposed for a subdivision (lot splits) pursuant to this
article must meet the requirements in subdivision (a) of Government Code
Section 66411.7.
   C.   A proposed housing development proposing a two-unit residential
development (duplex) pursuant to this article must meet the requirements in
subdivision (a) of Government Code Section 65852.21. (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-3: GENERAL URBAN LOT SPLIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All urban lot splits with two-unit residential developments within the R-1 Zone
must comply with the R-1 development standards contained in Article 15-4B and
the development standards of this Article 15-4G. If there are conflicts between
the provisions of Article 15-4B and this Article 15-4G, the provisions of this
Section will govern.
   A.   Urban lot splits must incorporate all built-form parameters of State of
California Government Code Section 66411.7, including:
      1.   A parcel map that subdivides an existing R-1 parcel will create no
more than two new parcels of approximately equal lot area and with one of the
two created parcels not smaller than 40 percent of the lot area of the original
parcel proposed for subdivision. See Figure 4G-1.
      2.   Both newly created parcels will be no smaller than 1,200 square feet
in gross area.
      3.   No more than two dwelling units per lot will be constructed on a R-
1 urban lot split.
      4.   Accessory Dwelling Units or Junior Accessory Dwelling Units are
prohibited where an Urban Lot Split is also developed with a two-unit
residential development pursuant to Sections 15-4G-4 and
15-4G-5.
      5.   A minimum of one off-street parking spaces will be provided per
newly constructed dwelling unit. No parking is required if the parcel is
located within one-half mile walking distance of a High-quality Transit
Corridor or major transit stop or if a car share vehicle is located within one-
block of the parcel.
   B.   Lot line splits will be parallel to public street frontages. See Figure
4G-2.
   C.   When cross easements across lot split parcels are required to provide
access to units, or access to vehicle parking spaces, or access to utilities
and utility connections, or access between lot split parcels, or access for any
other purpose, a covenant establishing the cross easement acceptable to the
Community Development Department must be recorded with the Los Angeles County
Recorder upon the filing of the Final Parcel Map described in chapter 14-6 of
this code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5918.png]
 
Figure 4G-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5916.png]
 
Figure 4G-2
(Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-4: DEV ELOPMENT STANDARD S FOR LOTS WIDER THAN TWENTY-F IVE FEET:
All two-unit residential developments and urban lot splits on lots that are
wider than 25 feet within the R-1 Zone must comply with the development
standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider
than Twenty-Five Feet)
   B.   Height: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider
than Twenty-Five Feet)
   C.   Lot Area: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4G-3 above.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: A minimum of 22 feet. Front yard setbacks for two car
and three car garages located in the front half of a lot must comply with the
standards contained in subsection H of this section.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed
on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front
setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a
dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a
first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also
projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may
not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a
porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24
inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not
greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard
setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater
than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade
to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a
maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater
than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of
four feet;
      2.   Side Yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback on
each side of the lot of 10 percent of the width of the lot, but can never be
less than three feet and need not be more than four feet.
      3.   Rear Yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback of
four feet on the first and second floors.
      Notwithstanding Subsections D.1 through D.3 above, the City may not
condition its approval of a two-unit residential development by requiring the
applicant to correct a non-conforming setback for an existing structure or a
new structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions of an
existing structure.
      4.   Setbacks for detached accessory structures: As provided in ESMC
Section
15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider
than Twenty-Five Feet)
   E.   Lot Width: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family
Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet)
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider
than Twenty-Five Feet)
   G.   Floor Area Ratio:
      1.   The maximum total building area on the lot shall not exceed an
overall floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.60. There is no minimum building size.
      2.   The maximum FAR for the second floor of the primary structure shall
not exceed 0.25.
      3.   In calculating the overall FAR, floor area is measured to the
interior of a building’s perimeter walls and shall include all floors of the
primary dwelling (i.e., main structure), attached and detached accessory
dwelling units, habitable attic space, accessory buildings, balconies, decks,
verandas, and porches.
      4.   Areas where the vertical measurement between the floor and ceiling
directly above is 14 feet or more shall be counted on both the first and second
stories for FAR calculations (areas such as rotundas, spaces with vaulted
ceilings, and other similar areas with volume).
      5.   Stairs and elevators are counted once and are applied to the first
floor.
      6.   For purposes of calculating floor area, the following are not
included:
         a.   Basements as defined in section
15-1-6 of this title;
         b.   Up to 500 square feet of interior floor area of an attached or
detached garage;
         c.   Detached accessory structures measuring not more than 120 square
feet;
         d.   First floor decks, verandas and porches under 30 inches in height
(as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface).
         e.   Up to 500 square feet cumulative of first floor decks, verandas
and porches, covered or uncovered, attached or detached, and at least 30 inches
in height (as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface), provided
that the deck, veranda or porch is at least 50 percent open on the sides.
         f.   Second floor balconies and decks that are not covered.
         g.   Up to 12 square feet of second floor decks and balconies that are
covered by roof, lattice or trellis.
         h.   The area of decks, balconies, verandas or porches covered by eave
projections up to 18 inches.
      7.   Nothing in this Chapter is meant to prohibit a residential dwelling
unit of at least 800 square feet of total floor area.
   H.   Placement of buildings and structures: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider
than Twenty-Five Feet)
   I.   Entry Orientation: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider
than Twenty-Five Feet)
   J.   Detached accessory buildings as defined in section
15-1-6 of this Title: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family
Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet).
(Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOTS TWENTY-FIVE FEET WIDE OR LESS:
All two-unit residential developments and urban lot splits on lots that are 25
feet wide or less within the R-1 Zone must comply with the development
standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots
Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   B.   Height: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots
Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   C.   Lot area: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4G-3 above.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: A minimum of 22 feet.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed
on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front
setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a
dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a
first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also
projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may
not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a
porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24
inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not
greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard
setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater
than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade
to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a
maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater
than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of
four feet.
      2.   Side Yard: A minimum of three feet.
      3.   Detached accessory structures and garages: Detached accessory
structures and attached garages are allowed along the property line on one
interior side lot line, provided that the detached accessory structure or
attached garage is in the rear one-third of the lot.
      4.   Rear Yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback of
four feet on the first and second floors.
      5.   Detached accessory structures and garages: Detached accessory
structures and garages are allowed a rear yard setback of zero feet on the
first story and must maintain a rear yard setback of four feet on the second
story.
      Notwithstanding Subsections D.1 through D.5 above, the City may not
condition its approval of a two-unit residential development by requiring the
applicant to correct a non-conforming setback for an existing structure or a
new structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions of an
existing structure.
   E.   Lot Width: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots
Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots
Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   G.   Placement of Buildings and Structures: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots
Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   H.   Entry Orientation: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots
Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   I.   Building Wall Modulation: As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots
Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   J.   Detached accessory buildings as defined in section
15-1-6 of this Title: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family
Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less).
(Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-6: LANDSCAPING (ALL LOTS):
As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-4 (Single Family Residential Landscaping - All Lots). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-
2025)
15-4G-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES (ALL LOTS):
Off street parking must be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title,
except that only a minimum of one off-street parking space must be provided per
newly constructed dwelling unit. No parking is required if a parcel is located
within ½ mile walking distance of a High-quality Transit Corridor or major
transit stop or if a car share vehicle is located within one-block of the
parcel. (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-8: SIGNS (ALL LOTS):
As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-6 (Single Family Residential Signs - All Lots). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-9: VEHICULAR ACCESS (ALL LOTS):
As provided in ESMC Section
15-4B-7 (Single Family Residential Vehicular Access - All Lots). (Ord. 1672, 5-
20-2025)
15-4G-10: APPLICATION PROCESS; FEES:
Any application for a building permit to create a two-unit residential
development or a lot created pursuant to an Urban Lot Split in compliance with
this Article on a single-family residential lot will be ministerially approved.
Properties developed under this section will be subject to all applicable fees,
including development impact fees, and assessments. (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-11: TENANCY:
   A.   Each unit created under this chapter may be rented separately, however
rental terms must not be less than 31 consecutive days or allow termination of
the tenancy prior to the expiration of at least one 31-day period occupancy by
the same tenant.
   B.   Urban Lot Split: The applicant for an urban lot split must sign an
affidavit, in the form approved by the City Attorney, stating that the
applicant intends to occupy one of the housing units on the newly created lots
as its principal residence for a minimum of three years from the date of the
approval of the Urban Lot Split. This subsection does not apply to an applicant
that is a “community land trust,” as defined in clause (ii) of subparagraph (C)
of paragraph (11) of subdivision (a) of Section 402.1 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code or is a “qualified nonprofit corporation” as described in Section
214.15 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 5
COMMERCIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. PERMITTED USES IN COMMERCIAL ZONES
SECTION:
15-5A-1: Permitted Uses
15-5A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Table No. 1 below contains the uses permitted in the C-2, C-3, C-4, CO, MU-N,
and MU-S zones, including uses permitted by right, accessory uses, uses subject
to an administrative use permit, and uses subject to a conditional use permit.
   Table No. 1 - Permitted uses in commercial zones
Uses Zones1
     C-2 C-3 C-4 CO MU-N MU- S
Uses                      Zones1
                          C-2      C-3      C-4   CO       MU-N     MU- S
Eating and drinking
establishments
Alcohol - Off-site sale   AUP      AUP      AUP   AUP      AUP      AUP
at retail establishments.
Alcohol - On site sale    CUP      CUP      CUP   CUP      CUP      CUP
and consumption at bars.
Alcohol On-site sale and
consumption at            AUP      AUP      AUP   AUP      AUP      AUP
restaurants and hotels
Cafés                    A        A        A     A        A        A
Drive-through restaurants          CUP2           CUP2     CUP2     CUP2
Micro-brewery with
tasting room and/or                         CUP            CUP      CUP
dining
Outdoor dining areas, per
ESMC                      A        A        A     A        A        A
Chapter 15-2
Restaurants,              P        P        P     P        P        P
delicatessens, and cafés
General Commercial uses
Adult-oriented businesses                                           P
per ESMC Chapter 15-13
Animal hospitals (and     P        P        P
veterinary services)
Billiard/pool rooms and   P        P        P
bowling alleys
Business and consumer              P                       P        P
support services
Car rental agencies       CUP      CUP
Catering services and                                      CUP      CUP
flight kitchens
Farmers' market                             P
Financial institutions                      P              P        P
Fitness centers           P        P        P3    P        P        P
General offices           P        P4       P     P        P        P
Indoor sale of
automobiles, motorcycles,                   P
and motor scooters
Massage establishments,
per ESMC                                    CUP                     CUP
Chapter 4-10
Medical-dental offices    P        P        P     P        P        P
Medical-dental            A        P        A     A        P        P
laboratories
Motion picture/television
production facilities                                      P        P
(indoor)8
Motion picture/television
production facilities                                      CUP      CUP
(outdoor)8
Multi-media offices                P        P     P        P        P
Office worker-oriented
services, not located on                          P
Pacific Coast Highway or
El Segundo Boulevard
Personal services         P        P        P              P        P
Retail sales              P        P        P              P        P
Service stations                   CUP6           CUP6     CUP6     CUP6
Group care and
hospitality uses
Bed and breakfast inns    CUP
Daycare centers           P        P        P     P        P        P
Hospitals                                                  CUP      CUP
Hotels and motels                  P              CUP5     P        P
Industrial
Freight forwarding        N        N        N     N        N        N
Light industrial uses                                      AUP      AUP
Research and development                          P7       P7       P7
uses
Waste material transfer   N        N        N     N        N        N
and storage
Wholesale uses                                             P        P
Institutional
Government buildings/     P        P              P
public uses
Museums                                           CUP
Schools
Miscellaneous uses
Any use customarily
incidental to a permitted A        A        A     A        A        A
use
Assembly halls                              P              CUP      CUP
Data centers                                               P        P
Drive-through or walk-up
services, excluding       A        A        A     A        A        A
drive-through restaurants
Employee recreational     A        A        A     A        A        A
facilities and play areas
Helicopter landing
facilities per ESMC                CUP            CUP      CUP      CUP
Section
15-2-13 
Open storage of
commodities sold or       A        A        A     A        A        A
utilized on the premises
Commercial Parking
facilities, including                                      CUP      CUP
park and ride lots
Parking structures and    A        A        A     A        A        A
surface parking lots
Permitted uses conducted
in a trailer, shipping                      AUP
container or similar
structure
Recreational facilities   P        P        P     P        CUP      CUP
(public and private)
Residential uses          A
Shared mobility parking   A        A        A     A        A        A
facilities
Solar energy systems -
Small and medium-scale    A        A        A     A        A        A
ground-mounted
Solar energy systems -    A        A        A     A        A        A
Roof-mounted
Other similar uses                          P, A,
approved by the Director, P, A,    P, A,    AUP , P, A,    P, A,    P, A,
per ESMC                  AUP, CUP AUP, CUP CUP   AUP, CUP AUP, CUP AUP, CUP
Chapter 15-22
 
Notes:
   1.   P = Permitted use, A = Accessory use, AUP = Use subject to an
administrative use permit (Per ESMC Chapters 22 and 23), CUP = Use subject to a
conditional use permit (per ESMC Chapters 24 and 28), N = prohibited
   2.   Drive-through restaurants are permitted with a CUP only east of Pacific
Coast Highway.
   3.   Fitness centers in the C-4 zone are only permitted indoors
   4.   General offices in the C-3 zone are limited to a maximum gross area of
5,000 square feet
   5.   Hotels in the CO zone are not permitted west of Pacific Coast highway
   6.   Service stations are permitted with a CUP only when located at least
500 feet from any residential zoned property. This distance restriction does
not apply to properties east of Pacific Coast Highway
   7.   Research and development uses in commercial zones are permitted only
east of Pacific Coast Highway
   8.   See ESMC Article 15-7B regarding the Multimedia Overlay (MMO) District
and its permitted uses
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1661, 5-21-2024)
ARTICLE B. DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (C-RS) ZONE
SECTION:
15-5B-1: Purpose
15-5B-2: Permitted Uses
15-5B-3: Site Development Standards
15-5B-4: Landscaping
15-5B-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-5B-6: Signs
15-5B-7: Residential Use Standards
15-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Downtown Commercial on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is comprised
of commercial retail-service areas and certain lands where such development is
desirable and appears likely to occur. Regulations are designed to stabilize
and protect the commercial retail-service character of the downtown area, and
to create a favorable environment for pedestrian circulation and access.
Principal uses are, therefore, restricted to commercial retail-service use, and
certain essential and complementary uses as permitted under the conditional use
permit. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all commercial zones are
listed in Article 15-5A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5B-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the C-RS Zone shall comply with the development standards
contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   All uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building,
except:
         a.   Outdoor restaurants, cafes or seating areas, provided they comply
with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title; and
         b.   Outdoor recreational activities.
      2.   Required on-site parking shall not be allowed between the use and/or
building and the front lot line upon which said use or building faces.
      3.   Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided
for in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
      4.   Other provisions as required by chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot area: A minimum of 5,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   Buildings and structures shall not exceed the height of 45 feet.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of 8 feet is permitted on sloping lots.
The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: None required, unless both the C-RS Zone and a
residential zone occupy the same block face. In such a case, the setback shall
be the same as the residential zone.
      2.   Side Yard: None required, unless the side yard abuts property with a
different zone classification, in which case the side yard setback shall be a
minimum of 10 feet.
      3.   Rear Yard: None required, unless the following conditions exist:
         a.   If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public
right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, rear yard
setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet; and
         b.   If the rear yard abuts property with a non-commercial zone
classification, the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
   E.   Lot frontage: No minimum requirements.
   F.   Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings, excluding
residential floor area, shall not exceed the total net square footage of the
property multiplied by 1.0 or an FAR of one to one (1:1).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6608.png]
   G.   Walls and fences: Walls and fences shall comply with the requirements
of chapter 2 of this title.
   H.   Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's
Transportation Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within
adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be
provided between buildings. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5B-4: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5B-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5B-6: SIGNS:
As required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5B-7: RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS:
Residential uses shall be permitted only on the floor above street level,
provided the street level is used for commercial purposes. One dwelling unit
shall be permitted for each 4,356 square feet of lot area. Parking for the
residential use shall conform with the requirements for multiple-family
dwelling units, except that parking shall not be required to be provided in a
covered structure. Tandem parking shall be allowed in a configuration that
provides all of the commercial spaces direct ingress and egress to the site.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE C. NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-2) ZONE
SECTION:
15-5C-1: Purpose
15-5C-2: Permitted Uses
15-5C-3: Site Development Standards
15-5C-4: Landscaping
15-5C-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-5C-6: Signs
15-5C-7: Residential Use Standards
15-5C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Neighborhood Commercial on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended
to promote, preserve, enhance and service the neighborhood commercial needs of
adjacent residential areas. Regulations are designed and intended to cater to
both pedestrian and vehicular access. Principal uses are, therefore, restricted
to neighborhood serving general commercial uses. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all commercial zones are
listed in Article 15-5A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5C-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the C-2 Zone shall comply with the development standards
contained in this section.
   A.   General Provision:
      1.   All uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building,
except:
         a.   Outdoor restaurants, cafes or seating areas, provided they comply
with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title; and
         b.   Outdoor recreational activities.
      2.   Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided
for in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
      3.   Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot area: A minimum of 5,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of 28 feet.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of 8 feet is permitted on sloping lots.
The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: 15 feet minimum.
      2.   Side Yard: None required, unless the side yard abuts property with a
non-commercial zone classification, in which case the side yard setback shall
be a minimum of 10 feet.
      3.   Rear Yard: 10 feet minimum.
   E.   Lot Frontage: No minimum requirements.
   F.   Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings, excluding
residential floor area, shall not exceed the net square footage of the
property, multiplied by 0.5 or an FAR of 0.5:1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6606.png]
   G.   Walls and fences: Walls and fences shall comply with the location
requirements of chapter 2 of this title.
   H.   Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's
Transportation Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within
adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then pedestrian access shall be provided between
buildings. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5C-4: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5C-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5C-6: SIGNS:
In compliance with chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5C-7: RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS:
Residential uses shall be permitted only on the floor above street level,
provided the street level is used for commercial purposes. One dwelling unit
shall be permitted for each 4,356 square feet of lot area. Parking for the
residential use shall conform with the requirements for multiple-family
dwelling units, except that parking shall not be required to be provided in a
covered structure. Tandem parking shall be allowed in a configuration that
provides all of the commercial spaces direct ingress and egress to the site.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE D. GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-3) ZONE
SECTION:
15-5D-1: Purpose
15-5D-2: Permitted Uses
15-5D-3: Site Development Standards
15-5D-4: Landscaping
15-5D-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-5D-6: Signs
15-5D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated General Commercial on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended
to provide for the development of commercial establishments which serve a broad
cross section of the City and surrounding area. Regulations are designed to
promote and control their growth in a favorable environment to all abutting and
surrounding land uses. Principal uses, therefore, include a broad spectrum of
retail and service commercial uses. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all commercial zones are
listed in Article 15-5A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5D-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the C-3 Zone shall comply with the development standards contained
in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   All uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building except:
         a.   Outdoor restaurants, cafes or seating areas, provided they comply
with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title;
         b.   Outdoor retail activities customarily conducted outdoors,
including, but not limited to, lumberyards and nurseries; and
         c.   Outdoor recreational activities.
      2.   Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided
for in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
      3.   Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot area: A minimum of 10,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   East of Sepulveda Boulevard: No building or structure shall exceed
200 feet.
      2.   West of Sepulveda Boulevard: No building or structure shall exceed
45 feet.
      3.   If the subject property abuts residentially zoned property, no
building or structure shall exceed 40 feet.
      4.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      5.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: 10 feet minimum
      2.   Side yard: None required, unless one of the following conditions
exists:
         a.   If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, a minimum of 10 feet
shall be provided; and
         b.   If the side yard abuts residentially zoned property, a minimum of
10 feet shall be provided.
      3.   Rear yard: None required, unless one of the following conditions
exists:
         a.   If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public
right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, a minimum of
10 feet shall be provided; and
         b.   If the rear yard abuts property with a non-commercial
classification, a minimum of 10 feet shall be provided.
      4.   Future street right-of-way Lines. If any future street right-of-way
line has been established by plan adopted by the city council, such line shall
be considered to be the property line for purposes of determining setbacks.
      5.   Easements. Setbacks from legal easements, other than street right-
of-way easements, shall not be required. In addition to the appropriate review
and approval by the city, no construction of any structure or improvement is
allowed within a legal easement without written authorization from the legal
holder of the easement. Such authorization shall be in a form acceptable to the
Director.
   E.   Lot frontage: Each lot shall be a minimum frontage on a street of 100
feet.
   F.   Building area: The total net floor area of all buildings shall not
exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 1.0 or an FAR
of one to one (1:1). Additional FAR may be granted for properties east of
Sepulveda Boulevard only, with approval of a transfer of development rights
(TDR) plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6604.png]
   G.   Walls and fences: Walls and fences shall comply with the location
requirement of chapter 2 of this title.
   H.   Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's
Transportation Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within
adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be
provided between buildings. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5D-4: LANDSCAPING:
As required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5D-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5D-6: SIGNS:
As required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE E. CORPORATE OFFICE (CO) ZONE
SECTION:
15-5E-1: Purpose
15-5E-2: Permitted Uses
15-5E-3: Site Development Standards
15-5E-4: Landscaping
15-5E-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-5E-6: Signs
15-5E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Corporate Office on the General
Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended to
provide for the development of office projects. Regulations are designed to
promote and control their growth in a favorable environment to all abutting and
surrounding land uses. Principal uses are, therefore, restricted to a mixture
of office and food serving uses with limited retail uses. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-
2023)
15-5E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all commercial zones are
listed in Article 15-5A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5E-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the CO Zone shall comply with the development standards contained
in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   All uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building,
except:
         a.   Outdoor restaurants and cafes incidental to the permitted use,
provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title.
         b.   Recreational facilities customarily conducted in the open.
      2.   Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided
for in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
      3.   Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot area: A minimum of 10,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   East of Pacific Coast Highway: No building or structure shall exceed
200 feet.
      2.   West of Pacific Coast Highway: No building or structure shall exceed
45 feet.
      3.   If the subject property abuts residentially zoned property, no
building or structure shall exceed 40 feet.
      4.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      5.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: A minimum of 20 feet.
      2.   Side yard: A minimum of 10 feet, unless one of the following
conditions exists:
         a.   If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, a minimum of 20 feet
shall be provided; and
         b.   If the side yard abuts property zoned for residential uses, a
minimum of 100 feet shall be provided, including a 25-foot landscape buffer.
      3.   Rear yard: A minimum of 10 feet, unless one of the following
conditions exists:
         a.   If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public
right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, a minimum of
25 feet shall be provided; and
         b.   If the rear yard abuts property zoned for residential uses, a
minimum of 100 feet shall be provided, including a 25-foot landscape buffer.
      4.   Future street right-of-way lines. If any future street right-of-way
line has been established by plan adopted by the city council, such line shall
be considered to be the property line for purposes of determining setbacks.
      5.   Easements. Setbacks from legal easements, other than street right-
of-way easements, shall not be required. In addition to the appropriate review
and approval by the city, no construction of any structure or improvement is
allowed within a legal easement without written authorization from the legal
holder of the easement. Such authorization shall be in a form acceptable to the
Director.
   E.   Lot frontage: Each lot shall have a minimum frontage on a street of
100-feet.
   F.   Building area: The total net floor area of all buildings shall not
exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 0.8 or an FAR
of 0.8:1. Additional FAR may be granted for properties east of Pacific Coast
Highway only, with approval of a transfer of development rights (TDR) plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6602.png]
   G.   Walls and fences: Wall and fences shall comply with the location
requirements of chapter 2 of this title.
   H.   Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's
Transportation Demand Management Program, chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within
adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then pedestrian access shall be provided between
buildings. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5E-4: LANDSCAPING:
As required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5E-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5E-6: SIGNS:
As required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE F. URBAN MIXED USE NORTH (MU-N) ZONE
SECTION:
15-5F-1: Purpose
15-5F-2: Permitted Uses
15-5F-3: Site Development Standards
15-5F-4: Landscaping
15-5F-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-5F-6: Signs
15-5F-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Urban Mixed Use North on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. The Urban Mixed Use
North (MU-N) zone is established to provide area(s) where a mixture of
compatible commercial, office, research and development, retail and hotel uses
can locate and develop in a mutually beneficial manner. It is the intent of the
MU-N zone to have several types of uses occupy a single building, or if a
project includes multiple buildings, then each building should contain a
different type of use. It is anticipated, although not required, that each type
of use will be from two or more of the following categories: retail, service,
hotel, office, research and development, theaters or recreational facilities.
It is further intended to ensure that adequate open space and development
regulations will create a favorable environment for abutting uses as well as
ensuring the compatibility and harmonious existence of development within MU-
N zoned property. Businesses located within this zone are encouraged to provide
street level uses which allow for, and facilitate, pedestrian activity for area
workers and visitors. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all commercial zones are
listed in Article 15-5A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5F-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the MU-N Zone shall comply with the development standards
contained in this section.
   A.   General Provision:
      1.   All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
except:
         a.   Electrical distribution stations.
         b.   Outdoor restaurants and cafes incidental to the permitted use,
provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title.
         c.   Recreational facilities customarily conducted in the open.
         d.   Special uses, to the degree the conditional use permit granting
such special uses expressly permits operation in other than a fully enclosed
building.
      2.   Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria as provided
for in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
      3.   Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot area: A minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of 175 feet.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: A minimum of 20 feet.
      2.   Side yard: A minimum of 10 feet, unless the side yard adjoins a
dedicated street, in which case a minimum of 20 feet shall be provided.
      3.   Rear yard: Five feet minimum, unless the rear yard adjoins an alley,
dedicated street, or public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through
the rear yard. In these cases, a minimum of 20 feet shall be provided.
      4.   Future street right-of-way lines. If any future street right-of-way
line has been established by plan adopted by the city council, such line shall
be considered to be the property line for purposes of determining setbacks.
      5.   Easements. Setbacks from legal easements, other than street right-
of-way easements, shall not be required. In addition to the appropriate review
and approval by the city, no construction of any structure or improvement is
allowed within a legal easement without written authorization from the legal
holder of the easement. Such authorization shall be in a form acceptable to the
Director.
   E.   Lot Frontage: Each lot in the MU-N Zone shall have a minimum frontage
on a street of 100 feet.
   F.   Building area: The total net floor area of all buildings shall not
exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 1.3 or an FAR
1.3:1. Additional FAR may be granted for properties east of Pacific Coast
Highway only, with approval of a transfer of development rights (TDR) plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6600.png]
   G.   Walls and fences: Fences in the MU-N Zone shall comply with the
requirements of chapter 2 of this title.
   H.   Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's
transportation demand management program in chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within
adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then pedestrian access shall be provided between
buildings. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5F-4: LANDSCAPING:
As required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15-15A of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5F-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5F-6: SIGNS:
As required chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE G. URBAN MIXED USE SOUTH (MU-S) ZONE
SECTION:
15-5G-1: Purpose
15-5G-2: Permitted Uses
15-5G-3: Site Development Standards
15-5G-4: Landscaping
15-5G-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-5G-6: Signs
15-5G-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Urban Mixed Use South on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. The Urban Mixed Use
South (MU-S) Zone is established to provide area(s) where a mixture of
compatible commercial, offices, research and development, retail and hotel uses
can locate and develop in a mutually beneficial manner. It is the intent of the
MU-S Zone to have several types of uses occupy a single building, or if a
project includes multiple buildings, then each building should contain a
different type of use. It is anticipated, although not required, that each type
of use will be from two or more of the following categories: retail, service,
hotel, office, research and development, theaters or recreational facilities.
It is further intended to ensure that adequate open space and development
regulations will create a favorable environment for abutting uses as well as
ensuring the compatibility and harmonious existence of development within MU-
S Zoned property. Businesses located within this zone are encouraged to provide
street level uses which allow for, and facilitate, pedestrian activity for area
workers and visitors. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5G-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all commercial zones are
listed in Article 15-5A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5G-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the MU-S Zone shall comply with the development standards
contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
except:
         a.   Electrical distribution stations;
         b.   Outdoor restaurants and cafes incidental to the permitted use,
provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title;
         c.   Recreational facilities customarily conducted in the open; and
         d.   Special uses, to the degree the conditional use permit granting
such special uses expressly permits operation in other than a fully enclosed
building.
      2.   Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria as provided
for in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
      3.   Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot area: A minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of 175 feet.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setback:
      1.   Front Yard: 20 feet minimum, except that along Rosecrans Avenue a
minimum setback of 30 feet must be provided.
      2.   Side Yard: 10 feet minimum, unless one of the following conditions
exists:
         a.   If the side yard abuts property with a non-commercial zoning
classification, the side yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
         b.   If the side yard abuts Rosecrans Avenue or Park Place, the side
yard setback shall be a minimum of 30 feet.
      3.   Rear Yard: Five feet minimum, unless the rear yard adjoins an alley,
dedicated street, or public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through
the rear yard. In these cases, the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 20
feet.
   E.   Lot frontage: Each lot in the MU-S Zone shall have a minimum frontage
on a street of 100 feet.
   F.   Building area: The total net floor area of all buildings shall not
exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 1.3 or an FAR
of 1.3:1. Additional FAR may be granted for properties east of Sepulveda
Boulevard only, with approval of a transfer of development rights (TDR) plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6598.png]
    G.   Walls and fences: Fences in the MU-S Zone shall comply with the
requirements of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six-foot high masonry wall
shall be provided along property lines for those yards abutting residential or
industrial zones.
   H.   Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's
Transportation Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within
adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then pedestrian access shall be provided between
buildings. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5G-4: LANDSCAPING:
As required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5G-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5G-6: SIGNS:
As required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE H. COMMERCIAL CENTER (C-4) ZONE
SECTION:
15-5H-1: Purpose
15-5H-2: Permitted Uses
15-5H-3: Site Development Standards
15-5H-4: Landscaping
15-5H-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-5H-6: Signs
15-5H-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
affecting property designated as commercial center on the General Plan land use
map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended to provide for
developing commercial establishments serving the City and surrounding area.
Regulations are designed to promote and control growth of commercial center
projects such as retail and service uses. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5H-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all commercial zones are
listed in Article 15-5A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5H-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the C-4 Zone must comply with the development standards contained
in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   All uses must be conducted within a fully enclosed building except:
         a.   Outdoor restaurants, cafes or seating areas, complying with the
provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title;
         b.   Outdoor wholesale or retail activities customarily conducted
outdoors, including, without limitation, lumberyards, nurseries, and periodic
outdoor sales;
         c.   Outdoor recreational activities; and
         d.   Temporary uses conducted for a period not to exceed one year in a
temporary trailer, shipping container, or similar structure.
      2.   Before the City approves any development project, the project must
meet all requirements of the transportation demand management (TDM) and trip
reduction criteria as set forth in chapter 16 of this title.
      3.   Other provisions as set forth in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot Area: A minimum of 10,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   No building or structure may exceed 65 feet.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks: The setback requirements shall not be applicable to
environmental treatment facilities that are determined by a regulatory agency
to be necessary to mitigate the presence of hazardous substances that are
present in the soils on the parcel of property on which a treatment facility is
located. However, the environmental treatment facility must otherwise comply
with the City's traffic safety and Building Code requirements.
      1.   Front yard: 25 feet minimum.
      2.   Side yard: Zero feet minimum, unless one of the following conditions
exists:
         a.   If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, at least 25 feet
must be provided; and
         b.   If the side yard abuts property with a different classification,
the side yard setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
      3.   Rear yard: 15 feet minimum unless one of the following conditions
exists:
         a.   If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public
right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, at least 25
feet must be provided;
         b.   If the rear yard adjoins a railroad right-of-way, at least 10
feet must be provided; and
         c.   If the rear yard abuts property with a different classification,
the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of feet.
   E.   Lot frontage:
      1.   Each lot must provide a minimum frontage on a public street of 100
feet; or
      2.   Flag lots are permitted with a minimum stem width of 20 feet at a
public street. If the flag lot does not provide physical access to a public
street, a permanent access easement must be provided from the lot across any
contiguous lot or lots which conform with the minimum lot frontage requirement
to a public street. The easement, and any proposed modification to the
easement, requires City review and approval.
   F.   Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings may not exceed
the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 0.275 or an FAR
0.275:1. However, additional FAR may be granted by the City pursuant to a
development agreement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6596.png]
   G.   Transfer of development rights: The transfer of development density
from one or more donor parcels to any other receiving parcel or parcels is
permitted within the C-4 Zone; provided, that the requirements of this section
are met.
      1.   Location of transfer parcels: The donor and receiving parcels must
each be located entirely within the C-4 Zone.
      2.   Maximum net floor area (NFA) for a receiving parcel: The NFA on any
receiving parcel increased in density pursuant to this section cannot exceed an
FAR of 0.6.
      3.   Reduced NFA for a donor parcel: The permitted NFA on any donor
parcel decreased in density pursuant to this section must be reduced by the
amount of NFA transferred to one or more receiving parcels.
      4.   Building standards for parcels: All buildings must comply with the
building standards of the C-4 Zone.
      5.   Transfer of development rights: A transfer of development rights may
be initiated by a person submitting a written application for a transfer to the
Community Development Department that identifies the donor parcel(s), receiving
parcel(s), the amount of NFA proposed to be transferred, and the proposed uses
of the donor and receiving parcels.
      6.   Review by Director: The Director must approve, conditionally approve
or deny a transfer plan at a public hearing. The Director must use the
following criteria in making a determination:
         a.   The transfer meets the objectives of this title and the purposes
of the C-4 Zone;
         b.   The proposed transfer will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the vicinity;
         c.   The proposed transfer complies with each of the applicable
provisions of this chapter;
         d.   The proposed transfer recognizes and compensates for potential
impacts that could be generated by the proposed transfer, such as aesthetics,
noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, traffic and hazards; and
         e.   The proposed transfer plan is consistent with the General Plan.
      7.   Notice and hearing: Upon filing of an application for a transfer
plan by a property owner or an applicant with the consent of the owner, the
Director must give public notice, as provided in chapter 28 of this title, of
the intention to consider at a public hearing the granting of a transfer plan.
      8.   Appeal to Planning Commission: The applicant or any person affected
by the Director 's decision respecting a transfer plan can appeal that decision
to the Planning Commission pursuant to chapter 29 of this title.
      9.   Appeal to City Council: The applicant or any person affected by the
Planning Commission's decision respecting a transfer plan can appeal the
Planning Commission's decision to the City Council pursuant to chapter 29 of
this title.
      10.   Final Approval: A transfer plan approved by the Director, Planning
Commission and/or City Council becomes final upon the completion of all
applicable conditions of approval and the following:
         a.   Legal Assurances: A covenant or other suitable, legally binding
agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney must be recorded against the
affected donor and receiving parcels confirming the transfer of NFA between/
among parcels and setting forth any conditions of approval imposed by the City.
The covenant must be executed by all parties that have a legal or equitable
interest in the affected donor and receiving parcels. The covenant must confirm
that from the date of recording of the covenant, the affected parcels will be
burdened by the covenant in perpetuity and the covenant will run with the land
and the FAR for the donor parcel and receiving parcel will be set in the
covenant pursuant to the FAR allowed at the time of approval of the transfer;
and
      11.   Removal/Modification: The Director may approve the removal or
modification of a covenant if the transfer has not been entirely utilized by a
receiving parcel or a different parcel has been identified as a donor parcel.
The legal and equitable owners of the affected parcels must execute a removal
or modification covenant in a form approved by the City Attorney.
   H.   Walls and fences: Walls and fences must comply with the location
requirement of chapter 2 of this title.
   I.   Access: All development projects must provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's
Transportation Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects must provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within
adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then safe and convenient pedestrian access must be
provided between buildings. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5H-4: LANDSCAPING:
As required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5H-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-5H-6: SIGNS:
Signs in the C-4 Zone must comply with requirements of chapter 18 of this title
except as specified below:
   A.   A maximum of three ground or monument signs not to exceed 45 feet in
height each are permitted along the Pacific Coast Highway street frontage,
north of the Union Pacific Railroad.
   B.   A maximum of two ground or monument signs not to exceed 25 feet in
height each are permitted along the Pacific Coast Highway street frontage south
of the Union Pacific Railroad.
   C.   A maximum of two ground or monument signs (not including wayfinding
signs), not to exceed 25 feet in height each are permitted along the Park Place
street frontage.
   D.   A maximum of one ground or monument sign (not including wayfinding
signs), not to exceed 25 feet in height is permitted along the Allied Way
street frontage.
   E.   A maximum of one ground or monument sign, not to exceed 65 feet in
height is permitted along the Allied Way street frontage.
   F.   A maximum of two ground or monument signs (not including wayfinding
signs), not to exceed 20 feet each are permitted along the Rosecrans Avenue
street frontage.
   G.   A maximum of one roof sign up to 450 square feet in that portion of the
C-4 Zone located south of the Union Pacific Railroad and north of Village Drive
which shall not count toward the maximum 15 percent permitted for storefront
signage as specified in subsection 15-18-4A(1)(b) of this title.
   H.   Parcels that are comprised of a minimum of 7.5 acres and that have at
least 80 percent of the floor area devoted to retail and restaurant uses may
have up to two (light emitting diode signs ("LED sign") that do not exceed 30
feet in height and 60 feet in width so long as: 1) the signs only advertise
businesses and products (but only in conjunction with the name of the business
that sells the product) that are located on the parcel or display movie
projections and abstract videos that are not related to advertising any
product, or entertainment, retail or service use and 2) the sign is oriented
such that it is intended to be viewed by individuals located on the parcel and
not by individuals located in a public right-of-way. Pursuant to a development
agreement that covers multiple parcels of property, and so long as the
requirements of this provision are otherwise met, the names of businesses and
products (but only in conjunction with the name of the business that sells the
product) that are located on parcels that are subject to the development
agreement may be advertised on an LED sign located on another parcel that is
subject to the same development agreement. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
CHAPTER 6
INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. PERMITTED USES IN INDUSTRIAL ZONES
SECTION:
15-6A-1: Permitted Uses
15-6A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Table No. 1 below contains the uses permitted in the M-1 and M-2 zones,
including uses permitted by right, accessory uses, uses subject to an
administrative use permit and uses subject to a conditional use permit
   Table No. 1 - permitted uses in industrial zones
Uses Zones
     M-1 M-2
Uses                                        Zones
                                            M-1               M-2
Eating and drinking establishments
Drive-through restaurants                   CUP               CUP
Restaurants and cafes                       P                 CUP
General Commercial uses
Adult-oriented businesses
Alcohol - off-site sale at limited support  AUP               AUP
service retail establishments.
Alcohol - on-site sale and consumption at   AUP               AUP
restaurants and delicatessens
Animal boarding                             CUP               CUP
Animal hospitals (and veterinary services)  P                 CUP
Billiard/pool rooms and bowling alleys      CUP               CUP
Business and consumer support services      CUP               CUP
Drive-through or walk-up services,          A                 A
excluding drive-through restaurants.
Financial institutions                      CUP               CUP
Fitness centers                             P                 CUP
General offices                             P                 CUP
Medical-dental offices                      CUP               CUP
Medical-dental laboratories                 CUP               CUP
Motion picture/television production        CUP               CUP
facilities (indoor)1
Multi-media offices                         CUP               CUP
Office worker-oriented services, not
located on Pacific Coast Highway or El      CUP               CUP
Segundo Boulevard
Personal services                           CUP               CUP
Retail sales                                CUP               CUP
Service stations2                           CUP               CUP
Group care and hospitality uses
Daycare centers                             P                 CUP
Dog daycare (indoor)                        P
Dog daycare (outdoor)                       CUP               CUP
Emergency shelters, per ESMC Section 15-6A- P
11
Hotels and motels                           CUP               CUP
Low-barrier navigation centers, pursuant to P
ESMC 15-37A
Industrial
Construction yards                                            P
Extraction of raw materials and refining                      P
Factories                                                     P
Freight forwarding, transfer, trucking      CUP               CUP
yards or terminals
General storage, warehousing and            P
ministorage
Generating stations                                           P
Heavy manufacturing uses                                      P
High and medium bay labs                    P
Light manufacturing uses and related        P
offices
Research and development                    P                 CUP
Waste material transfer and storage         N                 N
Wholesale uses                              CUP               CUP
Institutional
Government buildings/public uses            P                 CUP
Schools                                     CUP               CUP
Miscellaneous uses
Data centers                                CUP               CUP
Helicopter landing facilities, per ESMC
section                                     CUP               CUP
15-2-13 
Medium and large-scale ground-mounted solar P                 P
energy systems
Open storage of commodities sold or         A                 A
utilized on the premises.
Outdoor dining areas, per ESMC Chapter 15-2 A                 A
Public utilities, including, but not
limited to, power substations and telephone P
exchanges
Residential Uses                            N                 N
Recreational facilities (public and         P                 CUP
private)
Roof-mounted solar energy systems.          A                 A
Small and medium-scale ground-mounted solar A                 A
energy systems.
Any use customarily incidental to a         A                 A
permitted use
Other similar uses approved by the          P, A, AUP, CUP, N P, A, AUP, CUP, N
Director, per ESMC Chapter 15-22
 
Notes:
   1.   P = Permitted use, A = Accessory use, AUP = Use subject to an
administrative use permit (Per ESMC Chapters 23 and 23), CUP = Use subject to a
conditional use permit (per ESMC Chapters 24 and 28), N = prohibited
   2.   Service stations are permitted with a CUP if located a minimum of 500
feet from any residential zoned property. This distance criteria does not apply
to properties east of Pacific Coast Highway.
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1653, 12-5-2023; Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
ARTICLE B. LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-1) ZONE
SECTION:
15-6B-1: Purpose
15-6B-2: Permitted Uses
15-6B-3: Site Development Standards
15-6B-4: Landscaping
15-6B-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-6B-6: Signs
15-6B-7: Emergency Shelters Development Standards
15-6B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Light Industrial on the General
Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended to
provide for the location and grouping of light industrial activities, research,
and technological processes, and related offices and auxiliary uses performing
support services for existing and permitted establishments, companies or
business firms within the zone. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all industrial zones are
listed in Article 15-6A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-6B-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the M-1 Zone shall comply with the development standards
contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   No operations and uses conducted on the premises shall be in
violation of this Code, State laws, or environmental regulations by reason of
noise, odor, dust, mud, smoke, light, vibrations or other similar causes.
      2.   All uses in the M-1 Zone shall be conducted completely within a
fully enclosed building except:
         a.   Recreational facilities customarily undertaken in the open;
         b.   Special uses, provided such use expressly permits operation in
other than a fully enclosed building as provided through an administrative
determination; and
         c.   Outdoor restaurant seating, provided it complies with the
provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title.
      3.   Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided
for in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
      4.   Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot area: A minimum of 10,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of 200 feet.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: A minimum of 25 feet.
      2.   Side Yard: A minimum of 15 feet, unless the side yard adjoins a
dedicated street, in which case the side yard setback shall be a minimum of 25
feet.
      3.   Rear Yard: A minimum of 10 feet, unless the rear yard adjoins an
alley, dedicated street, public right-of-way, or if the primary access is
through the rear yard, in which case the rear yard setback shall be a minimum
of 25 feet.
   E.   Lot Frontage: A minimum frontage of 100 feet shall be provided on a
dedicated street.
   F.   Building Area: The total net "floor area" of all buildings, as defined
in section
15-1-6 of this title, on any parcel or lot shall not exceed the total square
footage of the parcel or lot area multiplied by 0.6, thereby giving a floor
area ratio (FAR) of 0.6:1. However, additional FAR may be granted by the City
upon the preparation and approval of a specific plan, consistent with section
65450 et seq., of the California Government Code, or, for properties east of
Pacific Coast Highway only, with the approval of a transfer of development
rights (TDR) plan. The total net floor area of high and medium bay labs may be
multiplied by a factor of 0.5 to determine the allowed net floor area, if an
agreement is recorded which ensures that the use and the number of employees is
consistent with the definition of "high and medium bay labs" in section
15-1-6 of this title.
   G.   Walls and fences: Walls and fences in the M-1 Zone shall comply with
the requirements of chapter 2 of this title.
   H.   Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's
transportation demand management program in chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site if within
adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be
provided between buildings. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-6B-4: LANDSCAPING:
As required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-6B-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title.
15-6B-6: SIGNS:
As required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-6B-7: EMERGENCY SHELTERS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Emergency Shelters: Emergency shelters are subject to the following,
objective development standards:
      1.   Not more than one emergency shelter is permitted within a radius of
three hundred feet (300') from another emergency shelter.
      2.   Not more than twelve (12) persons can be served on a nightly basis.
      3.   Maximum length of stay of a person in an emergency shelter is
limited to one hundred and eighty (180) days in any twelve (12)-month period.
      4.   Each emergency shelter must have an on-site management office, with
at least one manager present at all times the emergency shelter is in
operation.
      5.   Each emergency shelter must have on site security employees, with at
least one security employee present at all times the emergency shelter is in
operation.
      6.   Staging drop off, intake, and pick up of emergency shelter clients
must take place inside a building, at a rear or side entrance not adjacent to a
public right-of-way, or in an interior courtyard. Any exterior waiting areas
must be physically and visually separated from public view of a right-of-way
with a minimum six-foot tall decorative masonry wall and/or a six-foot tall
hedge or similar mature landscaping as approved by the Director. Floor plans
for the emergency shelter must be submitted with the building plans that show
the size and location of any proposed interior and/or exterior waiting or
resident intake areas.
      7.   Off street parking must be provided as set forth in this Code,
except that the number of off street parking spaces provided must be one
parking space per employee on duty with a minimum of three employee parking
spaces. Notwithstanding this requirement, the required number of off street
parking spaces cannot exceed the spaces required for similar uses of the same
size in the M-1 Zone.
      8.   Exterior lighting must be provided at all building entrances and
outdoor activity areas, and must be activated between sunset and sunrise of
each day. All exterior lighting must comply with this Code.  (Ord. 1648, 6-21-
2023; amd. Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
ARTICLE C. HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (M-2) ZONE
SECTION:
15-6C-1: Purpose
15-6C-2: Permitted Uses
15-6C-3: Site Development Standards
15-6C-4: Landscaping
15-6C-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-6C-6: Signs
15-6C-1: PURPOSE:
To provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations
which are designated heavy industrial on the general plan land use map and in
the general plan text. This zone is intended to provide areas suitable for the
development of heavy manufacturing, assembling, or processing activities having
unusual or potentially deleterious operational characteristics, that would be
detrimental if allowed to operate in other zones within the city. (Ord. 1648,
6-21-2023)
15-6C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses subject to administrative use
permit, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all industrial zones are
listed in Article 15-6A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-6C-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the M-2 Zone shall comply with the development standards
contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   Operations and uses conducted on the premises, which are or may be
in violation of this Code, State laws, or environmental regulations by reason
of noise, odor, dust, mud, light, smoke, vibrations or other similar causes,
shall conform to all City, State and Federal regulations which are designed to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this City and the
employees of the proposed use.
      2.   Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the
transportation demand management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided
for in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
      3.   Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot area: A minimum of 20,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   A maximum of 200 feet.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is included
in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade
plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: 25 feet minimum.
      2.   Side Yard: 15 feet minimum, unless the side yard adjoins a dedicated
street, in which case the side yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
      3.   Rear Yard: 10 feet minimum, unless the rear yard adjoins an alley,
dedicated street, or public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through
the rear yard, in which case the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 25
feet.
   E.   Lot frontage: A minimum frontage of 100 feet shall be provided on a
dedicated street.
   F.   Building area: The total net "floor area" of all buildings, as defined
in section
15-1-6 of this title, on any parcel or lot shall not exceed the total square
footage of the parcel or lot area multiplied by 0.6, thereby giving a floor
area ratio of 0.6:1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6592.png]
   G.   Walls and fences: As required by chapter 2 of this title.
   H.   Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and
facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the city's
transportation demand management program in chapter 16 of this title. In
addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between
buildings and transit facilities located on site and/or off site if within
adjoining public rights of way. If the building is part of a multi-building
development project, then safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be
provided between buildings.
   I.   Recreational facilities: All developments greater than 500 acres shall
maintain employee recreational facilities subject to the approval of the
Director of Community Development and the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 1648,
6-21-2023)
15-6C-4: LANDSCAPING:
As required by section
15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-6C-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-6C-6: SIGNS:
As required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
CHAPTER 7
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (MDR) OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
15-7A-1: Purpose
15-7A-2: Activation
15-7A-3: Development Standards
15-7A-4: Live/Work Development Standards
15-7A-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   To provide for an area within the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan area that
is appropriate for and capable of sustaining residential uses.
   B.   Moreover, it is the intent in identifying the long-term potential for
residential use in the area designated to establish that residential use is
explicitly excluded from the remainder of the Smoky Hollow specific plan area,
except for single caretaker dwelling units provided for elsewhere in the plan.
   C.   The MDR Zone shall be considered a "floating zone" in that once a need
is identified, this zone can be activated. This floating zone for the Smoky
Hollow Specific Plan area attempts to recognize that future residential market
forces are anticipated in certain portions of the specific plan area and
sensible land use planning dictates their exact locations given adjacent land
uses and proximity to arterial streets.
   D.   In effect, this zone is not a true "floating zone" in that it does not
add more regulations over the existing Smoky Hollow East base zone. Rather, it
is a "holding zone" which can be activated and used in place of the base zone.
(Ord. 1580, 2-5-2019; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-7A-2: ACTIVATION:
The following processes activate the MDR Zone:
   A.   A General Plan amendment to change the designation for proposed
activated property from Smoky Hollow Specific Plan to Multi-Family Residential;
   B.   A Specific Plan amendment to remove the proposed activated property
from the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan; and
   C.   A Zone Change application to change the zone of the proposed activated
property from Smoky Hollow East with MDR Overlay to Multi-Family Residential
(R-3) without MDR Overlay. (Ord. 1580, 2-5-2019)
15-7A-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards that apply to the underlying base zone shall apply
unless and until the MDR is activated. If the MDR is properly activated, Multi-
Family Residential (R-3) zoning standards shall apply to the activated property
along with the following additional standards:
   A.   The setback along Grand Avenue shall be 30 feet minimum for properties
east of Kansas Street, whether it is for a front or side yard.
   B.   Vehicular access to MDR activated properties may not be taken directly
from Grand Avenue. (Ord. 1580, 2-5-2019; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-7A-4: LIVE/WORK DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Live/work uses are in addition to residential uses and must comply with all the
following:
   A.   Live/work uses cannot be open to walk-in trade or client visits other
than by appointment;
   B.   Only one employee, other than the resident, may be employed on site;
   C.   Work activity must be conducted entirely within the individual unit;
   D.   Outdoor storage is not permitted;
   E.   Live/work uses cannot generate hazardous materials or employ hazardous
processes;
   F.   The live/work use cannot be publicly observed;
   G.   Live/work impacts, such as noise, vibration, dust, odors, fumes, smoke,
heat, electrical interference or other similar nuisances, cannot be perceptible
beyond the individual unit;
   H.   Live/work activities cannot increase pedestrian or vehicle traffic
beyond that ordinarily associated with residential occupancy nor can it reduce
the number of required off street parking spaces available for residential use;
   I.   One wall sign is permitted at the entrance of each individual unit. The
wall sign cannot exceed six square feet and cannot extend above or out from the
wall. Signs cannot emit sounds, odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or
steam. Signage may be lighted from another source such as gooseneck lamps.
Internally illuminated and neon signs are not allowed. Rooftop signage is not
allowed within the zone. Signs cannot contain any revolving, fluttering,
flashing or spinning elements. All signage is subject to city requirements for
sign permits. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE B. MULTIMEDIA OVERLAY (MMO) DISTRICT
SECTION:
15-7B-1: Purpose
15-7B-2: Permitted Uses
15-7B-3: Permitted Accessory Land Uses
15-7B-4: Uses Subject To Administrative Use Permit
15-7B-5: Uses Subject To Conditional Use Permit
15-7B-6: Prohibited Uses
15-7B-7: Site Development Standards
15-7B-8: Landscaping
15-7B-9: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-7B-10: Signs
15-7B-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this district is to provide consistency with and
implement policies related to those locations, which are designated for the
Multimedia Overlay (MMO) District. The MMO District is established to provide
creators of multimedia (film, television, music video, multimedia, digital
artists, web authors, etc.) and their support elements the opportunity to
obtain the space, equipment and personnel necessary to conceive, produce and
deliver their work in one location. It is the intent of the MMO District to
allow for the coexistence of uses permitted in the underlying zone along with
the possibility of multimedia uses.
   B.   It is anticipated, although not required, that each type of use will be
from two (2) or more of the following categories: office, sound stages and
support offices, post production, craft shops, services, rentals, theaters and
performance, commissary, or archive. It is further intended to ensure that
adequate open space and development regulations will create a favorable
environment for abutting uses as well as ensuring the compatibility and
harmonious existence of development within MMO District property. Businesses
located within this district are encouraged to provide street level uses which
allow for, and facilitate, pedestrian activity for area workers and visitors
and opportunities for easy interface. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1573,
10-2-2018)
15-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses would be permitted in the proposed MMO District:
   A.   Commissary.
   B.   Craft shops and rentals.
   C.   Movie and entertainment facilities.
   D.   Multimedia archive facilities.
   E.   Multimedia related office and postproduction facilities.
   F.   Picture equipment sales.
   G.   Special effects studios.
   H.   Studio/sound stage(s) and other support facilities.
   I.   Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community Development,
as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010; amd. Ord. 1573,
10-2-2018; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-7B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY LAND USES:
The following uses would be permitted as accessory uses in the MMO District:
   A.   Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but
excluding drive-through restaurants.
   B.   Employee recreational facilities and play area.
   C.   Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
   D.    Outdoor dining areas pursuant to the standards contained in sections
15-2-7 and 15-2-16 of this title.
   E.   Parking structures and surface parking lots.
   F.   Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22
of this title. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1573, 10-
2-2018; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-7B-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
The following uses would be permitted subject to the approval of an
administrative use permit in the proposed MMO District:
   A.   Employee daycare facilities.
   B.   The off site sale of alcohol at retail establishments.
   C.   The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-
through restaurants, delicatessens, and commissaries.
   D.   Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community Development,
as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1315,
1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006; Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020;
Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-7B-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit,
as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
   A.   Assembly halls.
   B.   Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community Development,
as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010; amd. Ord. 1573,
10-2-2018; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-7B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses prohibited in the underlying zone(s). (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord.
1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   All uses within the MMO District shall comply with the site development
standards of the underlying zone(s); provided, however, that a maximum of one
million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) square feet of development shall be
allowed in the entire MMO District area.
   B.   The total net "floor area" of all buildings, as defined in section
15-1-6 of this title on any parcel or lot in the underlying O-S, P, and P-
F Zones shall not exceed the total square footage of the parcel or lot area
multiplied by 1.3, thereby giving a floor area ratio of 1.3:1. (Ord. 1307, 4-
20-1999; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping in the MMO District will be provided as required in the underlying
zone(s). (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces in the proposed MMO District will be
provided as required in the underlying zone(s) and as required by chapter 15 of
this title. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the MMO District will be in compliance with the requirements of the
underlying zone(s). (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE C:
MIXED-USE OVERLAY (MU-O) ZONE
SECTION:
15-7C-1: Purpose
15-7C-2: Development Standards
15-7C-3: Landscape
15-7C-4: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-7C-5: Signs
15-7C-6: Vehicular Access
15-7C-7: Affordable Housing Developments
15-7C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Mixed-Use Overlay on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This overlay permits
multiple dwelling units at high densities in combination with permitted
commercial uses to facilitate meeting the City’s Regional Housing Needs
Assessment (RHNA) allocation and Housing Element goals. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7C-2: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      3.   An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage,
must share a common wall and be internally integrated and connected to the
existing dwelling unit.
   B.   Lot Area: A minimum of 7,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof shall
not exceed 58 feet and four stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof
must not exceed 52 feet and four stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3  of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback of 15 feet
with the exception of structures fronting Franklin Avenue, where no setback is
required. Entry gates for vehicular access must maintain a minimum setback of
20 feet.
         a.   Porches, verandas, courtyards, raised decks, or pergolas may
encroach into the front-yard setback a maximum of six feet.
      2.   Side yard facing a side street: Ten percent of the width of the lot,
but shall never be less than three feet and need not be more than five feet,
except if parking garages or covered parking spaces face a street, then the
setback shall be 20 feet.
      3.   Side yard facing an adjacent lot: Ten percent of the width of the
lot on each side of the lot, but shall never be less than three feet and need
not be more than five feet. Detached accessory structures, located in the rear
one-third of the lot, are allowed zero setback on one interior side lot line.
      4.   Side yard, reversed corner: Reversed corner lots shall have the
following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: one angle
shall be formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of
this angle shall be 15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side
property lines. The third side of this triangle shall be a straight line
connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard
setback area shall be in addition to the other side yard setback requirements
described in subsections D2 and D3 of this section.
      5.   Rear Yard: A minimum of 10 feet.
      6.   Rear Yard: Detached accessory structures are allowed zero setback on
the rear property line and on one interior lot side line in the rear one-third
of the lot.
   E.   Lot Width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Unit size:
      1.   The minimum unit size per dwelling unit shall be 250 square feet.
      2.   The average unit size for all dwelling units shall be at least 600
square feet.
   G.   Density: The maximum permitted density shall be 75 dwelling units per
acre.
   H.   Placement Of Buildings And Structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between
buildings.
      2.   A detached accessory structure in the rear one-third of the lot may
be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the
following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to
the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure shall be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the
alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
            (1)   90 degrees - 25 feet
            (2)   75 degrees - 21 feet
            (3)   60 degrees - 18 feet
            (4)   45 degrees - 18 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot, a detached accessory
structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building shall be
erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the
rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the
detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached
accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
         c.   Notwithstanding the above, a detached accessory dwelling unit
must be set back at least four feet from interior side and rear property lines.
   I.   Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings,
may cover 100 percent of the lot area, except for any required setback and/or
open space areas
   J.   Common Recreation Facility Requirements: A minimum of 50 square feet of
common recreational facility space is required per unit for buildings with 21
or more units.
   K.   Building Frontage: No plane of a building wall facing a property line
shall exceed 140 feet in width.
      1.   Developments that include more than one building shall maintain a
minimum 25 feet open-to-the-sky separation to allow for landscape, courtyards,
and passageways.
   L.   Massing Modulation: The top story of all new developments must be a
maximum 70 percent of the largest floor area of the building.
      1.   If more than ten percent of the total number of dwelling units in a
building are three or more-bedroom units, the top story must be a maximum of 90
percent of the largest floor area of the building.
   M.   Building Wall Modulation: No plane of a building wall facing a property
line shall exceed 36 feet in height or length without at least a two-foot
offset for a minimum length of six feet in the wall plane. When expanding or
adding onto the height or length of an existing building wall, only the
expansion or addition shall not exceed 36 feet without wall modulation. Below
is an example of wall modulation for walls up to 43 feet:
Total Wall Length Or Height Maximum Length Of Unbroken Minimum Length Of 2 Foot
                            Wall Plane                 Offset
Total Wall Length Or Height Maximum Length Of Unbroken Minimum Length Of 2 Foot
                            Wall Plane                 Offset
36 feet                     36 feet                    0 feet
37 feet                     36 feet                    1 foot
38 feet                     36 feet                    2 feet
39 feet                     36 feet                    3 feet
40 feet                     36 feet                    4 feet
41 feet                     36 feet                    5 feet
42 feet                     36 feet                    6 feet
 
      1.   Buildings are exempt from the above wall modulation standard if at
least one of the following components are integrated into the building design:
         a.   Windows that are recessed or projected at least three inches from
the wall plane.
         b.   Three feet of landscaped building setback on street-facing sides
in addition to the existing setback standards.
         c.   Two or more materials on street-facing facades.
   N.   Balconies: External Balconies facing R-1 zoned neighborhoods are
prohibited.
   O.   Condominium Conversions: Condominiums and stock cooperatives converted
from multiple-family dwellings shall meet all the requirements for condominiums
in effect at the time they were originally constructed. If there were no
condominium standards in effect at the time of construction, the conversion
shall comply with the condominium standards of ordinance 898, adopted January
20, 1976.
   P.   Detached Accessory Buildings:
      1.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit pursuant to article
15-4E of this title, detached accessory buildings shall not contain a kitchen
or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and shall not be used for sleeping
purposes. Each multi-family lot is permitted no more than two detached
accessory dwelling units.
      2.   Detached accessory buildings, except detached accessory dwelling
units, shall not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit or as an “R”
occupancy, as defined by the California Building Code, except that they may
contain a sink and a toilet.
      3.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for a detached accessory
structure, except a detached accessory dwelling unit, the Director shall
require the recording of a covenant to run with the land, which states that the
accessory structure shall not be used in violation of this subsection.
   Q.   Parking:
      1.   A minimum of one parking space per bedroom is required. No more than
two parking spaces are required per unit.
      2.   See Section
15-15-6  for number of required commercial parking spaces.
      3.   Tandem and mechanical parking shall be permitted for two or more-
bedroom units.
      4.   Notwithstanding the standards in this section, see Section
15-5-5  for additional parking area design standards. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7C-3: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Except where not allowed per the placement of existing utilities, one
deciduous or evergreen on-site tree must be provided per 25 feet of street-
facing frontage length along the front-yard, rear-yard, and street-facing side-
yard setbacks.
      1.   Trees must be planted within a maximum of ten feet of the property
line.
   B.   Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a
minimum of 50 percent softscape and a maximum of 50 percent hardscape in the
landscape, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. In addition,
those portions of the property which abut a different zoning classification
must be landscaped with trees and shrubs to provide an effective buffer from
adjoining property.
   C.   The setback areas may contain artificial turf or synthetic grass in the
side and rear yards only, provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the
environment (such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2)
includes a pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and
stormwater detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive
landscaping design and site plan.
   D.   Drought-tolerant plants must be utilized in the landscape. (Ord. 1657,
5-7-2024)
15-7C-4: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off-street parking shall be provided as required by
Chapter 15  of this title. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7C-5: SIGNS:
Signs in the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone shall comply with the requirements of
chapter 18  of this title. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7C-6: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where a Mixed-Used Overlay lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must
be from the alley. Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance
with section 15-15-5 of this title. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7C-7: AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS:
Mixed-use developments in which at least 20 percent of residential units are
affordable to lower-income households shall be considered a by right use as
defined in Government Code Section 65583.2. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
ARTICLE D:
HOUSING OVERLAY (H-O) ZONE
SECTION:
15-7D-1: Purpose
15-7D-2: Development Standards
15-7D-3: Landscape
15-7D-4: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-7D-5: Signs
15-7D-6: Vehicular Access
15-7D-7: Affordable Housing Developments
15-7D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated Housing Overlay on the General
Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This overlay permits multiple
dwelling units at high densities to facilitate meeting the City’s Regional
Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) allocation and Housing Element goals. (Ord.
1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7D-2: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following development standards apply to the Housing Overlay parcels
located in these four neighborhoods.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      3.   An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage,
must share a common wall and be internally integrated and connected to the
existing dwelling unit.
   B.   Lot Area: A minimum of 7,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof shall
not exceed 47 feet and three stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof
must not exceed 41 feet and three stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping
lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented
grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3  of this title for exceptions to building height.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback of 15 feet
with the exception of structures fronting Franklin Avenue, where no setback is
required. Entry gates for vehicular access must maintain a minimum setback of
20 feet.
         a.   Porches, verandas, courtyards, raised decks, or pergolas may
encroach into the front-yard setback a maximum of six feet.
      2.   Side yard facing a side street: Ten percent of the width of the lot,
but shall never be less than three feet and need not be more than five feet,
except if parking garages or covered parking spaces face a street, then the
setback shall be 20 feet.
      3.   Side yard facing an adjacent lot: Ten percent of the width of the
lot on each side of the lot, but shall never be less than three feet and need
not be more than five feet. Detached accessory structures, located in the rear
one-third of the lot, are allowed zero setback on one interior side lot line.
      4.   Side yard, reversed corner: Reversed corner lots shall have the
following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: one angle
shall be formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of
this angle shall be 15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side
property lines. The third side of this triangle shall be a straight line
connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard
setback area shall be in addition to the other side yard setback requirements
described in subsections D2 and D3 of this section.
      5.   Rear Yard: A minimum of 10 feet.
      6.   Rear Yard: Detached accessory structures are allowed zero setback on
the rear property line and on one interior lot side line in the rear one-third
of the lot.
   E.   Lot Width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Unit size:
      1.   The minimum unit size per dwelling unit shall be 250 square feet.
      2.   The average unit size for all dwelling units shall be at least 600
square feet.
   G.   Density: The maximum permitted density shall be 65 dwelling units per
acre.
   H.   Placement Of Buildings And Structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between
buildings.
      2.   A detached accessory structure in the rear one-third of the lot may
be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the
following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to
the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure shall be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the
alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
            (1)   90 degrees - 25 feet
            (2)   75 degrees - 21 feet
            (3)   60 degrees - 18 feet
            (4)   45 degrees - 18 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot, a detached accessory
structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building shall be
erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the
rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the
detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached
accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
         c.   Notwithstanding the above, a detached accessory dwelling unit
must be set back at least four feet from interior side and rear property lines.
   I.   Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings,
may cover 100 percent of the lot area, except for any required setback and/or
open space areas.
   J.   Common Recreation Facility Requirements: A minimum of 50 square feet of
common recreational facility space is required per unit for buildings with 21
or more units.
   K.   Building Frontage: No plane of a building wall facing a property line
shall exceed 140 feet in width.
      1.   Developments that include more than one building shall maintain a
minimum 25 feet open-to-the-sky separation to allow for landscape, courtyards,
and passageways.
   L.   Massing Modulation: The top story of all new developments must be a
maximum 70 percent of the largest floor area of the building.
      1.   If more than ten percent of the total number of dwelling units in a
building are three or more-bedroom units, the top story must be a maximum of 90
percent of the largest floor area of the building.
   M.   Building Wall Modulation: No plane of a building wall facing a property
line shall exceed 36 feet in height or length without at least a two-foot
offset for a minimum length of six feet in the wall plane. When expanding or
adding onto the height or length of an existing building wall, only the
expansion or addition shall not exceed 36 feet without wall modulation. Below
is an example of wall modulation for walls up to 43 feet:
Total Wall Length Or Height Maximum Length Of Unbroken Minimum Length Of 2 Foot
                            Wall Plane                 Offset
Total Wall Length Or Height Maximum Length Of Unbroken Minimum Length Of 2 Foot
                            Wall Plane                 Offset
36 feet                     36 feet                    0 feet
37 feet                     36 feet                    1 foot
38 feet                     36 feet                    2 feet
39 feet                     36 feet                    3 feet
40 feet                     36 feet                    4 feet
41 feet                     36 feet                    5 feet
42 feet                     36 feet                    6 feet
 
      1.   Buildings are exempt from the above wall modulation standard if at
least one of the following components are integrated into the building design:
         a.   Windows that are recessed or projected at least three inches from
the wall plane.
         b.   Three feet of landscaped building setback on street-facing sides
in addition to the existing setback standards.
         c.   Two or more materials on street-facing facades.
   N.   Balconies: External Balconies facing R-1 zoned neighborhoods are
prohibited.
   O.   Condominium Conversions: Condominiums and stock cooperatives converted
from multiple-family dwellings shall meet all the requirements for condominiums
in effect at the time they were originally constructed. If there were no
condominium standards in effect at the time of construction, the conversion
shall comply with the condominium standards of ordinance 898, adopted January
20, 1976.
   P.   Detached Accessory Buildings:
      1.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit pursuant to article
15-4E of this title, detached accessory buildings shall not contain a kitchen
or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and shall not be used for sleeping
purposes. Each multi-family lot is permitted no more than two detached
accessory dwelling units.
      2.   Detached accessory buildings, except detached accessory dwelling
units, shall not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit or as an “R”
occupancy, as defined by the California Building Code, except that they may
contain a sink and a toilet.
      3.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for a detached accessory
structure, except a detached accessory dwelling unit, the Director shall
require the recording of a covenant to run with the land, which states that the
accessory structure shall not be used in violation of this subsection.
   Q.   Parking:
      1.   A minimum of one parking space per bedroom is required. No more than
two parking spaces are required per unit.
      2.   Standard residential parking dimensions in the Housing Overlay shall
be 8.5' W X 18' L.
      3.   Tandem and mechanical parking shall be permitted for two or more-
bedroom units.
      4.   Notwithstanding the standards in this section, see Section 15-5-
5 for additional parking area design standards. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7D-3: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Except where not allowed per the placement of existing utilities, one
deciduous or evergreen on-site tree must be provided per 25 feet of street-
facing frontage length along the front-yard, rear-yard, and street-facing side-
yard setbacks.
      1.   Trees must be planted within a maximum of ten feet of the property
line.
   B.   Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a
minimum of 50 percent softscape and a maximum of 50 percent hardscape in the
landscape, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. In addition,
those portions of the property which abut a different zoning classification
must be landscaped with trees and shrubs to provide an effective buffer from
adjoining property.
   C.   The setback areas may contain artificial turf or synthetic grass in the
side and rear yards only, provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the
environment (such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2)
includes a pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and
stormwater detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive
landscaping design and site plan.
   D.   Drought-tolerant plants must be utilized in the landscape. (Ord. 1657,
5-7-2024)
15-7D-4: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off-street parking shall be provided as required by Chapter 15 of this title.
(Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7D-5: SIGNS:
Signs in the Housing Overlay Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter
18 of this title. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7D-6: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where a Housing Overlay lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be
from the alley. Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with
section
15-15-5  of this title. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-7D-7: AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS:
Housing developments in which at least 20 percent of residential units are
affordable to lower-income households shall be considered a by right use as
defined in Government Code Section 65583.2. (Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
CHAPTER 8
OPEN SPACE (O-S) ZONE
SECTION:
15-8-1: Purpose
15-8-2: Permitted Uses
15-8-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
15-8-4: Uses Subject To Conditional Use Permit
15-8-5: Site Development Standards
15-8-6: Landscaping
15-8-7: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-8-8: Signs
15-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated open space and parks on the
general plan land use map and in the general plan text. The open space (O-S)
zone is intended both to provide adequate recreational opportunities and to
preserve open space for the anticipated needs of both present and future
residents and employees in the city. This is to be achieved by preserving and
protecting natural resources; providing visual relief from intense urban
development; developing new recreational opportunities and preventing
incompatible development of areas that should be preserved or regulated for
scenic, recreation, conservation, transportation, or public health and safety
purposes. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the O-S zone:
   A.   Public outdoor recreation, including, without limitation, ballparks and
bleachers, swimming pools, parks and other areas of active or passive
recreational usage; trails and other suitable corridors including off road
bicycle paths.
   B.   The preservation and conservation of natural resources, including,
without limitation, areas required for the preservation of plant and animal
life and areas required to provide visual relief from intense urban development
and growth.
   C.   The managed production of mineral deposits.
   D.   The regulation of areas for public health and safety, including,
without limitation, areas which require special management or regulation
because of hazardous or special conditions.
   E.   Other similar uses approved by the director, as provided by chapter 22
of this title. (Ord. 1497, 10-21-2014)
15-8-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses are permitted in the O-S zone when developed and
used in conjunction with one or more permitted uses in the zone:
   A.   Comfort stations.
   B.   Concession stands.
   C.   Maintenance buildings.
   D.   Parking areas.
   E.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems.
   F.   Small and medium-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems.
   G.   Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22
of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-8-4: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses shall be allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use
permit consistent with chapter 23 of this title:
   A.   Buildings or structures allowed in conjunction with permitted uses
which exceed the height limitations of subsection
15-8-5C of this chapter.
   B.   Intermodal transit facilities entirely within five hundred feet (500')
of a Metro Green Line station, a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from
residential property, and with a parking time limit of twenty four (24)
consecutive hours.
   C.   Landscape nurseries (no wholesale or retail sales on premises).
   D.   Private recreation.
   E.   Recreational or multipurpose recreational building in conjunction with
park or playground facilities.
   F.   Utility facilities.
   G.   Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community Development,
as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315,
1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-8-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the O-S Zone shall comply with the development standards
contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions: As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot Area: No minimum requirements. (Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996)
   C.   Height:
      1.   Buildings and structures with a pitched roof shall not exceed a
height of thirty two feet (32'). Buildings and structures with a flat roof
shall not exceed twenty six feet (26').
      2.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on
sloping lots, measuring from the grade plane to the lowest finished grade
immediately adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. The vertical height
which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is included in measuring the
maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied
to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: The front yard setback shall be not less than the
average front yard setback requirements of abutting properties that have the
same street frontage.
      2.   Side Yard: The side yard shall not be less than the average side
yard setback requirements for those properties which abut the side yard of the
subject property.
      3.   Rear Yard: The rear yard shall not be less than the average rear
yard setback requirements for those properties which abut the rear yard of the
subject property.
   E.   Lot Frontage: No minimum requirements.
   F.   Building Area: No maximum floor area ratio requirements.
   G.   Walls And Fences: Walls and fences shall be located in compliance with
the requirements of
chapter 2 of this title.
   H.   Lot Coverage: Buildings shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot
area. (Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996)
15-8-6: LANDSCAPING:
Five percent (5%) of the at grade total vehicular use area must be landscaped.
Landscaping must conform to
chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-8-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking spaces shall be provided as required by
chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-8-8: SIGNS:
Signs in the O-S Zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
CHAPTER 9
AUTOMOBILE PARKING (P) ZONE
SECTION:
15-9-1: Purpose
15-9-2: Permitted Uses
15-9-3: Uses Subject To Conditional Use Permit
15-9-4: Prohibited Uses
15-9-5: Site Development Standards
15-9-6: Landscaping
15-9-7: Signs
15-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated parking on the general plan
land use map and in the general plan text. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the P Zone:
   A.   Open air parking lots.
   B.   Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community Development,
as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-9-3: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses shall be allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use
permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
   A.   Parking structures.
   B.   Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community Development,
as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-9-4: PROHIBITED USES:
Car sales shall be prohibited in the P Zone. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-9-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the P Zone shall comply with the development standards of this
section.
   A.   General Provisions: As required by chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Lot Area: A minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be
provided. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
   C.   Height:
      1.   Buildings and structures with a pitched roof shall not exceed a
height of thirty two feet (32'). Buildings and structures with a flat roof
shall not exceed twenty six feet (26').
      2.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on
sloping lots, measuring from the grade plane to the lowest finished grade
immediately adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. The vertical height
which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is included in measuring the
maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied
to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: The front yard setback shall be not less than the
average front yard setback requirements of abutting properties that have the
same street frontage.
      2.   Side Yard: The side yard shall not be less than the average side
yard setback requirements for those properties which abut the side yard of the
subject property.
      3.   Rear Yard: The rear yard shall not be less than the average rear
yard setback requirements for those properties which abut the rear yard of the
subject property. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-9-6: LANDSCAPING:
Five percent (5%) of the at grade total vehicular use area must be landscaped.
Landscaping must conform to chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-9-7: SIGNS:
Signs in the P Zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of chapter 18
of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC FACILITIES (P-F) ZONE
SECTION:
15-10-1: Purpose
15-10-2: Permitted Uses
15-10-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
15-10-4: Uses Subject To Conditional Use Permit
15-10-5: Site Development Standards
15-10-6: Landscaping
15-10-7: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-10-8: Signs
15-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies
related to those locations which are designated public facility and Federal
government on the general plan land use map and in the general plan text. The
Public Facilities (P-F) Zone is established to provide adequate space for
community facilities of a public or quasi-public nature in locations best
suited to serve the needs of the community, to protect that land from intrusion
by other uses, and to set forth those development standards necessary to ensure
that such uses will be compatible with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993)
15-10-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the P-F Zone:
   A.   Flood control facilities, including, but not limited to, spreading
grounds, settling basins and drainage facilities.
   B.   Municipal, County, State or Federal governmental buildings such as City
Hall, library, court facilities or fire stations.
   C.   Public or quasi-public educational facilities such as schools and
administrative offices.
   D.   Public parking lots or structures.
   E.   Public recreational facilities.
   F.   Public utilities.
   G.   Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community Development,
as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-10-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
   B.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems.
   C.   Small and medium-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems.
   D.   Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22
of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1620,
11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-10-4: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit,
as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
   A.   Assembly halls.
   B.   Charitable institutions.
   C.   Private recreation.
   D.   Publicly owned facilities such as warehouses and storage yards.
   E.   Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community Development,
as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010; Ord. 1620, 11-
17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-10-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the P-F Zone shall comply with the development standards of this
section.
   A.   Lot Area: No minimum requirement. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
   B.   Height:
      1.   The permissible height limit shall be the average height of all
zones which abut the property.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on
sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential
limit is included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a
segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section
15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: The minimum front setback shall be the average front
yard setback for the zones which abut the property.
      2.   Side Yard: The minimum setback shall be the average side yard
setback for the zones which abut the property.
      3.   Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall be the average rear yard
setback for the zones which abut the property.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3817.png]
 
   D.   Walls And Fences: Walls and fences shall comply with the requirements
of section
15-2-4 of this title.
   E.   Lot Coverage: The permissible lot coverage shall be the average lot
coverage of all zones which abut the property. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-10-6: LANDSCAPING:
Five percent (5%) of the at grade total vehicular use area shall be landscaped.
Landscaping shall conform to
chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-10-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required by
chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-10-8: SIGNS:
Signs in the P-F Zone shall comply with the requirements of
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
CHAPTER 11
SMOKY HOLLOW SPECIFIC PLAN
(Rep. by Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
CHAPTER 12
RESERVED
(Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 13
ADULT USE ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-13-1: Purpose And Scope
15-13-2: Adult-Oriented Business Defined
15-13-3: Definitions; Related Words And Phrases
15-13-4: Definitions; Specified Anatomical Areas And Specified Sexual
Activities
15-13-5: Application For Permit; Filing Fee
15-13-6: Timeline For Land Use Review And Decisions
15-13-7: Findings Requiring Application Approval
15-13-8: Appeals To City Council
15-13-9: Reservation Of Right To Review Permit; Changed Conditions
15-13-10: Applicability And Nonconforming Period
15-13-11: Continuation Of Nonconforming Buildings And Uses
15-13-12: Extension Of Nonconforming Use Amortization Period
15-13-13: Location, Design And Performance Standards
15-13-14: Sexual Activities Prohibited
15-13-15: Establishment Of Adult-Oriented Business
15-13-16: Partial Invalidity
15-13-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to provide for the reasonable and
uniform regulation of adult-oriented businesses in the City. It is recognized
that adult-oriented businesses have a serious deleterious effect upon adjacent
areas, as well as the areas in which they are located. It is therefore the
purpose of this Chapter to establish criteria and standards for the
establishment and conduct of adult-oriented businesses which will protect the
public health, safety, and welfare, preserve locally recognized values of
community appearance, minimize the potential for nuisances related to the
operation of adult-oriented businesses, and maintain local property values.
   A.   The special regulation of adult-oriented businesses is necessary to
ensure that their adverse secondary effects will not contribute to an increase
in the crime rates or the blighting or downgrading of the areas in which they
are located or surrounding areas. The need for the special regulation is based
on the recognition that adult-oriented businesses have serious objectionable
operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated
under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity with sensitive uses
such as residential zones and uses, parks, schools, churches, or daycare
centers, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas.
   B.   It is the purpose and intent of these special regulations to prevent
the concentration or location of adult-oriented businesses in a manner that
would create such adverse secondary effects. Thus, in order to protect and
preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry, especially
including minors, the special regulation of the time, place, and manner of the
location and operation of adult-oriented businesses is necessary.
   C.   The need to regulate the proximity of adult-oriented businesses to
sensitive land uses such as residential, religious, educational, recreational,
and other adult-oriented businesses is documented in studies which were the
basis of the time, place, and manner of the restrictions contained in this
Chapter.
   D.   The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually-oriented materials, that are protected by the
First Amendment of the United States Constitution and the relevant provisions
of the California State Constitution. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-2: ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS DEFINED:
   A.   An "adult-oriented business" is any business where employees or patrons
expose "specified anatomical areas" or engage in or simulate "specified sexual
activities", or any business which offers to its patrons services or
entertainment or goods characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult-oriented businesses do not include bona fide medical establishments
operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate
medical credentials for the treatment of patients. Adult-oriented businesses
also do not include athletic or exercise facilities where "specified anatomical
areas" may be exposed within a single-sex locker room or similar facility used
for changing clothing. An adult-oriented business also does not include a bona
fide "theater", as defined herein. An adult-oriented business also does not
include bona fide "motion picture/television production facilities", as defined
in Section
15-1-6 of this Title.
   B.   In determining whether a use is an adult-oriented business, only
conduct or activities which constitute a regular and substantial course of
conduct shall be considered. "Substantial" conduct includes any use which has a
significant portion of its floor area, stock-in-trade, entertainment/
performance, or revenue derived from material characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". Isolated instances of
conduct or activities described in this Section as characterizing an adult-
oriented business shall not be considered except where such activities, taken
together, constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct.
   C.   Adult-oriented businesses include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Adult Arcade: An "adult arcade" shall mean any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug- operated, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projections, or other image-producing devices are maintained
to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and
where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the
depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
      2.   Adult Bookstore: "Adult bookstore" is an establishment which has, as
a significant portion of its stock-in-trade, floor area, or revenue derived
from and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of
the following:
         a.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter,
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities".
         b.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with "specified sexual activities".
         c.   Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate, "specified
anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities", or goods which are designed
to be placed on or in "specified anatomical areas", or to be used in
conjunction with "specified sexual activities".
      3.   Adult Cabaret: An "adult cabaret" is a bar, nightclub, or similar
establishment which features dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers who
expose "specified anatomical areas".
      4.   Adult Motel: An "adult motel" means a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment which:
         a.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has a sign
visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions; and/or
         b.   Offers a room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten
(10) hours; and/or
         c.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a room to sub-rent the room for a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
      5.   Adult Motion Picture Theater: An "adult motion picture theater"
shall mean a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depictions or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
      6.   Adult Tanning Salon: An "adult tanning salon" or "parlor" shall mean
a business establishment where patrons receive tanning services and patrons
and/or owners, agents and/or employees of the establishment expose specified
anatomical areas.
      7.   Adult Theater: An "adult theater" is any place, building, enclosure,
theater, concert hall, auditorium, or structure, partially or entirely used for
live performances or presentations, which place, building, enclosure, theater,
concert hall, auditorium, or structure is used for presenting matter
characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation
by patrons therein. Such place shall also include an adult theater wherein
persons are regularly featured appearing in a state of nudity or giving live
performances which are characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing,
describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas". An "adult theater" shall not mean a bona fide "theater", as
hereinafter defined.
      8.   Nude Model Studio: A "nude model studio" means any place where a
person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical
areas" is provided to be conversed with or be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons, for
any form of consideration, except photography conducted at bona fide "motion
picture or television production facilities" as defined in Section
15-1-6 of this Title. "Nude model studio" shall not include any classroom of
any school licensed under State law to provide art education, while such
classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such State license.
      9.   Sex Supermarket/Sex Mini-Mall: A "sex supermarket/sex mini- mall"
shall mean the establishment or operation of more than one type of "adult-
oriented business or use" as defined in this Development Code within the same
building.
      10.   Sexual Encounter Center: "Sexual encounter center" means a business
or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers
for any form of consideration:
         a.   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or is semi-nude or is exhibiting specified anatomical areas; or
         b.   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-
nude or is exhibiting specified anatomical areas.
      11.   Sexual Novelty Store: A "sexual novelty store" is an establishment
having as a substantial portion of its stock-in- trade, of its floor area, or
its revenue derived from, goods which are replicas of, or which simulate,
"specified anatomical areas", or "specified sexual activities", or goods which
are designed to be placed on or in "specified anatomical areas", or to be used
in conjunction with "specified sexual activities", to cause sexual excitement.
      12.   Sexually Oriented Business: A "sexually oriented business" is any
business, where employees or patrons expose "specified anatomical areas" or
engage in or simulate "specified sexual activities", or any business which
offers to its patrons services or entertainment or goods characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
      13.   Theater: A "theater" shall mean a theater, concert hall, or similar
establishment that is primarily devoted to the production of artistic dance,
literary, dramatic, or comedic performances on stage. If any such performance
depicts, exposes, describes, or relates to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", the theater shall be an adult business unless one
or more of the following is true:
         a.   Any emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, or
relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" is on
an occasional or incidental basis.
         b.   The performance is primarily devoted to a verbal presentation and
the spoken emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" is not a significant portion
of the entire verbal presentation.
         c.   The performance is primarily devoted to a visual presentation and
the emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" is not intended
to appeal to sexual interests. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-3: DEFINITIONS; RELATED WORDS AND PHRASES:
In addition to the terms defined in Sections
15-13-2 and
15-13-4 of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below:
   A.   Appeal: Wherever the reference to an "appeal" being filed or available
to be filed is made in this Chapter, such right of appeal shall also include
the right to appeal administrative determinations made by the Director of
Community Development/designee or the City Manager/designee pursuant to this
Chapter and Chapter 25 of this Title, to the Planning Commission and City
Council. Wherever the term "appeal" is used in this Chapter, including any time
limit to act on an appeal, such term shall also mean a complete appeal being
filed which includes all identified information and payment of any appeal fee.
   B.   Nudity Or State Of Nudity: The appearance of a human bare buttock,
anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.
   C.   Private Viewing Area: An area or areas in an adult-oriented business
designed to accommodate no more than five (5) or less patrons or customers for
purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape,
slide, movie, or other presentation. No private viewing areas shall be
established, maintained, or authorized which does not provide an unobstructed
view of the private viewing areas from a manager's station or from any other
point outside the private viewing area, and there shall be no doors, curtains,
stalls, or other enclosures creating a private viewing area.
   D.   Semi-Nude: A state of dress in which clothing, including supporting
straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae
of the female breast. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
   E.   Specified Criminal Act: Also means "specified criminal acts" and
include sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse or assault; rape; or
crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not
limited to, the distribution of obscenity; violations involving the
distribution, display, or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or
pandering. "Specified criminal acts" shall exclude those acts which are
authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to California Welfare
and Institutions Code sections 601 to 900. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. 2000
Code; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-13-4: DEFINITIONS; SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS AND SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the
meanings set forth below:
   A.   "Specified anatomical areas" shall include any of the following human
anatomical areas:
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areolae; or
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   B.   "Specified sexual activities" include all of the following:
      1.   The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human
anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts.
      2.   Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
      3.   Human masturbation, actual or simulated.
      4.   The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon
another, or by an individual upon himself or herself, for the purpose of the
sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of
flagellation, beating, striking, or touching of an erogenous zone, including
without limitation, the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if such
person is a female, a breast.
      5.   Sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, between a human being and
an animal.
      6.   Excretory functions. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FILING FEE:
   A.   Information Required; Fee: In order to operate an adult-oriented
business within this City, the applicant or proprietor of the business must
obtain the license required by Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code and any other
license required by Title 4 of this Code and an adult business permit as
required herein. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment
in accordance with Section
1-2-1 of this Code, for an owner, operator, manager, or employee to operate an
adult-oriented business without processing an adult business permit required by
this Chapter and any license required by Title 4 of this Code. In order for the
application to be deemed or determined complete, the applicant shall pay the
filing fee as set by resolution of the City Council for an adult business
permit. All applicants for such a permit, in addition to any application or
documents required to be filed pursuant to the provisions of this Code, shall
file a written, signed, and verified application on a form provided by the
Director of Community Development evidencing the following:
      1.   The name and permanent address of the applicant.
      2.   The name and business address of the applicant. If the applicant is
a corporation, the applicant shall provide the name of the corporation and the
state of incorporation. The corporate name shall be exactly as set forth in its
articles of incorporation and the applicant shall show the name and address of
each of the officers, directors, and controlling stockholders owning no less
than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall show the name and address of each of the
partners, including limited partners.
      3.   Location and address of the proposed adult-oriented business.
      4.   Legal description of the subject property.
      5.   A detailed description of the manner of providing proposed
entertainment, including type of entertainment and the number of persons
engaged in the entertainment.
      6.   Proposed hours of operation.
      7.   A floor plan showing where the specific entertainment uses are
proposed to be conducted within the building.
      8.   A site plan showing the location of the building, parking,
landscaping, exterior lighting, and signage for the proposed use.
      9.   The name or names of the person or persons having responsibility for
the management or supervision of the applicant's business and of any
entertainment.
      10.   Statement of the nature and character of the applicant's business,
if any, to be carried on in conjunction with such entertainment.
   B.   Certain Information Confidential: Notwithstanding the fact that an
application filed hereunder may be a "public record" under California
Government Code section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application
contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of
the licensing and/or permit scheme established herein which is personal,
private, confidential, or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to
a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the
applicant's residence address and telephone number, the applicant's date of
birth and/or age, the applicant's driver's license and/or social security
number, and/or personal financial data. The City Council in adopting the
application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined
in accordance with California Government Code section 6255 that the public
interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the
public interest in achieving compliance with this Chapter by ensuring that the
applicant's privacy, confidentially, or security interests are protected. The
City Clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license
application made available to any member of the public, the information set
forth above. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022)
15-13-6: TIMELINE FOR LAND USE REVIEW AND DECISIONS:
The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the completed adult
business permit application within forty five (45) days of its acceptance as
complete by the Director of Community Development, unless extended upon the
written consent of the Director of Community Development and the applicant.
This forty five (45) day review period shall be used by the City staff, the
Director of Community Development, the Planning Commission, and governmental
agencies to complete the following necessary steps in the approval process:
   A.   Within two (2) working days of receipt of the completed application,
the Director of Community Development shall determine whether the proposed use
is subject to an exemption from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA
Exemption Review) 1 .
   B.   Within the balance of the processing period, the Director of Community
Development shall prepare an initial study and necessary proposed environmental
determination required by the California Environmental Quality Act.
   C.   Prepare public notice of the consideration of the proposed
environmental determination and the notice of public hearing on the permit
application, pursuant to Section 15-27-5 of this Title.
   D.   Submit applicant fingerprints using the priority processing procedure
to the State Department of Justice for criminal history background check so
that results may be obtained prior to the public hearing on the proposed permit
application. The results are guaranteed by the State to be issued within
seventeen (17) days of submittal.
   E.   Within thirty (30) days of the City's receipt of the completed
application, the following agencies and departments should have completed their
inspections and reviews of the proposed use and information contained in the
application, and should have issued a report to the Director of Community
Development:
      1.   County Health Department;
      2.   City Fire Department;
      3.   Community Development Department for zoning compliance;
      4.   City building safety staff; and
      5.   The Police Department for criminal history purposes and site
security issues for the individuals involved.
In the event that any of the aforementioned agencies or departments does not
complete its inspection and/or review within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
completed application by the City, that agency or department shall be deemed to
have waived that agency's or department's right to inspect or review the
proposed use and approval and that agency's or department's approval shall not
be necessary to grant the applicant an adult business permit; and
   F.   Within forty five (45) days of receipt of the completed application by
the City, the Planning Commission shall conduct a noticed hearing on the
application for an adult business permit and shall approve the application if
the application meets the requirements of Section
15-13-8 of this Chapter and shall deny the application if any of the findings
set forth in Section
15-13-8 of this Chapter cannot be made. The Planning Commission shall issue its
decision within fifteen (15) days of opening the public hearing. However, in no
event shall the Planning Commission fail to approve or deny the application
within sixty (60) days of receipt of the completed application, unless consent
to a later deadline is given by the applicant and the Director of Community
Development. If the Planning Commission fails to approve or deny the
application within sixty (60) days, or any extension thereof, of the receipt of
the completed application, the application shall be deemed approved by the
Planning Commission entitling the applicant to engage in the proposed use,
subject to the remaining provisions of this Chapter (including the filing of an
appeal by an interested party under Section
15-13-7 of this Chapter) and all other applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord.
1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. Pub. Res. C. § 21000 et seq.
15-13-7: FINDINGS REQUIRING APPLICATION APPROVAL:
   A.   Findings Enumerated: The Planning Commission, or City Council on
appeal, shall approve the application for an adult business permit unless it is
unable to make one or more of the following findings:
      1.   That all applicable filing fees have been paid.
      2.   That the applicant is not overdue in payment to the City of any
taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed in relation to an
existing or former adult-oriented business.
      3.   That the building, structure, equipment, and location used by the
business for which an adult-oriented business license is required complies with
the requirements and standards of the health, building, zoning, fire, and
safety laws of the State, the El Segundo Fire Department, and the City.
      4.   That the conduct of the adult-oriented business as proposed by the
applicant, if permitted, will comply with all applicable laws; including, but
not limited to, the City's building, zoning, fire, and health and safety
regulations.
      5.   That the City currently has no evidence demonstrating that the
applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of
material facts in the adult business permit application or any other document
required by the City in conjunction therewith.
      6.   That the use is permitted in the zone, district, or area in which it
is proposed to be located and is in conformity with the applicable development
standards of that zone, district, or area, including the provision of required
parking.
      7.   That the use is in conformity with the locational criteria set forth
in Section
15-13-13 of this Chapter.
      8.   That the design of the site and the proposed improvements are in
compliance with all applicable design provisions of Section
15-13-13 of this Chapter.
      9.   That the proposed conduct of the adult-oriented business is in
compliance with all applicable performance standards of Section
15-13-13 of this Chapter.
      10.   That the applicant, his or her employees, agents, partners,
directors, officers, controlling stock holders, or managers has not knowingly
made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the
application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with
any City or County agency or department.
      11.   That on the date that the business for which a permit is required
herein commences, or thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the
premises to act as manager at all times during which the adult-oriented
business is open.
      12.   That the applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
      13.   That an applicant, including partners of the applicant if the
applicant is a partnership, or officers, directors, and controlling
shareholders if applicant is a corporation, has not been convicted of a
"specific criminal act" for which:
         a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the "specified criminal acts" which
are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse or assault; rape; or crimes
connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to,
distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of material harmful
to minors; prostitution; or pandering.
         b.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the "specified criminal
acts" which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse or assault; rape;
or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not
limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of
material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering.
         c.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors for the "specified
criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse or
assault; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business
including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution,
display, or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; pandering; or
conviction of any such offense occurring within twenty four (24) months prior
to application.
         d.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on disqualification of the applicant.
         e.   An applicant who has been convicted of any of the above described
"specified criminal acts" may qualify to own, operate, or manage an adult-
oriented business only when the required time period has elapsed. (Ord. 1260,
9-17-1996)
   B.   Confidential Information: In acting on the application for an adult
business permit, the Planning Commission or City Council on appeal shall not
consider information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to
California Welfare and Institutions Code sections 601 to 900. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-
1996; amd. 2000 Code)
   C.   Denial Of Application: In the event the Planning Commission, or the
City Council on appeal, denies an adult business permit application, the
business, if operating, shall cease its operations as an adult-oriented
business and no further activities regulated by this Chapter or
Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code shall be conducted on the premises unless and
until an adult use planning permit and a license required by
Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code is obtained. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-8: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Denial Of Application: If the application for an adult business permit
is denied by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall have ten (10) days
from the date of the hearing in which to appeal the decision to the City
Council. If appealed, notice of the public hearing before the City Council
shall be mailed and published in the City's official newspaper and the hearing
shall be held at the earliest possible date authorized by law, but in no event
later than thirty five (35) days from the date of the Planning Commission's
action to approve or deny the application or from the date the application was
deemed approved. The City Council shall act on the appeal within forty five
(45) days from the date the application was approved, deemed approved, or
denied by the Planning Commission. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed
approved and the applicant shall be entitled to engage in the proposed use
subject to the remaining provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable
laws and ordinances.
   B.   Approval Of Application: If the application for an adult business
permit is approved or deemed approved by the Planning Commission's actions or
failure to act, such action or inaction may be appealed by the applicant or any
aggrieved party by filing a letter of appeal, with the required appeal fee,
with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the application's
approval or deemed approval. The procedures set forth in subsection A of this
Section shall apply to an appeal by any aggrieved party as well as to an appeal
by the applicant. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-9: RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO REVIEW PERMIT; CHANGED CONDITIONS:
   A.   Right To Review And Modify: Any adult business permit granted or
approved hereunder shall be granted or approved with the City and its City
Council, Planning Commission, and Director of Community Development retaining
and reserving the right and jurisdiction to review and modify the adult
business permit, including the conditions of approval, based on changed
circumstances. "Changed circumstances" include, but are not limited to, the
modification of the business, the change in scope, emphasis, size, or nature of
the business, and the expansion, alteration, or change of use. The reservation
of the right to review any permit granted or approval hereunder by the City,
City Council, Planning Commission, and Director of Community Development is in
addition to, and not in lieu of, the right of the City, City Council, Planning
Commission, and Director of Community Development to review and revoke or
modify any permit granted or approved hereunder for any violations of the
conditions imposed on such permit.
   B.   Requested Information Not Available: In the event the information
requested pursuant to Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code is not available prior to
the granting of the permit, the City shall, if the application otherwise meets
the requirements of this Code, issue the permit. Should information later
obtained pursuant to Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code materially vary from that
contained in the application, such variance shall be cause to revoke the
permit. Any permit issued prior to the City receiving the information required
by Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code shall state clearly on its face that the
license is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to Section
4-1-26 of this Code. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022)
15-13-10: APPLICABILITY AND NONCONFORMING PERIOD:
   A.   Necessary Standards: All design and performance standards set forth in
this Chapter are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare and shall be applicable and govern all existing and
proposed adult-oriented businesses immediately upon adoption and passage of
this Chapter.
   B.   Time Limit For Conformance: In the event that there is any adult-
oriented business lawfully in existence prior to the adoption of this Chapter
and is not in compliance with the design and performance standards of this
Chapter, any such adult- oriented business shall conform to all design and
performance standards within six (6) months of the effective date hereof. (Ord.
1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-11: CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 21 of this Title, the following
provisions shall apply to adult-oriented businesses:
   A.   Any adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use on June 13,
1996, shall be subject to an amortization period expiring June 13, 1999, and
any adult-oriented business which becomes a nonconforming use after June 13,
1996, shall be subject to an amortization period of three (3) years commencing
on the date the use becomes nonconforming.
   B.   The owner of any adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use
may apply for extension of the amortization period, pursuant to Section
15-13-12 of this Chapter. Such application shall be made prior to the
expiration of the amortization period unless the reviewing authority determines
that good cause is shown for late filing of the application.
   C.   Upon the conclusion of the amortization period, any adult- oriented
business which is a nonconforming use shall cease all business operations and
all signs, advertising, and displays relating to said business shall be removed
within thirty (30) days.
   D.   Any nonconforming building may be continued and maintained, except as
provided in this Chapter, provided there are no structural alterations, except
as provided in this Chapter.
   E.   Any nonconforming use may be continued, except as provided in this
Chapter; provided, that the use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or
altered, except as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-12: EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING USE AMORTIZATION PERIOD:
An application for extension of the amortization period for an adult-oriented
business which is a nonconforming use shall be made as provided below:
   A.   Application For Extension: The owner of the property on which an adult-
oriented business is located or the owner of the adult-oriented business who
desires to extend the amortization period must apply for approval of an
extension not later than six (6) months prior to expiration of the amortization
period, unless the Director of Community Development determines that good cause
is shown for late filing of the application. Such application shall be made in
writing on a form as prescribed by the Director of Community Development and
shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by resolution of the
City Council. The party requesting the extension of the amortization period
shall bear the burden of proof in establishing that the amortization period
established by this Section is unreasonable and that the requested extension is
a reasonable amortization period for the owner to receive a fair rate of return
on the investment in the business. The party applying for the extension shall
furthermore be required in order to meet its burden of proof to submit the
documentation set forth in this Section.
   B.   Notification Of Decision; Contents Of Application: Not later than
thirty (30) days after submittal of an application to extend the amortization
period, the Director of Community Development shall notify the applicant, in
writing, if the application is not complete. A complete application shall
include:
      1.   The applicant's signature;
      2.   A written request for an extension of the amortization period which
shall include information relevant to the factors listed in subsection D of
this Section and shall identify the term of the requested extension;
      3.   The required fees;
      4.   A mailing list, two (2) sets of stamped envelopes, and two (2) sets
of gummed labels with the names, addresses, and tax assessor parcel numbers of
all owners of real property, as shown on the latest assessment rolls, within a
radius of five hundred feet (500') from the external boundaries of the property
on which the adult-oriented business is located; and
      5.   A tax assessor's parcel map identifying the properties to be
notified within the five hundred foot (500') radius.
If the application is not complete, the Director of Community Development shall
specify in writing those parts which are incomplete and shall identify the
manner by which the application can be made complete. If a written
determination is not provided to the applicant within thirty (30) calendar days
after it is submitted, the application shall be deemed complete.
   C.   Public Hearing: The Planning Commission shall hold a noticed public
hearing on the request for an extension.
   D.   Criteria And Findings: In determining whether to grant an extension of
the amortization period for an adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming
use, and in determining the appropriate length of such an extension, the
reviewing authority shall consider the amount of investment in the business,
the opportunities for relocation to a legally permissible site, the costs of
relocation, the effects of the business on the surrounding area, and the
following additional factors:
      1.   The present actual and depreciated value of business improvements;
      2.   The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedule or
functional nonconfidential equivalents;
      3.   The remaining useful life of the business improvements;
      4.   The remaining lease term;
      5.   The ability of the business and/or landowner to change the use to a
conforming use; and
      6.   The date upon which the property owner and/or business operator
received notice of the nonconforming status of the adult-oriented business and
the amortization requirements.
   E.   Consider Evidence: The Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal,
shall receive and consider evidence presented by the applicant and any other
persons, and shall make findings that the amortization period it establishes is
reasonable in view of the evidence and the criteria set forth above. (Ord.
1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-13-13: LOCATION, DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Location Restrictions: An adult-oriented business shall not be
established or located within five hundred feet (500') of:
      1.   Any County or City zone or land use district which contains the
words "residence", "residential", "ranches", or "rural living", within its
title;
      2.   Any residential use;
      3.   A State authorized, certified or licensed family care home, foster
family home, or group home;
      4.   A State authorized, certified or licensed residential facility,
residential care facility, residential care facility for the elderly,
intermediate care facility developmentally disabled habilitative or nursing, or
congregate living health facility;
      5.   Any church, chapel, or similar place of worship, or property zoned,
planned, or otherwise designated for such use by City action;
      6.   Any funeral parlor, mortuary, cemetery, or similar facility, or
property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for such use by City action;
      7.   Any school, nursery school, daycare center, small or large family
daycare facility, park, or public or private playground, or property zoned,
planned, or otherwise designated for such use by City action;
      8.   Any other recreational facility where minors congregate, or property
zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for such use by City action, or
      9.   Any hospital or similar health care facility.
   B.   Existing Business: An adult-oriented business shall not be established
or located within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing adult-oriented
business. If two (2) or more existing adult-oriented businesses are located in
closer proximity to each other than one thousand feet (1,000'), then in
determining which of the businesses is or are nonconforming, preference shall
be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous uninterrupted
operation of the businesses.
   C.   Measurement Of Distances: For the purposes of this Section, all
distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the nearest point of the building, or structure in which the
adult-oriented business is or will be located to the nearest property line of
any land use, land use district, or zone described in subsection A of this
Section, or to the nearest point of the building or structure in which an
existing adult-oriented business described in subsection B of this Section, is
located.
   D.   Sign Restrictions: No advertising sign or structure, advertisement,
display, or other promotional material depicting "specified anatomical areas"
or "specified sexual activities" or displaying instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia designed for use in connection with "specific sexual activities",
shall be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from any exterior area.
   E.   Windows And Openings Covered: All building openings, entries, and
windows shall be located, covered, or screened to prevent viewing the interior
from any exterior area.
   F.   Loudspeakers: No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in
any public exterior area shall be used in connection with an adult-oriented
business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with
the business are not emitted into any public exterior area.
   G.   Compliance With Site Development Standards: The establishment of an
adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable site development
standards, including parking, of the zone, district, or area in which the
adult-oriented business is located, the building codes, fire codes, and the
health and safety codes of the City. An adult-oriented business shall comply
with the applicable City permit and inspection procedures. In addition, adult-
oriented businesses shall comply with the following performance standards:
      1.   Separate Entrance: Each adult-oriented business shall have a
business entrance separate from any other nonadult business located in the same
building.
      2.   Public Shielded: No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any
manner that permits the observation by the public of any material depicting,
describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" from any public way or from any location beyond the walls of
the building or portion thereof in which the adult-oriented business is
conducted.
      3.   Posted: The building entrance to the adult-oriented business shall
be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are
precluded from entering the premises.
      4.   Manager's Station: Each adult-oriented business shall be provided
with a manager's station for the purpose of supervising activities within the
business. A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the
adult-oriented business is open to the public.
      5.   Visibility From Station: Any viewing room shall be visible from the
manager's station of the adult-oriented business, and visibility of the entire
viewing room from the manager's station shall be neither obscured nor
obstructed by any curtain, door, wall, or other structure.
      6.   Outside Appearance: All exterior areas of adult-oriented businesses,
including buildings, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a
clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds, and debris in accordance with
Title 7, Chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
      7.   Compliance Standards: The maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire
lanes, and fire suppression equipment shall be regulated, designed, and
provided in accordance with the regulations and standards of the El Segundo
Fire Department and the Community Development Department.
      8.   Hours: No adult-oriented business shall operate between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day. The
Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall establish the actual
permitted hours of operation for each permit approved or granted. No owner,
operator, manager, or employee of an adult-oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under the provisions
of this Chapter, shall allow such business to remain open for business, or to
permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a
sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours
of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day
or in violation of the actual permitted hours of operation established in the
conditions of approval for the permit.
      9.   Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided for the adult-oriented
business as specified for the zone, district, or area in which the business is
located in accordance with the parking provisions of Chapter 15 of this Title,
and as follows:
Adult Theater, Adult Cabaret, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Or Adult Motion
Picture Arcade: One parking space shall be provided for every two (2) seats in
the viewing room, or one parking space shall be provided for every two (2)
occupants per the allowable occupant load as established by the Building
Official and/or the Fire Marshal, whichever standard is greater. In addition,
one parking space shall be provided for each employee on the maximum shift.
      10.   Size Of Areas: Any person who operates or causes to be operated an
adult- oriented business, other than an adult motel and regardless of whether
or not an adult-oriented business license has been issued to said business
under this Chapter, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or viewing
booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film,
video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas", shall comply with the following
requirements:
         a.   Upon application for an adult-oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location
of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises
in which patrons shall not be permitted. A manager's station(s) shall not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
         b.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station shall be made without the prior written approval of the Director of
Community Development. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
         c.   It is the duty of the permit holder to ensure that at least one
employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that
any patron is present inside the premises.
         d.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designed, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in
this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
         e.   It shall be the duty of the permit holder and any employees
present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection
G10d of this Section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise,
display racks, or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designed as an area
in which patrons shall not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
this Chapter.
      11.   Security Program: An on-site security program shall be prepared and
implemented including the following items:
         a.   All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the
adult-oriented business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with
a lighting system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway.
This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient
illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the
incidence of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall be shown on the required
site or plot plan and shall be subject to review for compliance through the
design review process by the Director of Community Development and the Chief of
Police.
         b.   All interior portions of the adult-oriented business, except
those areas devoted to motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours
of operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained
horizontal illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles of light.
         c.   For adult-oriented businesses which exceed an occupant load of
one hundred twenty five (125) persons, the provision of on-site security
personnel shall be required during all business hours pursuant to a plan to be
reviewed and approved for adequacy by the Chief of Police. Security personnel
shall be licensed in accordance with the California Business and Professions
Code, to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police.
      12.   Adult Motion Picture Theater Or Adult Motion Picture Arcade:
         a.   A manager's station shall be located near the main entrance and
the station shall be provided with an unobstructed view of all motion picture
private viewing areas.
         b.   No adult motion picture theater or arcade shall be maintained or
operated unless the complete interior of the adult motion picture theater or
arcade is visible upon entrance to such adult motion picture theater or arcade.
No partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully concealed booths
shall be maintained.
         c.   No person shall operate an adult motion picture theater or arcade
in which the number of image producing devices exceeds the maximum occupancy
load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image
producing device is located.
      13.   Adult Hotel/Motel:
         a.   Evidence that a room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial
establishment has been rented or sub-rented and vacated two (2) or more times
in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours on a recurring basis,
creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an "adult hotel/
motel" as that term is defined in this Chapter.
         b.   A person is in violation of the provisions of this Chapter if
such person rents or sub-rents a room at a location without an adult-oriented
business license and an adult business permit to a person or persons and within
ten (10) hours thereafter rents or sub-rents the same room to another person
(s), or sub-rents the same room to the prior renter.
   H.   Distance From Patrons: All persons on the premises of the establishment
who are engaged in "specified sexual activities" or are exposing "specified
anatomical areas" must be located upon a stage that is at least eighteen inches
(18") above the immediate floor level and is at least six feet (6') from the
nearest patron.
   I.   No Tipping Policy: Patrons of establishments are prohibited from
directly or indirectly giving or soliciting tips (money or anything else of
value) to performers, owners, employees, or agents of an establishment, and
said performers, owners, employees and agents are prohibited from directly or
indirectly accepting from patrons of an establishment tips (money or anything
else of value). This subsection shall not apply to waiters and waitresses
serving food and/or beverage to patrons as long as such waiters and waitresses
are not exposing "specified anatomical areas". (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-13-14: SEXUAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:
For purposes of this Section, "couch dancing" or "straddle dancing" shall be
defined as an activity involving at least two (2) persons where at least one of
the persons is a patron who is sitting or resting on an object or the floor and
at least one of the persons is dancing or moving such that said person's
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, regardless of whether such
body area is covered or uncovered, is intentionally positioned for any period
of time within three feet (3') of, and at a level between, the chin and
forehead of, the person(s) who is/are sitting or resting on an object or the
floor. For purposes of this Section, "employee" shall include independent
contractors of the adult-oriented business.
   A.   No person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult- oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this
Chapter, knowingly, or with reason to know, permitting, suffering, or allowing
any employee:
      1.   To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the
business;
      2.   To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch
dance or straddle dance with a person at the business;
      3.   To intentionally touch any patron at an adult-oriented business
while engaged in the display or exposure of a "specified anatomical area" or
engaged in or simulating a "specified sexual activity"; or
      4.   To voluntarily be within six feet (6') of any patron while engaged
in the display or exposure of any "specified anatomical area" or engaged in or
simulating a "specified sexual activity".
   B.   No employee of an adult-oriented business shall:
      1.   Engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the
business;
      2.   Contract or otherwise agree to engage in a couch dance or straddle
dance with a patron at the business;
      3.   Engage in the display or exposure of any "specified anatomical area"
or engage in or simulate a "specified sexual activity" while intentionally
touching a patron at the adult-oriented business; or
      4.   Engage in the display or exposure of any "specified anatomical area"
or engage in or simulate a "specified sexual activity" closer than six feet
(6') from any patron.
   C.   No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not
said business is permitted under this Chapter, shall intentionally touch an
employee who is displaying or exposing any "specified anatomical area" or
engaging in or simulating a "specified sexual activity" at the adult-oriented
business.
   D.   No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not
said business is permitted under this Chapter, shall engage in a couch dance or
straddle dance with an employee at the business who is displaying or exposing
any "specified anatomical area" or engaging in or simulating a "specified
sexual activity".
   E.   No employee of an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not
a permit has been issued for said business under this Chapter, shall engage in
a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service, or solicit a service involving "specified sexual activity" or the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" between the hours of two o'clock (2:
00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-
1996)
15-13-15: ESTABLISHMENT OF ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS:
The establishment of an adult-oriented business shall include any of the
following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of operation of any such business as a new
business.
   B.   The conversion of any existing business, (whether or not an adult-
oriented business), to any adult-oriented business.
   C.   The addition of any adult-oriented business to any existing adult-
oriented businesses if the addition results in enlargement of the place of
business. For the purposes of this subsection, enlargement shall mean an
increase in the size of the building within which the business is conducted by
either construction or use of an adjacent building or any portion thereof,
whether located on the same or an adjacent lot or parcel of land.
   D.   The relocation of any adult-oriented business.
   E.   The expansion or enlargement of the premises by ten percent (10%) or
more of the existing floor area. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-16: PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If a court of laws determines that any portion of this Chapter is unlawful and
unenforceable, such shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the enforceability
of any other portion of this Chapter. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
CHAPTER 13A
ASSEMBLY HALLS
SECTION:
15-13A-1: Definitions
15-13A-2: Compliance With Permit Requirements
15-13A-3: Parking Requirements
15-13A-4: Compatibility With Surrounding Uses
15-13A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter:
   ASSEMBLY HALL: A building, or portion of a building, used for large scale
public or private gatherings of people. For example, and without limitation,
assembly halls include private educational facilities; religious institutions;
clubs; lodges; theaters; and similar kinds of facilities whether available for
public or private use. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-13A-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Any ancillary uses affiliated with an assembly hall must be specifically
identified and permitted by a validly issued conditional use permit pursuant to
this chapter or be separately permitted in accordance with the requirements for
that zone. For example, and without limitation, a daycare center or private
school associated with an assembly hall must be identified as an authorized use
in the conditional use permit. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-13A-3: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Off street parking must be provided in accordance with the requirements
set forth in this title including, without limitation, landscaping
requirements.
   B.   Where an assembly hall is established in a residential zone, the
required front yard may not be used for parking vehicles. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-
2010)
15-13A-4: COMPATIBILITY WITH SURROUNDING USES:
   A.   All buildings, structures, and landscaping must be developed and
maintained in a manner compatible with development on surrounding properties.
   B.   For assembly halls located within or adjacent to a residential zone,
the planning commission may condition hours of operation to ensure
compatibility with adjacent residential uses. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
CHAPTER 13B
CANNABIS-RELATED USES AND ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
15-13B-1: Definitions
15-13B-2: Prohibited Uses And Activities
15-13B-3: Cultivation Of Cannabis For Personal Use
15-13B-4: Interpretation
15-13B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definition of "cannabis" and related terms for the purpose of this chapter
are contained in section
15-1-6, "Definitions", of this title. (Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018)
15-13B-2: PROHIBITED USES AND ACTIVITIES:
The establishment or operation of any commercial cannabis activity, cannabis-
related activity, cannabis storage facility, or cannabis establishment,
including any business licensed by the State or other government entity
pursuant to division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as it may be
amended from time to time, is prohibited in all zoning districts and specific
plan areas of the City. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other
entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, can be approved
or issued for the establishment or operation of any such business or activity.
(Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018)
15-13B-3: CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS FOR PERSONAL USE:
   A.   Outdoor Cultivation: The outdoor cultivation of cannabis is prohibited
in the City of El Segundo regardless of purpose.
   B.   Indoor Cultivation: Not more than six (6) plants may be cultivated,
planted, harvested, dried, processed or possessed at one time by persons twenty
one (21) years of age or older when conducted within a single private residence
and in a manner consistent with Health and Safety Code section 11362.2 and any
other applicable regulations. (Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018)
15-13B-4: INTERPRETATION:
The intent of this chapter is to prohibit all cannabis-related uses and
activities, including the personal cultivation of cannabis, whether medical or
recreational in nature, to the maximum extent allowed under State law. Nothing
in this chapter should be interpreted as allowing behavior otherwise prohibited
by State law and nothing in this chapter should be interpreted as prohibiting
conduct that the City is expressly preempted from prohibiting under State law.
(Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018)
CHAPTER 15-13C
MICRO-UNITS
SECTION:
15-13C-1: Purpose
15-13C-2: Applicability; Locations
15-13C-3: Unit Size; Unit Size Mix
15-13C-4: Concentration; Unit Mix
15-13C-5: Development Agreement Required
15-13C-6: Operational Standards
15-13C-7: In-unit Amenities
15-13C-8: Development Standards
15-13C-9: Common Onsite Amenities
15-13C-10: Design Standards
15-13C-11: Prohibition Of Condominium Subdivisions
15-13C-12: Development Impact Mitigation Fees
15-13C-13: Administration And Enforcement
15-13C-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage the production of a more diverse
housing stock and more affordable housing options. In enacting this chapter, it
is also the intent of the City to implement the goals, objectives, and policies
of the Housing Element of the City's General Plan.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-2: APPLICABILITY; LOCATIONS:
   A.   Housing developments containing 5 or more units 250 to 450 square feet
shall be considered "Micro-Unit developments" and be subject to the standards
in the underlying zoning district, specific plan or overlay and the standards
in this chapter. If the standards in this chapter conflict with the underlying
zoning, the standards in this chapter will take precedence. Housing
developments containing fewer than 5 units 250 to 450 square feet shall not be
considered Micro-Unit developments and shall be subject only to the standards
in the underlying zoning district, specific plan or overlay.
   B.   Micro-Unit developments are permitted in the following zones, overlays,
specific plans, and other locations that the City Council may designate:
      1.   Multi-family Residential (R-3) Zone.
      2.   Housing Overlay (HO) District.
      3.   Mixed-Use Overlay (MU-O) District.
      4.   Downtown Specific Plan (DSP).
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-3: UNIT SIZE; UNIT SIZE MIX:
   A.   Unit Size: Each unit must be at least 250 square feet in floor area but
cannot exceed 450 square feet in floor area.
   B.   Unit Size Mix: 50% of the micro-units in a project must be at least 350
square feet in floor area.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-4: CONCENTRATION; UNIT MIX:
A maximum 25% of residential units in a development may be micro-units, unless
otherwise agreed to via development agreement under section
15-13C-6.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-5: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
   A.   A development agreement pursuant to Government Code § 65854 et seq. is
required for a micro-unit development proposing more than 40 total units or in
excess of the 25% micro-unit limit set forth in section
15-13C-4. The foregoing notwithstanding, no development may exceed a maximum of
75% micro-units of the total number of residential units in a development.
   B.   A development agreement is required for projects with 40 or fewer total
units that do not comply with the required standards, amenities, or unit mix
specified in this chapter.
   C.   The Community Development Director, or designee, may require the person
requesting the development agreement to include reasonable information or
documentation as part of the development agreement application process.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-6: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
Projects subject to this chapter must comply with this section's operational
standards, unless otherwise provided in a development agreement pursuant to
section 15-13C-6:
   A.   Onsite manager required for projects pursuant to California Code of
Regulations Title 25 section 42.
   B.   The minimum length of stay shall be 30 days; short-term rentals are
prohibited.
   C.   Occupancy is limited to two persons, not including children up to three
years of age.
   D.   A management plan must be submitted to the Community Development
Director before the City issues building permits or before a development
agreement is approved for review and approval and must, without limitation,
provide for the following:
      1.   Security;
      2.   Rental periods;
      3.   Tenant screening and residency requirements;
      4.   Parking; and
      5.   Occupancy limits.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-7: IN-UNIT AMENITIES:
Each micro-unit must contain the following amenities, unless otherwise provided
in a development agreement pursuant to section
15-13C-6:
   A.   One kitchen in every unit, including the following minimums:
      1.   30-inch sink;
      2.   18-inch by 24-inch counter;
      3.   Stove and/or oven feature;
      4.   24-inch wide, full height refrigerator; and
      5.   Microwave.
   B.   One bathroom, including the following minimums:
      1.   Toilet;
      2.   Sink; and
      3.   Bathtub or shower.
   C.   A minimum 48 square feet of storage space in a closet.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-3C-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Projects subject to this chapter must comply with this section's development
standards for micro-units, unless otherwise provided in a development agreement
pursuant to section
15-13C-6:
   A.   Vehicle Parking: One space for studio and one-bedroom units or 1.5
spaces for two-bedroom units.
   B.   Other parking standards in Chapter 15-15 (Off-street parking).
   C.   Bicycle parking - 1 rack (two-bike capacity) for every 3 units.
   D.   Deviation From Parking Standards: Any person requesting deviation from
the vehicle parking requirements in section 15-3C-9 must submit a parking
demand study and Transportation Demand Management (TDM) program to the City
with its development agreement application, or at a later time, for review and
approval by the Community Development Director or designee. The Community
Development Director or designee will consider the following mobility amenities
and incentives in reviewing the TDM program and proposed deviations from the
parking requirements in this section:
      1.   Bicycle parking/storage beyond minimum code requirements;
      2.   Onsite bike-share station;
      3.   Onsite car-share stop;
      4.   Shuttle service to major hubs;
      5.   Onsite childcare service;
      6.   Subsidized transit passes for residents;
      7.   Unbundling parking spots from the regular rent; or
      8.   Use of point system or consideration of proximity to public transit.
   E.   Security:
      1.   Minimum lighting of 1.25 foot-candles is required in all parking
areas.
      2.   Projects must comply with all applicable security code provisions in
this code.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-9: COMMON ONSITE AMENITIES:
   A.   Private Open Space: All units must have a minimum of 50 square feet of
private open space.
   B.   Common Open Space: There must be a minimum of 400 square feet of common
open space for the first 30 project units overall, plus 15 square feet per each
unit above the first 30 project units.
   C.   Common Indoor Space:
      1.   Projects must include common indoor space equal to at least the
greater of 10 square feet per unit or 200 square feet.
      2.   Common indoor space must consist of the following amenities:
         a.   Communal Kitchen: Projects with more than 30 units must
incorporate at least one common full kitchen; and
         b.   Multipurpose Space: Projects must incorporate multipurpose space
on each floor that may include any of the following:
            (1)   Office/meeting room;
            (2)   Fitness room/gym;
            (3)   Game/craft room;
            (4)   Living room; or
            (5)   Other similar uses.
      3.   Required common indoor space excludes janitorial storage, laundry
facilities, and common hallways.
   D.   Laundry: Projects must provide one washer and dryer per 10 units or
fraction thereof.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-10: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Projects subject to this chapter must comply with the following design
standards, unless otherwise provided in a development agreement pursuant to
section
15-13C-6:
   A.   Unit Configuration: Project configuration must facilitate the future
combination of micro-units into larger units.
   B.   Ceiling Height: Micro-unit ceiling height must be at least nine feet.
   C.   Access To Natural Light: Micro-units must have direct access to natural
light.
   D.   Window Size: The total square-foot area of windows in a micro-unit must
equal at least 15% of the unit's floor area.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-11: PROHIBITION OF CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
The subdivision or individual sale of micro-units is prohibited.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-12: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT MITIGATION FEES:
Micro-units are subject to the same development impact mitigation fees as other
multi-family residential units.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
15-13C-13: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The City Council may establish fees by resolution for the City's
ongoing administration of this chapter.
   B.   The Community Development Director, or designee, may promulgate
regulations to facilitate the City's ongoing administration of this chapter,
and such regulations will become effective upon publication on the City's
website.
(Ord. 1647, 3-7-2023)
CHAPTER 14
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
15-14-1: Purpose
15-14-2: Authority Of Planning Commission
15-14-3: Designation Of Cultural Resources
15-14-4: List Of Designated Cultural Resources
15-14-5: Designated Cultural Resources; Certificate Of Appropriateness
15-14-6: Authority To Grant Certificate Of Appropriateness
15-14-7: Certificate Of Appropriateness Criteria And Criteria Exemptions
15-14-8: Duty To Keep In Good Repair
15-14-9: Ordinary Maintenance And Repair
15-14-10: Emergency Work On Designated Cultural Resources
15-14-11: Enforcement And Penalties
15-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare by providing for the identification, protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of historic buildings and structures within the City that
reflect special elements of the City's historical heritage for the following
reasons:
   A.   To safeguard the City's heritage as embodied and reflected in cultural
resources and historic sites;
   B.   To encourage public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the
City's historic past;
   C.   To foster civic and neighborhood pride and a sense of identity based on
the recognition and preservation of cultural resources;
   D.   To promote understanding and appreciation of cultural resources for the
education of the people of the City;
   E.   To preserve diverse architectural styles and design preferences of
periods of the City's history and to encourage complementary contemporary
design and construction;
   F.   To promote public awareness of the benefits of preservation; and
   G.   To take whatever steps are reasonable and necessary to safeguard the
property rights of the owners whose building or structure is declared to be a
landmark. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-2: AUTHORITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   The Planning Commission shall have the power and authority to perform
all of the duties enumerated and provided in this Chapter and shall act in
accordance with its established rules and bylaws.
   B.   For the purposes of this Chapter, the Director, or the Director's
designee, shall serve as administrative staff and as secretary to the
Commission.
   C.   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   To maintain a local register of cultural resources and historic
sites.
      2.   To recommend removal of a designated cultural resource.
      3.   To review and comment upon the conduct of land use, housing,
municipal improvements, and other types of planning and programs undertaken by
any agency of the City, the County, or the State as they relate to the cultural
resources and historical sites within the City.
      4.   To report to the City Council on the use of various Federal, State,
local, or private funding sources and mechanisms available to promote
preservation of cultural resources and historical sites in the City.
      5.   To review applications for alteration, construction, demolition,
relocation, and restoration of proposed or designated cultural resources and
approve or deny certificates of appropriateness for such actions pursuant to
Sections
15-14-5 through
15-14-7 of this Chapter.
      6.   To cooperate with local, County, State and Federal governments and
private organizations in the pursuit of the objectives of historic preservation
within the City.
      7.   To ensure that designation of a building or structure as a
designated cultural resource shall not infringe upon the rights of private
owners to make any and all reasonable uses of such designated cultural resource
which are not inconsistent with the purposes of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-14-3: DESIGNATION OF CULTURAL RESOURCES:
   A.   Procedures: Requests for designation of a cultural resource are
voluntary and may be made by or with the written consent of the property owner,
by filing an application with the Community Development Department. The
designation of a cultural resource is strictly voluntary, not mandatory.
      1.   The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter as set
forth in Chapter 15-28 and provide a written recommendation to the City Council
as to whether the building or structure should be made a designated cultural
resource.
      2.   After receiving the recommendation of the Commission, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing as set forth in Chapter 15-28 and approve
or deny the recommendation.
      3.   Any hearing may be continued for any reason by the consent of the
City and the property owner. If the property owner does not consent, there may
be no more than one continuance for a period not to exceed 31 days if the
additional time is needed to conduct further study of the cultural resource. If
an EIR or negative declaration is required, the time limits set forth in
California Public Resources Code section 21151.5 shall apply.
      4.   The City Council shall declare designated cultural resources by
resolution, which shall contain a statement as to why the cultural resource is
so designated. Any such resolution shall include a legal description of the
property involved, including lot and block number and the name of the property
owner. The resolution shall be duly recorded by the City Clerk in the County
Recorder's office.
   B.   Criteria: A cultural resource may be declared a designated cultural
resource if it meets the following criteria:
      1.   Must be at least 50 years old; and
      2.   It is associated with persons or events significant in local, State,
or national history; or
      3.   It reflects or exemplifies a particular period of national, State,
or local history; or
      4.   It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, style, period
of architecture, or method of construction.
   C.   Temporary Stay On Permits Pending Designation: No construction,
alteration, demolition, relocation, or restoration shall be allowed and no
other entitlement permits shall be issued with regard to any proposed
designated cultural resource from the time an application for designation is
made until the City Council has made a final decision to either approve or deny
the request for designation.
   D.   Removal Of Designation: A cultural resource designation may be removed
subject to the same procedures set forth above. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-14-4: LIST OF DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCES:
The Community Development Department shall maintain a designated cultural
resources list which shall include the following information:
   A.   A legal description of each designated cultural resource, the names and
addresses of all owners of designated cultural resources, and assessor's parcel
numbers of designated cultural resources.
   B.   A legal description of the property included in any historic district,
including the special historical, aesthetic, cultural, architectural, or
engineering interests or value of the District.
   C.   Sketches, photographs or drawings of structures of all designated
cultural resources and other significant buildings or historical sites.
   D.   A statement of the condition of designated cultural resources and other
significant buildings or historical sites.
   E.   An explanation of any known threats to any designated cultural resource
and other significant buildings or historic sites. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd.
Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022)
15-14-5: DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCES; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
   A.   A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before the following
actions affecting a designated cultural resource may be undertaken:
construction, alteration, restoration, relocation, and demolition.
   B.   No building permit for any work on a designated cultural resource shall
be issued until a certificate of appropriateness is issued in the manner
provided for in this Chapter.
   C.   A certificate of appropriateness is not required for any ordinary
repair and maintenance as described in Section
15-14-9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-14-6: AUTHORITY TO GRANT CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
The Planning Commission may grant a certificate of appropriateness, subject to
the process set forth in Chapter 28 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-14-7: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS CRITERIA AND CRITERIA EXEMPTIONS:
   A.    Alteration, Construction or Restoration: A certificate of
appropriateness for the alteration, construction or restoration of a designated
cultural resource shall not be issued unless the Commission or City Council, on
appeal, find all of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The proposed alteration, construction or restoration will not
adversely affect exterior architectural features of the building or structure
specified in the designation; and
      2.   The proposed alteration, construction or restoration will not
adversely affect the special character; special historical, architectural or
aesthetic interest; nor the relationship and congruity between the subject
structure or feature and its neighboring structures and surroundings, as
specified in the designation.
   B.   Demolition: A certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of a
designated cultural resource shall not be issued unless the Commission or City
Council, on appeal, find one or more of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The structure or building is a hazard to public health or safety;
      2.   The site on which the designated cultural resource is located is
required for a public use which will be of more benefit to the public than its
use as a cultural resource and there is no practical alternative location for
the public use; or
      3.   Denial of the proposed application will result in unreasonable
economic hardship to the owner; it is not feasible to preserve or restore the
designated cultural resource; and the property owner will be denied the
reasonable beneficial use of the property if the application is denied.
   C.   Relocation: A certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a
designated cultural resource shall not be issued unless the Commission or City
Council, on appeal, finds that:
      1.   One or more of the conditions set forth in subsection B of this
Section exist;
      2.   The relocation will not destroy the historic, cultural or
architectural value of the designated cultural resource; and
      3.   The relocation is part of a definitive series of actions which will
assure the preservation of the designated cultural resource.
   D.   Exemption for Unreasonable Economic Hardship: A property owner may
request an exemption from the provisions of this Chapter on the grounds of
unreasonable economic hardship for any alteration, construction, restoration,
demolition or relocation of a designated cultural resource.
A property owner requesting an exemption on the grounds of unreasonable
economic hardship shall provide the following information; including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Ownership and operation of the property, mortgage and financing
information, market value, structural integrity, rehabilitation costs, assessed
value, real estate taxes, debt service, and potential adaptive re-use.
      2.   For income-producing property:
         a.   Annual gross income from the property for the previous two years;
         b.   Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two
years; and
         c.   Annual cash flow, if any, for the previous two years.
      3.   For low-income owners: a statement of present household income and
number of persons in the household. Low-income households shall be defined as
meeting the income level established by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
      4.   The staff may require that a property owner furnish additional
information which would assist the Commission in making a determination as to
whether or not the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the
owner(s) (i.e., pro forma financial analysis). In the event that any of the
required information is not reasonably available to the property owner and
cannot be obtained by the property owner, the property owner shall file with
his affidavit a statement of the information which cannot be obtained and shall
describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained.
The property owner shall have the burden of proof to establish unreasonable
economic hardship.
The Commission, or City Council on appeal, may grant an exemption on the
grounds of unreasonable economic hardship if it finds that the application of
the provisions of this Chapter to the proposed alteration, construction,
restoration, demolition or relocation would deny the property owner reasonable
beneficial use of the property and a reasonable rate of return on the owner's
investment in the property. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-14-8: DUTY TO KEEP IN GOOD REPAIR:
The owner, occupant, or other person who exercises control over a cultural
resource shall keep in good repair all of the exterior architectural features
of such improvement, building, or structure, and all of the interior portions
whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any
exterior architectural feature. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-9: ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance
or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any designated
cultural resource that does not involve a change in design, material, or
external appearance thereof, nor does this Chapter prevent the construction,
alteration, restoration, demolition, or removal of any such architectural
feature if the Director certifies to the Commission that such action is
required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-14-10: EMERGENCY WORK ON DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCES:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the Building Official
from issuing a building permit if he determines that the demolition, removal or
alteration of a designated cultural resource is immediately necessary to
protect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-11: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or fails to obey
an order issued by the Commission or comply with a condition of approval of any
certificate of appropriateness issued under this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to provisions of Section
15-30-2 of this Title.
   B.   Any person who constructs, alters, removes, relocates, restores or
demolishes a designated cultural resource in violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be required to restore the building, object, site, or structure
to its appearance or setting prior to the violation.
   C.   The Building Official shall have the authority to enforce all
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 15
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES
SECTION:
15-15-1: Purpose
15-15-2: Applicability
15-15-3: General Provisions
15-15-4: Plan Preparation And Permit Approval
15-15-5: Parking Area Development Standards
15-15-6: Required Parking Spaces
15-15-7: Off Street Loading Space Standards
15-15-8: Parking Of Licensed Recreational Vehicles And Habitable Vehicles
15-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for adequate off street parking and
loading standards, to ensure that parking spaces are suitably maintained and
available for the use of the occupants of the site and to mitigate associated
on street parking and traffic circulation problems throughout the City. (Ord.
1444, 8-3-2010)
15-15-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter apply in all zones of the City unless
specifically provided otherwise in an adopted specific plan.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter apply at the time a building or
structure is erected, altered, or expanded, or when the use is established,
changed or expanded.
   C.   Parking spaces and loading spaces established by this chapter must be
improved as required by this chapter before new buildings or structures are
occupied or existing buildings or structures are expanded or modified for a new
use.
   D.   The provisions of this chapter apply to parking facilities for
authorized temporary uses or special events, except where specifically exempted
by the Director of Community Development. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1620,
11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-15-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Compliance: It is unlawful for any person to violate any part of this
chapter including, without limitation, any discretionary or ministerial permit
issued by the City pursuant to this Code or chapter.
   B.   Availability: It is unlawful for required parking to be utilized in any
manner inconsistent with the lawful uses of property including, without
limitation, rendering it unavailable for property occupants, patrons, or
visitors of a building or use during normal hours of operation. This meaning
shall not be construed to prohibit security devices.
   C.   Maintenance: Parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering aisles, turnaround
areas, and landscaping areas must be maintained free of debris, graffiti, and
litter; and striping, paving, walls light standards, and all other facilities
must be maintained in good condition.
   D.   Location Of Parking: All required parking must be located on the same
lot or building site as the uses for which such spaces are required, unless an
off site parking covenant is approved in compliance with this chapter.
   E.   Mixed Or Multiple Uses And/Or Occupancies: A site with multiple uses or
mixed occupancies must provide the aggregate number of parking spaces required
by this chapter for each separate use. On site parking spaces for one use
cannot be considered as providing required parking spaces for any other use,
except when authorized through an off site parking covenant in accordance with
this chapter.
   F.   Fractional Spaces: Where the application of cumulative parking
requirements results in a fractional space, then the fractions are rounded to
the nearest whole number.
   G.   Expansion Or Remodeling Of Building, Or Change In Use:
      1.   Expansion Of Building Or Use, Generally: Upon change or expansion of
a building, or outdoor use area resulting in additional floor area devoted to a
use, additional outdoor use area, or an increase in the number of dwelling
units on a lot, additional parking and loading spaces must be provided only for
the additional floor area, outdoor use area, or residential units without
diminishing the existing parking, unless such parking exceeds the requirements
of this chapter.
      2.   Addition Of Floor Area To A Dwelling Unit: Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, the cumulative addition of one thousand (1,000)
square feet of floor area to a residential unit upon the effective date hereof
must comply with the minimum parking requirements for residential units as
established in this chapter.
      3.   Change Of Use, Generally: When the use of a building changes to
another use that is required to have the same number of parking spaces, no
additional parking spaces are required for the new use, regardless of the
number of spaces provided by the previous use, if the previous use was legally
established and the number of spaces has not decreased. When a change in use
requires more off street parking than the previous use, additional parking
spaces must be provided equal in number to the difference between the total
number of spaces required by the new use and the number of spaces required for
the immediately previous use. When a change in use requires less off street
parking than the previous use, no additional parking spaces are required.
   H.   Off-Site Parking:
      1.   Applicability/authority: The Director may approve off-site parking
locations within the City for nonresidential uses to meet the parking
requirements of this chapter subject to the process set forth in Chapter 23 of
this Title. Such off-site parking locations must be secured with a covenant,
approved by the City Attorney, and recorded in the County Recorder's Office
before the City issues building permits. The parking covenant may include such
conditions as the Director may lawfully impose. The Director may refer
decisions on off-site parking requests to the Planning Commission at his
discretion.
      2.   Off-Site Parking Findings of Approval: Requests for off-site parking
must meet the following requirements:
         a.   The off-site parking must be located so that it will adequately
serve the use for which it is intended. In making this determination, the
following factors, among other things, must be considered:
            (1)   Proximity of the off-site parking facilities (i.e., 750 feet
is a reasonable maximum walking distance for high turnover uses such as retail
sales, services and restaurants);
            (2)   Ease of pedestrian access to the off-site parking facilities;
            (3)   Provisions for transportation to and from the off-site
parking facility (e.g., shuttle or valet services);
            (4)   The type of use the off-site parking facilities are intended
to serve.
         b.   The off-site parking spaces must be surplus to the required
parking spaces for uses at the off-site location, unless an adjustment is
approved based on an approved parking demand study pursuant to Sections
15-15-3(J) and
15-15-6(C) of this chapter.
   I.   Joint Use/Shared Parking: Uses that share parking facilities on the
same lot may be granted parking space reductions when they have significantly
different peak hours of operation. Joint use/shared parking reductions may be
granted in compliance with this chapter (reductions in the number of required
parking spaces).
   J.   Parking Exceptions:
      1.   Director Review: The Director may review and approve requests for
adjustments from the requirements of this chapter as provided in Chapters 22
and 23, of this title including, the design and layout of parking facilities;
the required number of parking spaces; the dimensions of parking spaces; the
type of loading spaces required; aisles; driveways and curb cuts; paving
materials and colors; and striping. The types and extent of adjustments the
Director is authorized to review are specified in sections
15-15-5,
15-15-6, and
15-15-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Planning Commission Review: The Planning Commission must review
requests for adjustments that are referred to it by the Director at a public
hearing as set forth in Chapter 28 of this title.
   K.   Failure To Maintain Required Parking: In the event on site parking and
loading area facilities required to be provided under this Code are not
maintained for licensed vehicle parking and truck loading area purposes to the
extent required, the Director of Community Development may revoke a certificate
of occupancy for structures that fail to maintain required on site parking and
loading facilities. The Director of Development Services must provide a
property owner at least ninety (90) days to comply with this Code, including
any ministerial or discretionary permits as to parking if it appears that a
violation was reasonably beyond the control of the person required to comply
with this chapter. Should a certificate of occupancy be revoked, the premises
affected cannot be occupied or used for any purpose until a new certificate of
occupancy is issued. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; Ord.
1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-15-4: PLAN PREPARATION AND PERMIT APPROVAL:
   A.   A person seeking a building permit, change of occupancy, or change in
design to a parking and loading area must submit a parking and loading area
plan, in a form approved by the Director of Community Development, to the
Director of Community Development. The plans must clearly indicate the
location, size, shape and design, of all curb cuts, lighting, landscaping, and
parking spaces in full compliance with Code requirements.
   B.   The City cannot issue a building permit until the applicant presents
satisfactory evidence to the Director of Community Development that parking and
loading facilities required by the provisions of this chapter will be provided
and maintained. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022)
15-15-5: PARKING AREA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Access and Circulation:
      1.   Design: Parking facilities must be designed so that a car within a
facility will not have to enter a street to move from one location to any other
location within the same facility.
      2.   Exit: Parking facilities in nonresidential zones must be designed in
such a manner that any vehicle on the property will be able to exit from the
property traveling in a forward direction. However, vehicles may exit onto an
alley traveling in a reverse direction.
      3.   The Director may approve adjustments from the site access and
circulation standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   B.   Driveway And Parking Area Paving And Surfacing: All permanent on site
parking, loading, vehicle storage and vehicle sales areas must be paved with
approved concrete or asphaltic concrete. On-site parking areas to be used for
not longer than one year must be surfaced and maintained with an impervious
material acceptable to the Director so as to eliminate dust and mud. All on-
site parking areas must be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface
water in accordance with the applicable stormwater regulations. Acceptable
alternative paving materials include decorative concrete, permeable concrete,
grasscrete, brick, or similar material of equivalent durability. The Director
may approve adjustments from the driveway and parking area paving standards for
non-standard roadbed construction and alternative roadway surfaces (such as
drivable reinforced turf) as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   C.   Parking Area Striping: All parking spaces must be clearly striped with
white, double four-inch wide stripes, one foot apart. The Director may approve
adjustments from the parking area striping standards as provided in Chapters 22
and 23 of this title. The alternative designs may include the use of colored
concrete and other decorative materials provided that alternative striping
options clearly identify parking spaces and distinguish them from adjoining
walkways and drive aisles.
   FIGURE 1 - PARKING AREA STRIPING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3837.png]
 
   D.   Parking Space Location:
      1.   Residential:
         a.   Required parking spaces, excepting guest spaces, must be located
within a garage or carport as required in Subsection S of this Section.
         b.   No required guest parking space may be located, in whole or in
part, in a required front yard or front two-thirds of a required side yard.
      2.   Nonresidential:
         a.   Parking spaces may encroach into a required street-facing setback
up to a maximum of 50 percent of the required setback area, provided a minimum
landscaped setback of five feet is maintained. Parking spaces may encroach into
a required interior side and rear setback up to the interior side or rear
property line, provided that the interior side and rear property line does not
abut a public or private street.
         b.   Parking spaces that back up directly into a driveway entrance
must maintain a minimum landscaped setback of 20 feet from any street facing
property line.
         c.   Where vehicular access is provided by an alley, parking may
intrude into the required rear yard; provided, however, the amount of setback
intruded upon must be replaced by increasing the other required yards on site
by an equivalent amount.
   FIGURE 2 - PARKING SPACE LOCATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3835.png]
 
   E.   Parking Lot Slope: The maximum slope for parking lots is five percent.
The Director may approve adjustments from the parking lot slope standard as
provided in, Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   F.   Lighting:
      1.   Lights provided to illuminate any parking area or vehicle sales
areas as permitted by this Code must be arranged so as to direct the light away
from any premises upon which a residential dwelling unit is located.
      2.   Parking area light standards located within 50 feet of a property
line must not exceed 25 feet in height.
      3.   The Director may approve adjustments from the lighting standards.
   G.   Landscaping:
      1.   All new or substantially redesigned parking areas must provide
landscaping as provided in chapter 2, “General Provisions”, of this title.
   H.   Parking Space Dimensions:
      1.   Minimum Interior Dimensions:
Space Type Minimum Width Minimum Length
Space Type                 Minimum Width Minimum Length
Commercial standard        8.5 feet      18 feet
Residential standard       9 feet        20 feet
Residential - narrow lots1 8.5 feet      20 feet
Vehicle lift               8.5 feet      18 feet
Compact                    8.5 feet      15 feet
Parallel                   8.5 feet      24 feet
Accessible                 See note 2    See note 2
Motorcycle                 5 feet        9 feet
Bicycle3                   2 feet        5 feet
 
   Notes:
      1.    Lots under 40 feet in width.
      2.    The dimensions of accessible parking spaces must comply with the
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), title III and California Code of
Regulations (CCR), California Access Code, title 24.
      3.   Each bicycle space must accommodate one 2-bicycle capacity rack.
      2.    Single-Family Dwellings:
         a.    Two-car garages must have minimum interior dimensions of 20 feet
by 20 feet, except for narrow lots as indicated below.
   FIGURE 4 - SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING GARAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3831.png]
 
         b.   Individual garages must not exceed 900 square feet in size or a
four car capacity, whichever is less. Subterranean garages and semi-
subterranean garages that meet the definition of a basement are exempt from
this requirement.
      3.    The Director may approve adjustments to the parking space
dimensions standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   I.   Compact Spaces: Compact parking is allowed for office, industrial,
hotel, and recreational uses up to a maximum of 20 percent of required parking
spaces. Parking provided in excess of the required number may be compact in
size. Compact spaces cannot be allowed for retail uses.
   J.   Tandem Spaces: All tandem parking spaces, where allowed, must be
clearly outlined on the surface of the parking facility.
   TANDEM SPACES PERMITTED
 
                    Maximum Percentage of Maximum Percentage of
Use                 Required Spaces3      Required Spaces in    Maximum Depth
                                          Smoky Hollow
Single- and two-    100                   n/a                   2 spaces1
family residential
Multiple-family     Prohibited2           n/a                   n/a
residential
Retail and services Prohibited            30                    2 spaces
Industrial          20                    85                    2 spaces
Office              20                    85                    2 spaces
Restaurant          Prohibited            10                    2 spaces
 
   Notes:
      1.    Tandem spaces for single- and two-family dwellings must be assigned
to the same unit.
      2.    Tandem parking is permitted for multiple-family residential
developments involving density bonuses, pursuant to Government Code section
65915.
      3.   Parking provided in excess of the required number may be tandem in
configuration.
The Director may approve adjustments to the required number and standards for
tandem parking spaces as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title, subject
to conditions. The conditions may include recording of a covenant agreement,
requiring a parking attendant, requiring valet service, and other operational
conditions. The Director may also approve tandem parking in excess of the above
limits for permitted temporary uses and/or special events.
   K.   Parking Clearance and Obstructions:
      1.   Vertical Clearance: The minimum vertical clearance for all parking
areas must be seven feet.
         a.   Exceptions: Storage cabinets and other obstructions shall be
permitted in an area above the front end of parking spaces that must be at
least 4.5 feet above the ground and no more than 3.5 feet from the front end of
the space.
      2.   Horizontal Clearance: Parking spaces located next to walls, columns,
or similar obstructions must provide an additional one foot of clearance on the
side of the obstruction.
         a.   Exceptions:
            (1)   Columns or similar obstructions are permitted in the one-foot
clearance area four feet of the front and rear end of a parking space.
            (2)   Walls, columns, or similar obstructions may project six
inches into the front end corners of a parking space.
            (3)   In existing parking facilities, standard parking spaces may
be reduced in length by up to two feet to accommodate installation of electric
vehicle charging stations.
      3.   Disabled Access: Where necessary to comply with the Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA), title III and California Code of Regulations (CCR),
California Access Code, title 24, parking facilities may deviate from the
parking clearance and obstructions standards.
   FIGURE 5 - REQUIRED CLEARANCE AND PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3829.png]
 
      4.   The Director may approve adjustments to the parking clearance and
obstructions standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   L.   Vehicle Ramps:
 
Maximum slope             20 percent
Transitions slopes        Required at each end of ramps that exceed a 6 percent
                          slope
Maximum transition length 8 feet
Slope of transitions      50 percent of the main ramp slope
 
   FIGURE 6 - VEHICLE RAMP DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3827.png]
 
The Director may approve adjustments to the vehicle ramps standards as provided
in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   M.   Drive Aisle Width and Parking Row Depth:
 
Parking Angle Aisle Width - Aisle Width - Standard    Compact Space Space Width
              One-Way       Two-Way       Space Depth Depth
A             B             B             C           C             D
0° - parallel12'           18'           8.5'        8.5'          24'
30°          12'           18'           16.36'      14.86'        17'
45°          15'           18'           18.74'      16.62'        12.02'
60°          16'           18'           19.84'      17.24'        9.82'
90°          25'           25'           18'         15'           8.5'
 
   FIGURE 7 - PARKING AISLE AND PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3825.png]
 
      1.   For 90 degree parking, the parking aisle width can deviate from the
above requirements based on the following table:
   EXCEPTIONS FOR 90° PARKING ANGLE1
 
Parking Space Minimum Width (in feet) Aisle Width (in feet)
8.5                                   25
9.0                                   24
9.5                                   23
10                                    22
 
Note:
    1.    The exceptions for 90-degree parking do not apply to garages for
single- and two-family dwellings.
      2.   The Director may approve adjustments to the drive aisle width and
parking space depth standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   N.   Driveway and Curb Cuts: All curb cuts and driveways must lead directly
to required parking. Curb cuts not leading to parking, must be removed whenever
new buildings are constructed or additions are made to existing buildings. The
location and design of all driveway entrances and exits must comply with the
standards listed below. The goal of these standards is to: 1) preserve on
street parking spaces, where applicable, 2) improve traffic safety, and 3)
improve on site vehicle circulation.
      1.   Driveway and Curb Cut Width:
Zone Curb Cut Width (in feet)* Driveway Width (in feet)
     Minimum Maximum           Minimum Maximum
Zone                         Curb Cut Width (in feet)* Driveway Width (in feet)
                             Minimum Maximum           Minimum Maximum
R-1 and R-2 - lots less than 10      20                10      20
50 feet wide
R-1 and R-2 - lots at least  10      25                10      28
50 feet wide
R-3 - serving 12 or fewer    12      30                12      30
parking spaces or one-way
R-3 - serving 13 or more     18      30                18      30
parking spaces or two-way
Nonresidential - one-way     12      30                12      30
Nonresidential - two-way     18      30                18      30
 
   Note:
       *    Curb cut width excludes the width of aprons.
      2.   Curb Cut Locations:
 
               Minimum Distance     Minimum Distance From Minimum Distance From
Zone           Between Curb Cuts On Curb Cuts To Street   Curb Cuts To Property
               The Same Property    Corners               Lines
Residential    24 feet              20 feet               5 feet
Nonresidential 24 feet*             50 feet               5 feet
 
   Note:
      *   For a signalized driveway on a major or secondary arterial street as
defined in the General Plan Circulation Element that provides safe passage for
pedestrians crossing the driveway, a minimum distance of 10 feet between curb
cuts on the same property is permitted, subject to approval of the Community
Development Director and City Engineer.
   FIGURE 8 - CURB CUT AND DRIVEWAY LOCATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3823.png]
 
      3.   The Director may approve adjustments to the driveway and curb cut
standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   O.   Corner Clearance and Driveway Visibility: All parking areas must meet
the corner clearance and driveway visibility standards as provided in chapter
2, “General Provisions”, of this title.
   P.   Drive-Through Facilities:
      1.   Drive-through lanes may encroach into required landscaped setbacks
up to a maximum of 50 percent of the required setback area, provided a minimum
landscaped setback of five feet is maintained.
      2.   Drive-through lanes must be located and designed in such a manner as
to not interfere with on-site and off-site circulation. The location and design
of the drive-through lane is subject to Director review and approval.
   DRIVE-THROUGH LANE DIMENSIONS
 
Use                                Minimum Length (Continuous) Minimum Width
Eating and drinking establishments 150 feet                    10 feet
Banks, pharmacies, and cleaners    60 feet                     10 feet
 
   FIGURE 9 - DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3821.png]
 
      3.   The Director may require wider or longer drive-through lanes,
subject to a queuing study.
      4.   The Director may approve adjustments to the drive-through facilities
standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   Q.   Parking Structure Standards:
      1.   The following setback requirements apply to all subterranean parking
facilities:
 
Zone           Projection Above Grade          Setback
               Completely subsurface           Must meet required front setback
                                               No rear or side setback required
Residential    No more than 3 feet above grade Must meet required setbacks
                                               Must meet required setbacks and
               More than 3 feet above grade    must be screened from public
                                               view
Nonresidential Completely subsurface           No setbacks required1
               Above grade                     Must meet required setbacks
 
   Note:
      1.    The parking structure must be designed in such a manner as to
maintain sufficient soil above for landscaping (ground cover, shrubs and trees)
to grow above grade.
      2.   The Director may approve adjustments to the parking structure
standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   R.   Special Residential Parking Provisions:
      1.   Covered parking: All required parking spaces must be covered and
enclosed in the following manner:
 
Use                              Minimum Parking Enclosure
Single- and two-family dwellings Fully enclosed garage
Multiple-family dwellings        Covered structure enclosed on 3 sides
Guest parking spaces             May be uncovered and unenclosed
 
      2.   Residential Garage Openings: All garages must meet the minimum and
maximum widths listed below:
 
Type Of Garage              Minimum Opening Width Maximum Opening Width
Single car                  8 feet                14 feet
Two car                     16 feet               20 feet
Multiple-family residential 16 feet               Equal to the drive aisle
                                                  width it serves
 
      3.   Residential Turn Radius Requirements:
         a.   One or two car garages located behind a residence must provide a
minimum turning radius of 25 feet.
         b.   Residential garages that take access directly from an alley may
measure the required turn radius to the opposite side of the alley.
   FIGURE 10 - RESIDENTIAL TURN RADIUS AND ALLEY ACCESS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3819.png]
 
      4.   The Director may approve adjustments to the special residential
parking provisions standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   S.   Vehicle Lifts: Vehicle lifts may be used by right to provide off street
parking spaces on lots in the single-family residential (R-1) zone and the two-
family residential (R-2) zone where the vehicle lifts provide parking in excess
of the minimum number of required parking spaces subject to the standards in
this section and in this chapter.
      1.   An administrative use permit is required for vehicle lifts providing
required off street parking spaces on lots in the R-1 and R-2 zones subject to
the following:
         a.   The vehicle lift must be located only within a fully enclosed
garage.
         b.   A vehicle lift may only be used to store two vehicles vertically
where a minimum vertical height clearance from the floor to the ceiling plate
of the garage is a minimum of 14 feet clear of obstructions.
         c.   A vehicle lift must be designed and used as a designated parking
space for use only by occupants in the same dwelling unit as the parking space
located directly below the vehicle lift.
         d.   A vehicle lift must be permitted only if it is operated with an
automatic shutoff safety device, is installed according to manufacturer
specifications, and is operable at all times.
      2.   In nonresidential zones, vehicle lifts are permitted as tandem
spaces, subject to the limitations in ESMC § 15-15-5(K), and may store up to
two vehicles vertically. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1483, 11-5-2013; Ord.
1551, 8-15-2017; Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1629, 11-16-
2021; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; Ord. 1659, 5-7-2024)
15-15-6: REQUIRED PARKING SPACES:
The number of on-site parking spaces required for the establishment of a
building or use must be provided and thereafter maintained at the ratios set
forth below. For uses not listed, the required number of spaces will be
determined by the Director based on most similar listed use or a parking demand
study. A parking demand study must include, at a minimum, information
specifying the number of employees, customers, visitors, clients, shifts,
deliveries, parking spaces, or other criteria established by the Director. The
Director may refer any decision regarding uses not listed to the planning
commission for review. Unless stated otherwise, parking must be based on net
floor area as defined in this code. Accessible parking spaces must be provided
and comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), title III and
California Code of Regulations (CCR), California Access Code, title 24.
   A.   Automobile Spaces Required:
Use Number Of Parking Spaces Required
Use                                                                             Number Of Parking Spaces Required
Commercial:                                                                      
 Animal care:                                                                   
                                                                                1 space for each 300 square feet of office/retail area,
  Animal boarding, kennels                                                    plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of storage and animal
                                                                                area including outdoor play area
                                                                                1 space for each 300 square feet of office/retail area,
  Animal daycare and training (no overnight stay)                             plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of storage and animal
                                                                                area, including outdoor area
  Veterinary hospital                                                         1 space for each 300 square feet
 Fitness centers, gyms, health clubs                                           1 space for each 150 square feet
                                                                                1 space for each of the first 100 rooms, or sleeping
  Hotels, motels, auto courts, bed and breakfast inns, motor lodges, and        units;
 tourist courts                                                                3/4 space for each of the next 100 rooms, or sleeping
                                                                                units; and
                                                                                ½ space for each room above 200 rooms, or sleeping units
                                                                                1 space for each 300 square feet of interior floor area,
 Landscape nurseries                                                           plus 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of exterior
                                                                                storage and display area
 Medical/dental offices and clinics                                            1 space for each 200 square feet
  General offices (including up to 500 square feet of accessory eating
  establishments)                                                               1 space for each 300 square feet for the first 25,000
  Retail sales                                                                  square feet
  Retail services:                                                              1 space for each 350 square feet for the second 25,000
    Business and consumer support services                                      square feet
    Financial institutions                                                      1 space for each 400 square feet for the area in excess
    Personal services                                                           of 50,000 square feet

                                                                                1 space for each 500 square feet for the first 25,000
 Motion picture/television studio/sound stages (indoor)                        square feet
                                                                                1 space for each 1,000 square feet for the area in excess
                                                                                of 25,000 square feet
Eating and drinking establishments:                                              
 Cafes:                                                                         
    Which equal 20 percent or less of the gross floor area of a multi-tenant
  shopping center, office development or the commercial portion of a mixed    1 space for each 300 square feet
    use development
    Any portion of a café or any cumulative floor area of multiple cafes which 1 space for each 75 square feet, including outdoor areas
  exceed 20 percent of a multi-tenant shopping center, office development, or if outdoor dining area exceeds 200 square feet
    the commercial portion of a mixed use development
                                                                                1 space for each 75 square foot area, including outdoor
                                                                                dining areas. (Parking for outdoor dining areas is
 Fast food and drive-through restaurants, bars, and cocktail lounges           required only for the portion that exceeds 200 square
                                                                                feet or 20 percent of the indoor dining area, whichever
                                                                                is less.)
                                                                                Minimum of 3 spaces regardless of size
 Food to go uses                                                               1 space for each 300 square feet, with a minimum of 3
                                                                                spaces
                                                                                1 space for each 75 square feet of dining area, including
                                                                                outdoor dining areas (parking for outdoor dining areas is
 Full service restaurants                                                      required only for the portion that exceeds 200 square
                                                                                feet or 20 percent of the indoor dining area, whichever
                                                                                is less), and 1 space for each 250 square feet of
                                                                                nondining areas. Minimum of 3 spaces regardless of size
Group care:
 Daycare (adult)                                                               1 for every 7 adults, plus 1 space for each employee and
                                                                                faculty member
 Daycare (children)                                                            1 space for each 1 classroom, plus 1 space for each
                                                                                employee and faculty member
                                                                                1 space per employee on duty, with a minimum of 3
 Emergency shelters                                                            employee parking spaces, provided the number of spaces
                                                                                does not exceed the minimum spaces required for similar
                                                                                uses if the same size in the M-1 Zone.
 Hospitals                                                                     11/2 spaces for each bed
 Senior communities, rest homes, convalescent homes                            1 space for each 2 beds
Industrial uses:                                                                 
 Data centers                                                                  1 space for each 3,500 square feet
 Heavy industrial:                                                              
    Extraction of raw materials and refining                                    1 space for each 500 square feet for the first 50,000
    Factories                                                                   square feet
    Generating stations                                                         1 space for each 1,000 square feet for the area in excess
    Heavy manufacturing                                                         of 50,000 square feet

 Light industrial:                                                              
    High and medium bay labs                                                    1 space for each 500 square feet for the first 50,000
    Light assembly and processing                                               square feet
    Light manufacturing                                                         1 space for each 1,000 square feet for the area in excess
    Research and development (includes office with on site testing facilities)  of 50,000 square feet

                                                                                1 space for each 300 square feet of office and/or
  Wholesaling                                                                 showroom area, plus parking as required for storage/
                                                                                warehouse areas
 Ministorage, personal storage                                                 5 spaces minimum, plus 1 space per 50 storage units or
                                                                                5,000 square feet
  Warehousing and storage related uses:                                          
    Freight forwarding                                                          1 space for each 1,000 square feet for the first 20,000
    General storage                                                             square feet
    Transfer, trucking yards or terminals                                       1 space for each 2,000 square feet for the second 20,000
    Warehouses and storage buildings                                            square feet
                                                                                1 space for each 4,000 square feet for the area in excess
    Warehousing and distribution                                                of 40,000 square feet

Public assembly:                                                                 
 Assembly hall:                                                                 
  With fixed seats                                                            1 space for every 4 seats
  Without fixed seats                                                         1 space for every 35 square feet of floor area used for
                                                                                assembly purposes
Recreational uses:                                                               
 Batting cages                                                                 2 spaces for each cage
 Billiard parlors/pool halls - primary use (more than 2 tables)                1 space for each 100 square feet
 Bowling alleys                                                                4 spaces for each lane, plus parking for other uses
Residential uses:                                                                
 Accessory dwelling units                                                      None
 Live/work units                                                               2 spaces for each unit plus 1 space per 350 square feet
                                                                                of commercial/work area
 Lodging houses, rooming houses, and guesthouses                               1 space for each guestroom
                                                                                2 spaces per unit, plus 1 visitor space for every 3 units
 Multiple-family dwellings (Properties more than two acres)                    (3 - 5 units = 1 visitor space, 6 - 8 units = 2 visitor
                                                                                spaces, etc.)
                                                                                1 space for studio units
 Multiple-family dwellings (Properties up to two acres)                        2 spaces for 1-bedroom units
                                                                                2 spaces for 2-bedroom units or larger
                                                                                1/3 guest space per unit
                                                                                2 spaces for each unit and 1 additional space for
 Single-family and two-family dwellings                                        dwelling units exceeding 3,500 square feet of gross floor
                                                                                area
Schools - educational institutions:                                              
 Preschool, elementary through junior high level                               1 space for each 1 classroom, plus 1 space for each
                                                                                employee and faculty member
 High school level                                                             7 spaces per classroom plus auditorium or stadium parking
                                                                                requirements
                                                                                1 space for every 50 square feet of gross floor area or 1
 Adult level, college, business and trade                                      space for every 3 fixed seats - whichever is greater; or,
                                                                                as modified by a parking demand study
Vehicle related services1:                                                       
 Car washes:                                                                    
  Automated, and/or accessory to service/gas station                          2 space minimum, plus queuing space for 3 vehicles ahead
                                                                                of each wash lane
                                                                                10 spaces minimum or 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet,
  Full service                                                                whichever is greater, plus 3 space queuing lane ahead of
                                                                                each wash lane
  Self-service                                                                1 space minimum per washing stall
 Service stations                                                              3 spaces minimum or 1 space per 300 square feet of
                                                                                office/retail area, whichever is greater
                                                                                2 spaces for each service stall plus 2 spaces for office
                                                                                Additionally, a parking plan must be submitted for
                                                                                automobile service uses that include limited automobile
 Vehicle maintenance/repair, accessories installation, and body shops          sales. The plan must demonstrate that the area for the
                                                                                display of automobiles for sale will not encroach into
                                                                                required setbacks, parking spaces, driveways, drive
                                                                                aisles, vehicle back up areas, landscaping, and any other
                                                                                required use areas as required by this Code
 
   Note:
       1.    Repair bays, washing stalls, vacuum stalls, and fuel pump spaces
do not count toward required parking.
   B.   Bicycle Spaces Required:
 
Use                                    Number Of Bicycle Spaces Required
Single-family and two-family dwellings None
                                       10 percent of the required vehicle
Multiple-family residential            parking spaces for projects with 6 or
                                       more units
                                       Five percent of the required vehicle
Nonresidential                         spaces with a minimum of 4 spaces and a
                                       maximum of 25 spaces
 
      The Director may approve adjustments to reduce the requirement for
bicycle spaces as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
   C.   Reductions in the Number of Required Parking Spaces:
      1.   For Single Uses:
         a.   The Director may approve an adjustment to the required number of
parking spaces for any use up to a maximum of 20 percent or 20 parking spaces,
whichever is less, based on the submittal of a parking demand study. The
Director may refer any such request to the Planning Commission for review.
         b.   Parking studies submitted in conjunction with requests for
reductions must include, at a minimum information specifying the number of
employees, customers, visitors, clients, shifts, deliveries, parking spaces, or
other criteria established by the Director.
      2.   For Joint/Shared Uses:
         a.   The Director may approve an adjustment to reduce the required
number of parking spaces in any zone for uses that share parking facilities for
a maximum of 20 percent or 20 parking spaces, whichever is less, based on the
submittal of a parking demand study. The Director may refer any request for an
adjustment from the required number of parking spaces to the Planning
Commission for review.
         b.   Requests for shared and/or joint uses are subject to the
following requirements:
            (1)   A parking study must be submitted by the applicant
demonstrating that there will not exist substantial conflict in the peak hours
of parking demand for the uses for which joint parking use is proposed;
            (2)   The number of parking stalls which may be credited against
the requirements of the structures or uses involved must not exceed the number
of stalls reasonably anticipated to be available during differing hours of
operation; and
            (3)   A written agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney,
must be executed by all parties concerned assuring the continued availability
of the number of stalls designed for joint use.
      3.   Sites with Transportation Systems Management Plans: The number of
required parking spaces may be modified subject to approval of a transportation
systems management plan submitted pursuant to the procedures and requirements
of chapters 16 or 17.
      4.   Reductions for Disabilities Upgrades: When required solely as needed
to upgrade existing parking facilities to comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), title III and California Code of Regulations (CCR),
California Access Code, title 24, the total number of parking spaces may be
reduced at the discretion of the Director of Community Development.
   D.   Parking In-Lieu Fees: Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the
contrary, the City Council may designate certain areas within the City where,
in lieu of providing the number of parking spaces required by this chapter or
applicable specific plan, such requirement may be satisfied by paying a parking
in-lieu fee in an amount set by City Council resolution. Designated parking in-
lieu fee areas and the process for payment of parking in-lieu fees are
described in chapter 33 of this title.
(Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018; Ord.
1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-
2023; Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023; Ord. 1670, 4-1-2025)
15-15-7: OFF STREET LOADING SPACE STANDARDS:
   A.   General Provisions: Every building established, erected, enlarged or
expanded for commercial, manufacturing or institutional purposes must provide
loading space as set forth below. However, for any building or use enlarged or
increased in capacity, additional loading spaces are required only for such
enlargement or increase. All required loading spaces are in addition to the
required on site parking spaces set forth in this chapter and must be developed
and maintained in accordance with this chapter. Loading spaces may be provided
either completely or partially within a building when such building is designed
to include adequate ingress and egress to the loading spaces. Unless stated
otherwise, loading requirements must be based on net floor area as defined in
section
15-1-6 of this title.
      1.   Location: Loading spaces, with the exception of passenger loading
spaces, must be located to the side or rear of buildings on site whenever
possible as determined by the Director. Loading spaces cannot interfere with
vehicular and pedestrian circulation on site.
      2.   Screening: Loading spaces must be appropriately screened from view
from public streets. The screening may include decorative walls, landscaped
berms, shrubs, trees and other landscaping, and any other screening methods
deemed appropriate by the Director.
   B.   Types and Dimensions:
   LOADING SPACE TYPES AND SIZES (IN FEET)
 
Type        Width Length Height
Passenger   10    20     7
Small truck 12    25     14
Large truck 13    50     16
 
   C.   Number Of Loading Spaces Required:
Use Number And Type Required
Use                                    Number And Type Required
Data centers                           1 small truck space
                                       1 passenger space for 1 to 25 children
Daycare centers                        2 passenger spaces for 26 to 50 children
                                       3 passenger spaces for over 50 children
                                       1 small truck space for buildings
                                       between 3,000 and 25,000 square feet in
Eating and drinking establishments     size
                                       1 small and 1 large truck space for
                                       buildings over 25,000 square feet
                                       0 spaces for buildings 0 to 5,000 square
Fitness centers, gyms, health clubs    feet in size
                                       1 small truck space for buildings over
                                       5,000 square feet in size
                                       1 small truck space for buildings up to
                                       25,000 square feet in size
                                       2 small truck spaces and 2 passenger
Hotels, motels, hospitals, and         spaces for buildings 25,001 to 100,000
institutional uses                     square feet in size, plus 1 large truck
                                       space and 1 passenger space for each
                                       additional 100,000 square feet or
                                       fraction thereof above 100,000 square
                                       feet
                                       1 small truck space for buildings up to
                                       25,000 square feet in size
Industrial, manufacturing, warehousing 1 small and 1 large truck space for
and storage related uses (except data  buildings 25,000 to 100,000 square feet
centers and personal/ministorage)      in size, plus 1 large truck for each
                                       additional 100,000 square feet over
                                       100,000 square feet in size
Mixed use, campus style projects       The loading requirements shall be the
                                       combined total of each building/use
                                       0 spaces for buildings up to 1,000
                                       square feet
                                       1 small truck space for buildings 1,000
                                       to 25,000 square feet in size
                                        
Offices (general, medical, dental and  2 small truck spaces for buildings
clinics)                               25,001 to 100,000 square feet in size
                                       2 small and 1 large truck space for
                                       buildings 100,001 to 250,000 square feet
                                       in size, plus 1 large truck space for
                                       every 100,000 above 250,000 square feet
                                       up to 3 large truck spaces
Personal/ministorage                   1 small truck space per 100 units
                                       1 small truck space for buildings
                                       between 1,000 to 25,000 square feet in
                                       size
                                       1 small truck and 1 large truck space
                                       for buildings between 25,001 and 50,000
Retail sales and services              square feet in size
                                       1 small truck and 2 large truck spaces
                                       for buildings between 50,001 and 100,000
                                       square feet, plus 1 large truck space
                                       for each 100,000 square feet over
                                       100,000 square feet
                                       2 passenger spaces for 1 to 50 students,
Schools - educational institutions     plus 1 passenger space for each 50
                                       students above 50 and 1 small truck
                                       space minimum
                                       1 small truck space for buildings
                                       between 3,000 and 25,000 square feet in
                                       size
                                       2 small truck spaces for buildings
Vehicle related services               between 25,000 and 100,000 square feet
                                       in size
                                       2 small truck spaces and 1 large truck
                                       space for each additional 100,000 square
                                       feet above 100,000 square feet in size
                                       Based on most similar listed use or a
Uses not listed                        parking study, as determined by the
                                       Director of Community Development
 
   D.   Adjustments: The Director may approve adjustments to the location,
number, types and dimensions of loading spaces as provided in Chapters 22 and
23 of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1629,
11-16-2021; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-15-8: PARKING OF LICENSED RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND HABITABLE VEHICLES:
   A.   Parking of any mobile home, camper, house trailer or other habitable
vehicle outside of an authorized mobile home park or licensed recreational
vehicle parking facility is prohibited except that such vehicles may be parked
on any public property or right-of-way subject to any applicable parking
restrictions of this Code, or on any developed residential lot as long as the
vehicle, if parked in a front yard, is parked on a nonporous surface pad
adequate to accommodate the parked vehicle.
   B.   A habitable vehicle parked on private property may be occupied for
residential purposes for no longer than seventy two (72) hours (outside of an
authorized mobile home park) within any thirty (30) day period. No habitable
vehicle may be occupied for commercial purposes except as otherwise provided by
this Code. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
CHAPTER 15A
WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
15-15A-1: Purpose
15-15A-2: Definitions
15-15A-3: Application Of Policies
15-15A-4: Submittal Requirements
15-15A-5: Landscape Documentation Package Requirements
15-15A-6: Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet
15-15A-7: Soil Management Report
15-15A-8: Grading Design Plan Requirements
15-15A-9: Stormwater Management And Rainwater Retention
15-15A-10: Water Features
15-15A-11: Landscape Maintenance
15-15A-12: Model Home Landscaping
15-15A-13: Prescriptive Compliance Option
15-15A-14: Verification Of Compliance
15-15A-15: Provisions For Existing Landscapes
15-15A-16: Penalties For Violation And Enforcement
15-15A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted in accordance with Government Code section 65595(c) for
the purpose of complying with California law and promoting water conservation.
This chapter may be referred to as the WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING
STANDARDS. The water conservation in landscaping standards are intended to
promote water conservation while allowing the maximum possible flexibility in
designing healthy, attractive, and cost effective water efficient landscapes.
(Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meanings
stated in the water conservation in landscaping act 1 ; regulations
promulgating the water conservation in landscaping act; this code; and any
successor statutes or regulations.
   APPLIED WATER: The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the
landscape.
   AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: A timing device used to remotely control
valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are
able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either
evapotranspiration (weather based) or soil moisture data.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A safety device used to prevent pollution or
contamination of the potable water supply due to the reverse flow of water from
the irrigation system.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: The document that certifies that the landscape
design plan, irrigation scheduling parameters and landscape project has been
installed per the approved landscape documentation package. An irrigation audit
report must also be included to obtain the final certificate of completion for
the project.
   CERTIFIED IRRIGATION DESIGNER: A person certified to design irrigation
systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade
organization or other program such as the U.S. environmental protection
agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation
Association's certified irrigation designer program.
   CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR: A person certified to perform
landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a
professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. environmental
protection agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and
Irrigation Association's certified landscape irrigation auditor program.
   CHECK VALVE OR ANTIDRAIN VALVE: A valve located under a sprinkler head, or
other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent
drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.
   CLIMATE ZONE: A region characterized by long term weather patterns. The
climate is measured by assessing weather patterns, variation in temperature,
air pressure, wind, humidity, precipitation, sunshine, atmospheric particle
count and other meteorological variables in a given region. The climate of a
region is affected by its latitude, terrain, and altitude, as well as nearby
water bodies and their currents. Evapotranspiration along with temperature and
precipitation are used for classifying which animals and plants species would
thrive in a specific climate zone. As such, the garden collection of plant
species described in Sunset Western climate zone no. 24 (with marine influence
along the Southern California coast) would perform best in the city of El
Segundo.
   COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS: Community apartment projects, condominium
projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code section
4100.
   COMPOST: The safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of
organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.
   CONVERSION FACTOR (0.62): The number that converts acre-inches per acre per
year to gallons per square foot per year.
   DESIGNER: A person qualified to practice landscape architecture and/or
irrigation design.
   DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY: The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water
over a defined area.
   DRIP IRRIGATION: Any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing
emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume
irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water
slowly at or near the root zone of plants.
ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR (ETAF): A factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45
for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration,
adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two (2) major influences
upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF
for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas must not exceed
1.0. The ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.
   ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT: A project where the site is intentionally
altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.
   EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION OR USABLE RAINWATER (Eppt): The portion of total
precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.
   EMITTER: A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from
the system to the soil.
   ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPE: The point at which plants in the landscape have
developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are
established after one or two (2) years of growth.
   ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD OF THE PLANTS: The first year after installing the
plant in the landscape or the first two (2) years if irrigation will be
terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after
one or two (2) years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may
need three (3) to five (5) years for establishment.
   ESTIMATED TOTAL WATER USE (ETWU): The total water used for the landscape.
The ETWU is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected
for the landscape design. The ETWU must be below the MAWA.
   EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE: The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil
and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.
   FLOW RATE: The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission
devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per
second.
   FLOW SENSOR: An in-line device installed at the supply point of the
irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate.
Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow
monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This
combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter
or submeter.
   FRIABLE: A soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down
to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root
structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.
   FUEL MODIFICATION PLAN GUIDELINE: Guidelines from a local fire authority to
assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures
in a fire hazard severity zone.
   GRAY WATER: Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any
toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or
unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by
unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Gray water"
includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom
washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include
wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health And Safety Code section
17922.12.
   GUIDELINES FOR THE CITY OF EL SEGUNDO LAND DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS FOR
LANDSCAPING AND THE GUIDELINES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE:
Regulations separately adopted by city council resolution, and incorporated by
reference into this chapter, providing specific regulations for water
conservation.
   HARDSCAPE: Any durable material (pervious and nonpervious) that is comprised
of solid manmade and natural materials used in the built environment such as:
stone, tile, wood, crushed rock, gravel, granite, brick, metal, glass, bitumen,
concrete, and masonry. Hardscape projects may include paved areas, walkways,
patios, statuary, walls, pools, fountains, fireplaces, fire pits, stone
benches, and architectural landscape features.
   HYDROSEEDING (Otherwise Referred To As HYDRAULIC MULCH SEEDING,
HYDROMULCHING, HYDRASEEDING): A planting process that uses a slurry of seed and
mulch. It is often used as an erosion control technique on construction sites,
as an alternative to the traditional process of broadcasting or sowing dry
seed.
   HYDROZONE: A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water
needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated.
   INFILTRATION RATE: The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a
depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
   INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES: Species of plants not historically found in
California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or
economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural
agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the
California invasive plant inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds
database.
   IRRIGATION AUDIT: An in depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation
system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation
audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test
with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or
runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.
The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation
Association's landscape irrigation auditor certification program or other U.S.
environmental protection agency "WaterSense" labeled auditing program.
   IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY (OR IE): The measurement of the amount of water
beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency
is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics
and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this
chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.
   IRRIGATION SURVEY: An evaluation of an irrigation system that is less
detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not
limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve
performance of the irrigation system.
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM: A complete connection of system components, including the
water distribution network and the necessary irrigation equipment downstream
from the backflow prevention device.
   IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS: A review of water use data based on meter
readings and billing data.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who holds a license to practice landscape
architecture in the state of California Business And Professions Code, section
5615.
   LANDSCAPE AREA: All the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a
landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance
calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or
structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone
walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas
designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native
vegetation).
   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR: A person licensed by the state of California to
construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of
landscape systems.
   LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE: The documents required to be provided to
the city for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in
the implementation procedures of these water conservation in landscaping
standards. (See section
15-15A-5 of this chapter.)
   LANDSCAPE PROJECT: The total new or altered landscape area in a project, as
defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this chapter, meeting
requirements of water conservation in landscaping.
   LANDSCAPE WATER METER: An in-line device installed at the irrigation supply
point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is
connected to a totalizer to record water use.
   LATERAL LINE: The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the
emitters or sprinklers from the valve.
   LOCAL AGENCY: A city or county, including a charter city or charter county,
that is responsible for adopting and implementing the water efficient landscape
ordinance. The local agency is also responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or
design review of a project.
   LOCAL WATER PURVEYOR: Any entity, including a public agency, city, county,
or private water company that provides retail water service.
   LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION: The application of irrigation water at low pressure
through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as
drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically
designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of
plants.
   MAIN LINE: The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water
source to the valve or outlet.
   MASTER SHUTOFF VALVE: An automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply
point which controls water flow into the irrigation system which when closed,
water will not be supplied to the irrigation system.
   MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE (MAWA): The upper limit of annual applied
water for the established landscaped area. It is based upon the area's
reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the
landscape area. The estimated total water use must not exceed the maximum
applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas,
areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and
vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the
MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-
ETAF) x SLA)].
   MEDIAN: An area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or
planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.
   MICROCLIMATE: The climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with
the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun
exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.
   MINED LAND RECLAMATION PROJECTS: Any surface mining operation with a
reclamation plan approved in accordance with the surface mining and reclamation
act of 1975.
   MODEL HOME: A facility used exclusively for the promotion and sale of homes
similar to the model.
   MULCH: Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or
inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left
loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing
evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing
soil erosion.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: A new building with a landscape or other new landscape
such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.
   NONRESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE: Landscapes in commercial, institutional,
industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or
public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest
developments with designated recreational areas.
   OPERATING PRESSURE: The pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system
are designed by the manufacturer to operate.
   OVERHEAD SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS: Systems that deliver water through
the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).
   OVERSPRAY: The irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.
   PERMIT: An authorizing document issued by local agencies for new
construction or rehabilitated landscape.
   PERVIOUS: Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through
the material and into the underlying soil.
   PLANT FACTOR OR PLANT WATER USE FACTOR: A factor, when multiplied by ETo,
estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter,
the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0.0 to 0.1, the plant
factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for
moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high
water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived
from the publication "Water Use Classification Of Landscape Species". Plant
factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic
institutions or professional associations as approved by the California
department of water resources (DWR).
   PLANTING PLAN: A planting plan must identify location, spacing, numbers,
container planting sizes of all plant materials including common and botanical
names.
   PROJECT APPLICANT: The individual or entity submitting a landscape
documentation package to request a permit, plan check, or design review from
the local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her
designee.
   RAIN SENSOR OR RAIN SENSING SHUTOFF DEVICE: A component which automatically
suspends an irrigation event when it rains.
   RECORD DRAWING OR AS BUILTS: A set of reproducible drawings which show
significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually
based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the
contractor.
   RECREATIONAL AREA: Areas, excluding private single-family residential areas,
designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports
fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs,
surrounds and greens.
   RECYCLED WATER, RECLAIMED WATER, OR TREATED SEWAGE EFFLUENT WATER: Treated
or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as
landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human
consumption.
   REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION OR ETo: A standard measurement of environmental
parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per
day, month, or year and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large
field of four (4) to seven inch (7") tall, cool season grass that is well
watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the
maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be
accommodated.
   REGIONAL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE: A local ordinance adopted by
two (2) or more local agencies, water suppliers and other stakeholders for
implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical
region.
   REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE: Any relandscaping project that requires a permit,
plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of section
15-15A-3 of this chapter, and the modified landscape area is equal to or
greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
   RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE: Landscapes surrounding single- or multi- family
homes.
   RUNOFF: Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is
applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from
water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds
infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.
   SOFTSCAPE: Includes trees, shrubs, flowers, live horticulture plants, vines,
ground covers, grasses, and may include high quality artificial plants and
durable synthetic grass or artificial turf which are not made with heavy metals
or lead with completely pervious backing.
   SOIL MOISTURE SENSING DEVICE OR SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR: A device that measures
the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an
irrigation event.
   SOIL TEXTURE: The classification of soil based on its percentage of sand,
silt, and clay.
   SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA (SLA): An area of the landscape dedicated solely to
edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or
water features using recycled water.
   SPRINKLER HEAD: A device which delivers water through a nozzle.
   STATIC WATER PRESSURE: The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when
water is not flowing.
   STATION: An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate
simultaneously.
   STORMWATER RETENTION/DETENTION FEATURE: A device or system of improvements
that captures, retains and subsequently releases stormwater runoff from the
site at a lesser volume and/or slower rate than it is collected, while holding
the runoff in temporary storage for the purposes of infiltration, bioretention,
and/or storage with beneficial use as landscape irrigation.
   SUBMETER: A metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that
is installed after the primary utility water meter.
   SWING JOINT: An irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak free
connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement
in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.
   TURF: A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky
bluegrass, perennial rye grass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool grasses.
(Minimize cool season turf.) Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum,
St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, and buffalo grass are warm season grasses.
   VALVE: A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.
   WUCOLS: The "Water Use Classification Of Landscape Species" published by the
University Of California cooperative extension and the department of water
resources (2014).
   WATER CONSERVING PLANT SPECIES: A plant species identified as having a very
low or low plant factor.
   WATER FEATURE: A design element where open water performs an aesthetic or
recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls,
fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is
artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the
high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for
on site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are
not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are
not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget
calculation.
   WATERING WINDOW: The time of day irrigation is allowed.
   XERISCAPING (Often Incorrectly Referred To As ZERO-SCAPING Or XEROSCAPING):
Landscaping and gardening that reduces or eliminates the need for supplemental
water from irrigation. It is promoted in regions that do not have easily
accessible, plentiful, or reliable supplies of fresh water, and is gaining
acceptance in other areas as access to water becomes more limited. Xeriscaping
may be an alternative to various types of traditional gardening. The xeriscape
landscaping design may include natural rocks in various sizes, shapes, colors
and the use of California native species combined with species from the Arizona
desert, which are drought tolerant and require very little water or rain to
maintain. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. GOV § 65591 et seq.
15-15A-3: APPLICATION OF POLICIES:
   A.   Applicability: This chapter applies to all of the following landscape
projects:
      1.   New development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to
or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building permit,
plumbing permit, or design review.
      2.   Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area
equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet
requiring a building permit, plumbing permit, or design review.
      3.   Projects with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the performance
requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained
in section
15-15A-13 of this chapter.
      4.   Projects using treated or untreated gray water or rainwater captured
on the site, with an area less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet which meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated
total water use) entirely with treated or untreated gray water or through
stored rainwater captured on the site. Projects using gray water systems must
conform to the California plumbing code (California code of regulations title
24, part 5, chapter 16).
      5.   Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of
cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to section
15-15A-6 and subsections
15-15A-5I and
15-15A-14D of this chapter; and existing cemeteries are limited to the
requirements described in section
15-15A-15 of this chapter.
      6.   Existing landscapes limited to the requirements described in section
15-15A-15 of this chapter.
   B.   Nonapplicability: This chapter is not applicable to:
      1.   Registered local, state or federal historical sites.
      2.   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system.
      3.   Mined land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system.
      4.   Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and
arboretums open to the public.
      5.   Any project with a landscaped area less than five hundred (500)
square feet, unless the Director of Community Development determines that
substantial compliance with the purpose of this chapter requires that a
landscape plan be submitted or the existing irrigation system must be modified.
(Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-15A-4: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
The project applicant must submit the following:
   A.   A landscape documentation package for review and approval to the
Community Development Department.
   B.   The landscape documentation package must include a “Certificate of
Compliance” that has been prepared by an appropriately licensed professional
stating that the landscape design and water use calculations were prepared by
or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to
comply with the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act.
   C.   Before the City issues a building permit, a landscape documentation
package must be submitted and reviewed in accordance with this chapter.
Applications for a landscape plan approval must be filed by the owner of the
affected property or his agent, or by a public entity to which the provisions
of this chapter apply, on forms furnished by the Director of Community
Development.
   D.   No landscape documentation package can be approved unless the Director
of Community Development finds that the plan complements the design of the
project, is consistent with the provisions of this chapter; compatible with
adjacent existing or future public landscaped areas, and with the elevations
and appearance of existing structures located upon lots within the immediate
vicinity of the lot.
   E.   Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, the project
applicant must submit a copy of the “water efficient landscape worksheet”,
provided by City staff to the local water purveyor. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015;
amd. Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-15A-5: LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Landscape Documentation Package Elements: Each landscape package must
include the following six (6) elements:
      1.   Project information:
         a.   Date;
         b.   Project applicant;
         c.   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));
         d.   Total landscape area (square feet);
         e.   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private,
cemetery, homeowner installed);
         f.   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify
the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private
well;
         g.   Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package;
         h.   Project contacts to include contact information for the project
applicant and property owner;
         i.   Applicant signature and date with statement:
I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape
ordinance and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package.
      2.   Water efficient landscape worksheet describing water budget
calculations for the:
         a.   Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA);
         b.   Estimated total water use (ETWU);
      3.   Soil management report;
      4.   Landscape design plan;
      5.   Irrigation design plan; and
      6.   Grading design plan.
   B.   Landscaping Design Plan Requirements: The landscaping plan must
identify the location, spacing, numbers, container sizes of all plant materials
including common and botanical names, for the project in a clear and legible
fashion in accordance with the policies established to implement the provisions
of this chapter. The landscape design plan must:
      1.   Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other
method;
      2.   Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water
use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape must be included in the low
water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;
      3.   Identify recreational areas;
      4.   Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;
      5.   Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;
      6.   Identify type of mulch and application depth;
      7.   Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;
      8.   Identify type and surface area of water features;
      9.   Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious);
      10.   Identify location, installation details, and twenty four (24) hour
retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management
practices that encourage on site retention and infiltration of stormwater.
Project applicants must refer to the local agency or regional water quality
control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical
requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the
landscape design plan and examples are provided in section
15-15A-9 of this chapter.
      11.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies
as discussed in section
15-15A-9 of this chapter and their twenty four (24) hour retention or
infiltration capacity;
      12.   Identify any applicable gray water discharge piping, system
components and area(s) of distribution;
      13.   Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria
of the water efficient landscape ordinance and applied them for the efficient
use of water in the landscape design plan"; and
      14.   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed
landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape.
(See sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5,
5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business And Professions Code, section 832.27 of
title 16 of the California code of regulations, and section 6721 of the Food
And Agriculture Code.)
   C.   Landscaping Design Plan Criteria: The landscape design plan must
address the following design criteria as part of the landscape documentation
package:
      1.   Plant Material: Plant material may be selected for the landscape
providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed
the maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency must
include one or more of the following:
         a.   Protection and preservation of native species and natural
vegetation;
         b.   Selection of water conserving plant, tree and turf species,
especially local native plants;
         c.   Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease
and pest resistance;
         d.   Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or
tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting
area;
         e.   Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program
plant lists; and
         f.   Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines.
      2.   Similar Water Requirements: Plants having similar water use
requirements should be grouped together in distinct hydrozones, with the
exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in
subsection E2d of this section.
      3.   Plant Adaptability: Plants must be selected and planted
appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and
topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water
efficiency must include one or more of the following:
         a.   Use the Sunset Western climate zone system which takes into
account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying
degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;
         b.   Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature
plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or
infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate
soil volume for healthy root growth;
         c.   Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize
summer shade and winter solar gain;
         d.   Where possible, landscaping should be installed in the fall, in
order to establish plant materials when they will benefit most from winter
rains;
         e.   The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the
California invasive plant council, is strongly discouraged.
      4.   Turf: Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty five percent
(25%) where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and
where "twenty five percent (25%)" means one foot (1') of vertical elevation
change for every four feet (4') of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100
= slope percent).
      5.   High Water Use Plants: The planting of high water use plants is
limited to nonturf landscape area. The remaining landscape must be planted with
low and moderate water use plant materials. High water use plants,
characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street
medians.
      6.   Fire Prone Areas: A landscape design plan for projects in fire prone
areas must address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone
around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code sections
4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches
(refer to the local fuel modification plan guidelines).
   D.   Soil Preparation, Mulch And Amendments:
      1.   Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils must be
transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting
holes need meet this requirement.
      2.   Soil amendments must be incorporated according to recommendations of
the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see section
15-15A-7 of this chapter).
      3.   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four
(4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area must be
incorporated to a depth of six inches (6") into the soil. Soils with greater
than six percent (6%) organic matter in the top six inches (6") of soil are
exempt from adding compost and tilling.
      4.   A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch must be applied on all
exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting ground covers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is
contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife,
up to five percent (5%) of the landscape area may be left without mulch.
Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as
such.
      5.   Stabilizing mulching products must be used on slopes that meet
current engineering standards.
      6.   The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydroseeded
applications must meet the mulching requirement.
      7.   Organic mulch materials made from recycled or postconsumer products
must take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless
the recycled postconsumer organic products are not locally available. Organic
mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification plan
guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
   E.   Irrigation System Design Plan: The irrigation plan must identify all
components of the irrigation system drawn on project base sheets in a clear and
legible fashion in accordance with the policies established to implement the
provisions of this chapter. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation
system must meet all the requirements listed in this section and the
manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related
components must be planned and designed to allow for proper installation,
management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following
design criteria must be submitted as part of the landscape documentation
package.
      1.   Irrigation System:
         a.   Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water
service meter or private submeter, must be installed for all nonresidential
irrigated landscapes of one thousand (1,000) square feet but not more than five
thousand (5,000) square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies) and
residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or
greater. A landscape water meter may be either:
            (1)   A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided
by the local water purveyor; or
            (2)   A privately owned meter or submeter.
         b.   Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing nonvolatile memory
must be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.
         c.   If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended
pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure
regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each
emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for
optimal performance.
         d.   If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic
pressure of the irrigation system, pressure regulating devices such as in-line
pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices must be installed to meet
the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.
         e.   Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow
reading of the water supply must be measured at the point of connection. These
pressure and flow measurements must be conducted at the design stage. If the
measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements must be
conducted at installation.
         f.   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary,
that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather
conditions must be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local
climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing
weather or during rain.
         g.   Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or
butterfly valve) must be required, as close as possible to the point of
connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency
(such as a main line break) or routine repair.
         h.   Backflow prevention devices must be required to protect the water
supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant must
refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional
backflow prevention requirements.
         i.   Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system
damage or malfunction are required for all on nonresidential landscapes and
residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger.
         j.   Master shutoff valves are required on all projects except
landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control
of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low
pressure shutdown features.
         k.   The irrigation system must be designed to prevent runoff, low
head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water
flows onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas,
hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
         l.   Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil
type and infiltration rate, must be utilized when designing irrigation systems.
         m.   The design of the irrigation system must conform to the
hydrozones of the landscape design plan.
         n.   The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at
a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in section
15-15A-6 of this chapter regarding the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).
         o.   All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society Of
Agricultural And Biological Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC)
802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler And Emitter Standard". All sprinkler
heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low
quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
         p.   It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local
agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands
(on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the
effectiveness of the irrigation system.
         q.   In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is
required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.
         r.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices must have matched
precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's
recommendations.
         s.   Head to head coverage is recommended, however, sprinkler spacing
must be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using
the manufacturer's recommendations.
         t.   Swing joints or other riser protection components are required on
all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic
areas of turf or grass.
         u.   Check valves or antidrain valves are required on all sprinkler
heads where low point drainage could occur.
         v.   Areas less than ten feet (10') in width in any direction must be
irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or
overspray.
         w.   Overhead irrigation must not be permitted within twenty four
inches (24") of any nonpermeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the
setback from nonpermeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low
flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The
surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These
restrictions may be modified if:
            (1)   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no
runoff occurs; or the adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and
constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or
            (2)   The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or
technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly
demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in
subsection E1k of this section. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be
confirmed during the irrigation audit.
         x.   Slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) must not be
irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75
inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer
specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape
documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will
occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation
audit.
      2.   Hydrozone Criteria:
         a.   Each valve must irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope,
sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.
         b.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices must be selected based
on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.
         c.   Where feasible, trees must be placed on separate valves from
shrubs, ground covers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of
trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone must be considered when
designing irrigation for the tree.
         d.   Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water
use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:
            (1)   Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the
respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or
            (2)   The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for
calculations.
         e.   Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants will
not be permitted.
         f.   On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan,
hydrozone areas must be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On
the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and
assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone
information table (see water efficient worksheet) provided by staff. This table
can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.
      3.   Irrigation Design Plan: The irrigation design plan must contain:
         a.   Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;
         b.   Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation
system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads,
moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators,
and backflow prevention devices;
         c.   Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public
water supply;
         d.   Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per
hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each
station;
         e.   Recycled or reclaimed water irrigation systems must be utilized
if such lines are readily available adjacent to the site, as specified in
subsection F of this section;
         f.   The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of
the water efficient landscape ordinance and applied them accordingly for the
efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan;" and
         g.   The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified
irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person
authorized to design an irrigation system. (See sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641,
5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business
And Professions Code, section 832.27 of title 16 of the California code of
regulations, and section 6721 of the Food And Agricultural Code.)
   F.   Recycled Water:
      1.   The installation of recycled water irrigation systems must allow for
the current and future use of recycled water.
      2.   All recycled water irrigation systems must be designed and operated
in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.
      3.   Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape
areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special
landscape areas must not exceed 1.0.
   G.   Gray Water Systems: Gray water systems promote the efficient use of
water and are encouraged to assist in on site landscape irrigation. All gray
water systems must conform to the California plumbing code (California code of
regulations title 24, part 5, chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance
standards. Refer to subsection
15-15A-3A4 of this chapter for the applicability of this chapter to landscape
areas less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet with the
estimated total water use is met entirely by gray water.
   H.   Irrigation Scheduling: For the efficient use of water, all irrigation
schedules must be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum
amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules must
meet the following criteria:
      1.   Irrigation scheduling must be regulated by automatic irrigation
controllers.
      2.   Overhead irrigation must be scheduled between eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. unless weather conditions prevent it. If
allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the
stricter of the two (2) must apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside
the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.
      3.   For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention
must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current
reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total
water use. Total annual applied water must be less than or equal to maximum
applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules must be regulated
by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration
data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.
      4.   Parameters used to set the automatic controller must be developed
and submitted for each of the following:
         a.   The plant establishment period;
         b.   The established landscape; and
         c.   Temporarily irrigated areas.
      5.   Each irrigation schedule must consider for each station all of the
following that apply:
         a.   Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);
         b.   Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to
avoid runoff);
         c.   Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to
avoid runoff;
         d.   Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly
basis;
         e.   Application rate setting;
         f.   Root depth setting;
         g.   Plant type setting;
         h.   Soil type;
         i.   Slope factor setting;
         j.   Shade factor setting; and
         k.   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.
   I.   Landscape And Irrigation Maintenance Schedule:
      1.   Landscapes must be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A
regular maintenance schedule must be submitted with the certificate of
completion.
      2.   A regular maintenance schedule must include, but not be limited to,
routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system
and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; top dressing with
compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape
areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the
irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing
and system maintenance.
      3.   Repair of all irrigation equipment must be done with the originally
installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater
efficiency.
      4.   A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape
industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities.
   J.   Effective Precipitation: A local agency may consider effective
precipitation (25 percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and
may use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance:
   MAWA = (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential
areas. MAWA = (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for
nonresidential areas. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-6: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET:
The estimated water use calculations for the project must be identified. The
water use calculations must be certified by the landscape professional that it
meets the water conservation in landscaping act requirements and bear the
signature of the landscape professional as required by Business And Professions
Code section 5615.
   A.   Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet: A project applicant must complete
the "water efficient landscape worksheet" supplied by staff, which contains
information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and
area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that
the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does
not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential
areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project
is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum
applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55
for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as
annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated
based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape
design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.
In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water
use, a project applicant must use the annual ETo value for El Segundo of 33.0.
The annual ETo is found in the CIMIS reference evapotranspiration zones map,
from department of water resources, published in 1999.
   B.   Water Budget: Water budget calculations must adhere to the following
requirements:
      1.   The plant factor used must be from WUCOLS or from horticultural
researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved
by the California department of water resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges
from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use
plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for
high water use plants.
      2.   All water features must be included in the high water use hydrozone
and temporarily irrigated areas must be included in the low water use
hydrozone.
      3.   All special landscape areas must be identified and the water use for
each area must be calculated using the "water efficient landscape worksheet"
supplied by staff.
      4.   ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas
must not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-7: SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT:
Soil conditioning notes should be included on the plans. The soil analysis must
include a description of: soil texture, water holding capacity, infiltration
rate determined by laboratory test or soil infiltration rate table, pH, total
soluble salts, sodium, percentage of organic material, and implementation of
recommended amendments to the soil. The recommended amendments for the soil
must be appropriate for the plants selected. In order to reduce runoff and
encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report must be completed by
the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows:
   A.   Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.
      1.   Soil sampling must be conducted in accordance with laboratory
protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the
intended plants.
      2.   The soil analysis must include:
         a.   Soil texture;
         b.   Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture
infiltration rate table;
         c.   pH;
         d.   Total soluble salts;
         e.   Sodium;
         f.   Percent of organic matter; and
         g.   Recommendations.
   B.   In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production
home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven (7) lots or
approximately fifteen percent (15%) will satisfy this requirement. Large
landscape projects must sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven (7) lots.
   C.   The project applicant, or his/her designee, must comply with one of the
following:
      1.   If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report
must be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape documentation
package; or
      2.   If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report
must be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape certificate of
completion.
   D.   The soil analysis report must be made available, in a timely manner, to
the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design
plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.
   E.   The project applicant, or his/her designee, must submit documentation
verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the local
agency with certificate of completion. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-8: GRADING DESIGN PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
A grading design plan must be submitted as part of the landscape documentation
package for the project.
   A.   The project applicant must submit a landscape grading plan that
indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area
including:
      1.   Height of graded slopes;
      2.   Drainage patterns;
      3.   Pad elevations;
      4.   Finish grade; and
      5.   Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
   B.   To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that
project applicants:
      1.   Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within
property lines and does not drain onto nonpermeable hardscapes;
      2.   Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil;
and
      3.   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.
   C.   The grading design plan must contain the following statement: "I have
complied with the criteria of the water efficient landscape ordinance and
applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design
plan" and must bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by
state law. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-9: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND RAINWATER RETENTION:
   A.   Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase
infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality.
Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and
grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on site rainwater
retention and infiltration are encouraged.
   B.   Project applicants must refer to the local agency or regional water
quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical
requirements.
   C.   All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to
maximize water retention and infiltration. (Refer to subsection
15-15A-5D of this chapter.)
   D.   It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture
and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious
surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either: 1) the 1-inch, 24-hour rain
event or 2) the eighty fifth percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or additional
capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal
regulation.
   E.   It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the
following elements to improve on site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture
and use:
      1.   Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to
drain to vegetated areas.
      2.   Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof
and concrete driveways.
      3.   Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable
pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.
      4.   Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds
or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.
      5.   Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or
catchment systems.
      6.   Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and dry wells to
capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the
soil.
      7.   Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize
excess flow, and filter pollutants.
   F.   Landscape areas containing artificial turf or synthetic grass must be
permeable and must not contain lead or other toxic chemicals which can pollute
groundwater or the storm drain system. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-10: WATER FEATURES:
Decorative water features such as pools, ponds, and waterfalls used in
landscaped areas must incorporate recycling of water, and must use recycled
water where it is feasible, cost effective, and meets health standards. The
surface area of any water feature must be included in the high water use
hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.
   A.   Recirculating water systems must be used for water features.
   B.   Where available, recycled water must be used as a source for decorative
water features.
   C.   Surface area of a water feature must be included in the high water use
hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.
   D.   Pool and spa covers are highly recommended. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-11: LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE:
The property owner must permanently and continuously maintain landscaping and
irrigation in a neat, clean and healthy condition, including removal of litter,
proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeds, fertilizing, and watering; and
replacement of diseased and/or dead plants and malfunctioning or missing
irrigation system components.
The water purveyor will monitor the annual water use at each project site and
may require that corrections be made if water consumption substantially exceeds
the average yearly water use for landscaping areas. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-12: MODEL HOME LANDSCAPING:
For each subdivision with model homes, the developer must submit a landscape
plan and install landscaping for each model home, incorporating the policies of
this chapter and including:
   A.   Signs identifying water efficient landscape species, hydrozones,
irrigation equipment, and other water conserving landscape design elements
placed around the model. Signage must include information about the site water
use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the
water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to
landscaping such as using native plants, gray water systems, and rainwater
catchment systems.
   B.   Literature must be available to individuals touring the model home
describing the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water
efficient landscapes. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-13: PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE OPTION:
The prescriptive requirements may be used as a compliance option to the model
water efficient landscape ordinance. Compliance with the following items is
mandatory and must be documented on a landscape plan in order to use the
prescriptive compliance option:
   A.   Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the following
elements:
      1.   Date;
      2.   Project applicant;
      3.   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));
      4.   Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf
and plant material;
      5.   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery,
homeowner installed);
      6.   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the
local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;
      7.   Contact information for the project applicant and property owner;
      8.   Applicant signature and date with statement:
I agree to comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option
to the MWELO.
   B.   Incorporate compost: At a rate of at least four (4) cubic yards per one
thousand (1,000) square feet to a depth of six inches (6") into landscape area
(unless contraindicated by a soil test).
   C.   Plant material must comply with all of the following:
      1.   For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require
occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for
seventy five percent (75%) of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using
recycled water;
      2.   For nonresidential areas, install climate adapted plants that
require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3)
for one hundred percent (100%) of the plant area excluding edibles and areas
using recycled water; and
      3.   A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch must be applied on all
exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting ground covers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is
contraindicated.
   D.   Turf must comply with all of the following:
      1.   Turf must not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the landscape area
in residential areas, and no turf is permitted in nonresidential areas to
comply with the prescriptive compliance option;
      2.   Turf must not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of one
foot (1') vertical elevation change for every four feet (4') of horizontal
length;
      3.   Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten feet (10') wide, unless
the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles.
Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by subsurface irrigation or by other
technology that creates no overspray or runoff.
   E.   Irrigation systems must comply with the following:
      1.   Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data.
      2.   Irrigation controllers must be of a type which does not lose
programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.
      3.   Pressure regulators must be installed on the irrigation system to
ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturer's
recommended pressure range.
      4.   Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or
butterfly valve) must be installed as close as possible to the point of
connection of the water supply.
      5.   All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in
the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler And
Emitter Standard". All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document
a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol
defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
   F.   At the time of final inspection: The permit applicant must provide the
owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of
installation, irrigation schedule and a schedule of landscape and irrigation
maintenance. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-14: VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Landscape Certificate Of Completion: Upon completion of the
installation of the landscaping, the landscape architect, irrigation designer,
contractor, or owner must certify that the landscape complies with all policies
of this chapter. A certificate of completion must be obtained from the city.
City staff must verify through the inspection process that all equipment,
sprinklers and plant species installed conform to the approved landscape
documentation package plans for the project. Certification must be accomplished
by completion of a landscape certificate on a form approved by the Director of
Community Development. Additionally, a certified landscape auditor must perform
a landscape irrigation audit to obtain final certificate of occupancy. The
landscape irrigation audit and landscape certificate for the landscape and
irrigation system must be reviewed and approved by the building official before
final certificate of occupancy is issued. Failure to submit a complete and
accurate landscape certificate will delay final approval of the project and/or
discontinue water service.
   B.   Items Submitted For Review: The following items must be submitted for
review to request a Certificate of Completion:
      1.   Landscape Certificate of Completion form.
      2.   Soil Management Report.
      3.   Irrigation Scheduling Parameters.
      4.   Irrigation audit report, Irrigation Survey, or Irrigation Water Use
Analysis report.
      5.   Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance schedule.
   C.   Verification Of Compliance: The verification of compliance of the
landscape installation with approved plans must be obtained through the
certificate of completion in conjunction with a certificate of occupancy.
      1.   Upon completion of the landscaping project, the applicant must
submit a “landscape installation certificate of completion” to the Community
Development Department, certifying that the landscaping has been installed as
shown on the approved record drawings with the City.
      2.   No final for the landscaping permit will be approved by the City for
the project until the project applicant has submitted an “irrigation survey”,
or “irrigation water use analysis”, or “irrigation audit” report proving the
project does exceed the “maximum applied water allowance” calculated by the
licensed professional as approved in the record drawings with the City. The
“irrigation survey”, or “irrigation water use analysis”, or “irrigation audit”
report must describe how much water is used within a three (3) month period
after the irrigation system is fully functioning and all landscaping has been
installed. The report must be used to evaluate water use in landscaping
projects and provide recommendations to prevent water waste. All landscape
irrigation audits must be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation
auditor.
   D.   Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, And Irrigation Water Use Analysis
Report: The landscape certificate of completion must be accompanied by an
irrigation audit, irrigation survey, or irrigation water use analysis report.
All landscape irrigation audits must be conducted by a certified landscape
irrigation auditor. Landscape audits must not be conducted by the person who
designed the landscape or installed the landscape.
      1.   The irrigation audit, or irrigation survey, or irrigation water use
analysis report must describe the following:
         a.   Operation pressure of the irrigation system;
         b.   Distribution uniformity of overhead irrigation;
         c.   Precipitation rate of overhead irrigation; and
         d.   Report of any overspray or broken irrigation equipment.
      2.   In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations
(i.e., production home developments) an auditing rate of one (1) in seven (7)
lots or approximately fifteen percent (15%) will satisfy this requirement.
      3.   For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed
after December 1, 2015, as described in section
15-15A-3 of this chapter:
         a.   The project applicant must submit an irrigation audit report with
the certificate of completion to the local agency which may include, but is not
limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution
uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and
preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation
controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure
and any other factors necessary for accurate programming;
         b.   The local agency must administer programs that may include, but
not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and
irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance.
   E.   Irrigation Schedule: Irrigation schedule including:
      1.   Plant establishment irrigation schedule.
      2.   Regular irrigation schedule by month including: plant type, root
depth, soil type, slope factor, shade factor, irrigation interval (days per
week), irrigation day, gallons per minute for each valve, precipitation rate,
distribution uniformity and monthly estimated water use calculations.
   F.   Irrigation Maintenance Schedule: An irrigation maintenance schedule
time line must be attached to the certificate of completion that includes:
      1.   Routine inspections, adjustment and repairs to the irrigation
system, aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing,
pruning and weeding.
      2.   A final inspection must be performed by City staff to verify
compliance. The final building permit approval will not be complete until the
landscape inspection is approved.
      3.   A certified landscape auditor must perform a landscape irrigation
audit to obtain certificate of occupancy.
      4.   Irrigation of all landscaped areas must be conducted in a manner
conforming to the rules and requirements, and will be subject to penalties and
incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and
implemented by the local water purveyor and the city. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015;
amd. Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-15A-15: PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING LANDSCAPES:
   A.   Existing Landscapes: A local agency may by mutual agreement, designate
another agency such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the
requirements contained in this chapter. Local agencies may collaborate with
water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to
this chapter.
   B.   Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, And Irrigation Water Use Analysis:
This section will apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before
December 1, 2015, and are over one acre in size:
      1.   For all landscapes that have a dedicated water meter for the
irrigation system, the local agency is required to administer programs that may
include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation
surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide
recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does
not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The
maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes must be calculated as:
   MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62).
      2.   For all landscapes that do not have a dedicated meter for the
irrigation system, the local agency must administer programs that may include,
but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate
water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water
waste.
      3.   All landscape audits must be conducted by a certified landscape
irrigation auditor and must describe the items in subsection
15-15A-14D1 of this chapter.
   C.   Water Waste Prevention: Local agencies must prevent water waste
resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from
leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other
similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated
areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of
these prohibitions will be established locally.
Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:
      1.   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff
occurs; or
      2.   The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to
drain entirely to landscaping. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-16: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to violate, to cause, or to maintain a
violation of this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to remove or cause removal of water
conserving irrigation valves or equipment contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter will be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue will constitute a separate offense and will be punishable
as such. Before any enforcement action of this section by the city, at least
one warning notice shall be provided to a person responsible for a violation of
this section, provided that the violation does not create an immediate danger
to health or safety. In cases of immediate danger to health and safety, no
warning notice is required before an enforcement action.
   D.   The director of community development will have authority to perform
the following duties:
      1.   To enforce the provisions of this chapter and the landscape
specifications;
      2.   To supervise or inspect all work done under any permit or approval
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
      3.   To promulgate rules and regulations, and to amend or add to them,
for the implementation of the provisions of this chapter and the standards as
technology, situations, products and procedures change. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015;
amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 16
DEVELOPER TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM)
SECTION:
15-16-1: Purpose
15-16-2: Applicability Of Requirements
15-16-3: Development Standards
15-16-4: Monitoring
15-16-5: Enforcement
15-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for major new
developments to provide facilities that encourage and accommodate the use of
ridesharing, transit, pedestrian, and bicycle commuting as alternatives to
single occupant motor vehicle trips. A reduction in such trips can be expected
to assist in reduced traffic congestion, air pollution and energy consumption
impacts related to the new employment growth accommodated by new developments.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-16-2: APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Prior Approval: Prior to approval of any development project, the
applicant shall make the provision for, as a minimum, all of the following
applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures.
   B.   Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a
development application has been deemed "complete" by the city pursuant to
California Government Code section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation
for a DEIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building
permit has been received, prior to the effective date hereof.
   C.   Increased Floor Space: The requirements shall also apply to any
existing nonresidential use which proposes to increase its gross floor area by
twenty five percent (25%) or more above the floor area existing on the
effective date hereof, and which after expansion exceeds the minimum building
size. This chapter shall then apply to the entire development. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993)
   D.   Existing Developments: Existing nonresidential developments regardless
of size may voluntarily comply with the development standards and receive
reductions in the total number of required parking spaces as provided in
section
15-16-3 of this chapter, subject to the monitoring provisions in section
15-16-4 of this chapter.
   E.   Maintenance: All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise
required must be maintained in a state of good repair. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-16-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Twenty Five Thousand Square Feet: Nonresidential development of twenty
five thousand (25,000) square feet or more and all projects within the urban
mixed use zone must provide the following to the satisfaction of the director
of community development: a bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying
transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are
likely to see it. Information in the area must include, but is not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving
the site;
      2.   Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information
including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and locate transit
operators;
      3.   Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter oriented
organizations;
      4.   Bicycle route and facility information including regional/local
bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and
      5.   A listing of facilities available for car poolers, vanpoolers,
bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.
   B.   Fifty Thousand Square Feet: Nonresidential development of fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet or more must comply with subsection A of this
section, and must provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of
the director of community development:
      1.   Preferential Parking: Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of
employee parking areas must be designated as preferential parking and must be
located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s) without displacing
handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential car pool/vanpool
parking area must be identified on the site plan upon application for building
permit, to the satisfaction of the director of community development. A
statement that preferential car pool/vanpool spaces for employees is available,
and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on
the required transportation information board. Projects may reduce the total
number of required parking spaces by one vehicle space for every one space
which is marked and reserved for preferential parking, up to a maximum of ten
percent (10%), upon application to and approval by the director of community
development.
      2.   HOV Loading Area: A safe and convenient zone must be provided in
which high occupancy vehicles (vanpools and car pools) may deliver or board
their passengers. This staging area must provide adequate space for passenger
loading, unloading and waiting, which does not interfere with on site
circulation patterns. When located within a parking structure, a minimum
vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches (7'2") or the minimum
required by the California building code, whichever is greater, must be
provided for the loading area in accessways to be used by such vehicles.
Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions must also be included in
HOV loading areas.
      3.   Vanpool Access: Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools
must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking
structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches
(7'2") or the minimum required by the California building code, whichever is
greater, must be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such
vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions must also be
included in vanpool parking areas.
      4.   On Site Amenities Or Shuttle: In order to reduce the need for
employees to drive personal vehicles for midday activities, the project must
provide any one or more of the following measures which together must be sized
to accommodate during the course of the business day at least twenty percent
(20%) of the on site population:
         a.   On site amenities.
         b.   Guaranteed operation of a privately operated midday shuttle
serving the project site for the life of the project.
A reduction in the total number of required parking spaces of up to one percent
(1%) must be permitted, based on the extent of the amenities, upon application
to and approval by the director of community development.
      5.   Bicycle Facilities: Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking
spaces must be provided according to chapter 15, “Off Street Parking And
Loading Spaces”, of this title. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully
enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the
bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities
and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) must be
provided to the satisfaction of the director of community development.
      6.   Shower And Lockers (Optional): Projects may provide shower and
locker facilities for bicycle riders, motorcycle riders, and pedestrians. If
these facilities are provided, the number of preferential parking spaces may be
reduced by up to three percent (3%) and the total number of required spaces may
be reduced up to one percent (1%) based on the extent of facilities, upon
application to and approval by the director of community development.
      7.   Transit Support Facilities (Optional): Projects may provide
facilities which will promote transit use. If transit facilities are provided,
the number of preferential parking spaces may be reduced by up to five percent
(5%), and the total number of required spaces may be reduced up to one percent
(1%) for provision of bus transit facilities, and up to two and one-half
percent (21/2%) for rail transit, upon application to and approval by the
director of community development.
   C.   One Hundred Thousand Square Feet: Nonresidential development of one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more must comply with subsections A
and B of this section, and must provide all of the following measures to the
satisfaction of the city:
      1.   Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct safe routes
from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the
development.
      2.   If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact,
bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local
bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When location of
bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to
provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops.
      3.   Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to
bicycle parking facilities on site. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-
17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-16-4: MONITORING:
Physical facilities shall be verified through the city's existing development
review process. Initial enforcement shall consist of verification during plan
check and field inspection prior to release of utilities/certificate of
occupancy (to ensure that preferential parking spaces are marked, lockers are
installed, etc.). Subsequent enforcement shall be per established zoning code
procedures. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-16-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The director of community development or his/her representative is hereby
designated as the enforcing agent of this chapter and any amendments thereto
pursuant to section
15-1-4 of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord.
1639, 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 17
EMPLOYER/OCCUPANT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
15-17-1: Purpose
15-17-2: Applicability
15-17-3: Multi-Tenant Complexes
15-17-4: Exempt Projects
15-17-5: Requirements
15-17-6: Parking Incentives
15-17-7: Implementation And Administration
15-17-8: Off Site Parking
15-17-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this chapter is to set forth requirements for major employers and
occupants to develop and implement transportation systems management (TSM)
programs to encourage and accommodate the use of ridesharing, transit,
pedestrian, and bicycle commuting as a means to reduce single occupant motor
vehicle trips associated with employee commuting. A reduction in such trips can
be expected to assist in reduced traffic congestion, air pollution and energy
consumption impacts related to employee commuting. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-17-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to every existing or future employer/occupant of: a)
two hundred (200) or more persons during daytime business hours at a common
business location (e.g., a single building, group of buildings, or work
locations at a single site or contiguous sites); and to b) less than two
hundred (200) persons during daytime business hours at a common business
location in a multi-tenant complex. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-17-3: MULTI-TENANT COMPLEXES:
   A.   Every multi-tenant complex which is the place of employment of two
hundred (200) or more people shall have a complex coordinator designated by the
property owner/manager. The complex coordinator shall serve as liaison to any
major employers in the complex, and shall be the central information, reporting
and coordinating source for the complex.
   B.   Employers of two hundred (200) or more persons are required to comply
with this chapter individually, and shall coordinate with the complex
coordinator, if one exists.
   C.   Employers of less than two hundred (200) persons, located within a
multi-tenant complex which is required to comply with this chapter shall
either:
      1.   Develop an individual TSM plan;
      2.   Participate in a complexwide plan; or
      3.   Undertake the following actions:
         a.   Provide employees with the services of an employee transportation
coordinator, which may be the complex coordinator;
         b.   Provide information to employees regarding alternative ways to
commute to work; and
         c.   Provide a commuter matching service (i.e., provide and administer
a program of preferential parking). (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-17-4: EXEMPT PROJECTS:
   A.   Temporary activities (less than 90 days) in existing nonresidential
uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The exemption provisions shall be reviewed by the planning commission
after one year from the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-17-5: REQUIREMENTS:
Employers/occupants must be required to prepare a TSM plan for submittal to the
director of community development according to the compliance schedule
established in accordance with section
15-17-7 of this chapter. The applicant shall have discretion to select among a
range of program measures. However, the following minimum measures shall be
included:
   A.   Employee transportation coordinator (ETC).
   B.   Informational and promotional programs.
   C.   Establish and administer preferential parking program.
   D.   Develop and administer a personalized ridesharing program with a target
trip reduction of either twenty percent (20%) reduction in the base traffic
generation level projected for the work site based on the Institute Of
Transportation Engineers “Trip Generation”, seventh edition, or most current
edition, or other source submitted by the applicant and approved by the
director of development services, or a target average vehicle ridership (AVR)
of 1.43 employees per commute vehicle, which represents a twenty percent (20%)
increase in vehicle ridership from the estimated baseline AVR.
   E.   Monitoring and report to the director of community development once
every three (3) years. The report must include, but need not be limited to: 1)
the name and phone number of the ETC; 2) the number of employees at the work
site during the normal business hours; 3) the estimated number of vehicles used
for commuting (excluding public transit); 4) an identification of any
objectives in the approved TSM plan which have not been achieved; 5) a
description of proposed measures to remedy any deficiencies. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-
2010; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-17-6: PARKING INCENTIVES:
Existing employers may petition the director of community development for
approval of parking reductions in on and off site locations commensurate with
the level of trip reduction proposed (up to a maximum of 15 percent). A
condition of approval must be submittal of a TSM plan and the applicant shall
enter into a written agreement with the city, providing that the applicant and
all successors in interest shall implement and maintain the approved TSM plan
or a subsequently approved TSM plan which complies with the intent of this
chapter for the life of the project. The agreement must be in a form that may
be recorded and contain covenants which run with the land. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-
2010; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-17-7: IMPLEMENTATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Compliance Schedule: Implementation must be through a permit system
administered by the community development department. The director of community
development shall establish a phased compliance schedule with priority given
to: 1) new businesses; 2) business license renewals for companies employing one
thousand (1,000) or more persons; 3) business license renewals with five
hundred (500) or more employees; 4) business license renewals with two hundred
(200) or more employees. Companies with more than one business address shall be
permitted to file one TSM plan to cover all sites. The director of community
development must also establish a compliance schedule for multi-tenant
complexes, based on total complex size.
   B.   Notice: The community development department must mail notice of
requirements to all businesses requiring a permit, based on the compliance
schedule. Notified parties must submit their proposed TSM plan to the director
of community development within forty five (45) days of receipt of
notification. A filing fee may be established by council resolution to cover
the cost of program administration. The director of community development must
administratively review the TSM plan and determine whether it reasonably
complies with trip reduction objectives and standards specified herein.
   C.   Compliance Audit: The director of community development shall have the
authority to require a compliance audit to be prepared by any employer or
complex coordinator upon demonstration of a reasonable basis for complaint
relative to noncompliance with an approved TSM plan. No compliance audit shall
be required more often than once every twelve (12) months. Said audit must be
submitted to the director of community development within thirty (30) days of
his request. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022)
15-17-8: OFF SITE PARKING:
Employers may, upon application and approval of the director of community
development, use off site parking as part of their TSM plans. Off site parking
must comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
   A.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all required parking must be
provided on site;
   B.   Transportation from the satellite lot to the workplace must be detailed
as part of the TSM plan; and
   C.   Satellite lots must be tied to the site development that they are
meeting the parking requirements of, through a legal instrument, such as a
covenant or deed restriction. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020;
Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 18
SIGNS
SECTION:
15-18-1: Purpose And Intent
15-18-2: Prohibited Signs
15-18-3: Exempt Signs
15-18-4: General Sign Standards
15-18-5: Master Sign Programs, Applications, And Permits
15-18-6: Nonconforming Signs
15-18-7: Substitution Clause
15-18-8: Enforcement And Maintenance
15-18-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the effective use of signs,
to help maintain the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract
businesses, to encourage harmonious integration of signs with their
surroundings, to ensure pedestrian and traffic safety, and to minimize possible
adverse effects.
   B.   This chapter was adopted pursuant to the City's police powers to
advance the goals set forth in the General Plan to regulate the time, place,
and manner that signs may be used within the City.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or circumscribe the
content of any sign placed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-2: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter are prohibited. Such
prohibited signs include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Beacon signs, used in connection with commercial premises for
commercial purposes;
   B.   Balloons or other inflated devices or signs used in connection with
commercial premises for commercial purposes;
   C.   Billboards;
   D.   Flags and pennants, except those exempt under section
15-18-3 of this chapter;
   E.   Signs that emit sounds (except ordering menu boards at drive-
throughs), odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or steam;
   F.   Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a surface, except those
exempt under section
15-18-3 of this chapter;
   G.   Trailer or portable signs;
   H.   Signs that flash, rotate, pulsate, or otherwise move in a way that
creates a traffic hazard;
   I.   Signs that imitate or resemble official traffic lights, signs, or
signals or signs that interfere with the effectiveness of traffic lights,
signs, or signals;
   J.   Strobe lights used in signs;
   K.   Abandoned signs. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-3: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs and/or face changes are exempt from plan review, but all
such signs may require a building permit and must comply with the corner
clearance and driveway visibility standards of chapter 2 of this title:
   A.   Complies With Master Sign Program: Any sign that is on a property with
an approved Master Sign Program and fully complies with the program's standards
and design requirements.
   B.   Face Changes: Face changes of existing signs previously approved under
a valid Master Sign Program pursuant to subsection
15-18-5A of this chapter;
   C.   Inside Building: Signs inside a building not attached to a window or
door;
   D.   Required By Law: Signs required by Federal, State, or local law;
   E.   Building Marker: Building marker signs;
   F.   Holiday Decorations: Lights used for holiday decorations;
   G.   Temporary Election Season Signs: Temporary election season signs are
allowed in any zone subject to the following:
      1.   Sign cannot exceed four (4) square feet in area;
      2.   Except as otherwise allowed by this chapter, such signs cannot be
erected more than sixty (60) days before an election in which residents of the
City of El Segundo are eligible to vote; and,
      3.   Except as otherwise allowed by this chapter, such signs must be
removed not later than forty eight (48) hours after the election.
   H.   Works Of Art: Works of art, including decorative flags and murals, such
as historical and community oriented murals, which are not for commercial
purposes are permitted, subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use of registered, copyrighted, or trademark names, insignia, or
logos is permitted within the sponsor's portion of the artwork, but names,
insignia, or logos larger than six (6) square feet or one percent (1%) of the
area of the artwork, whichever is less, may not include registration,
copyright, or trademark symbols. Such artwork is subject to review by the
Director or their designee to determine if the extent of any commercial message
in the mural is a minor component of the artwork. When the use of names,
insignia, or logos is larger than six (6) square feet or one percent (1%), the
entire artwork will be treated as a sign that is subject to the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-4: GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Signs In Non-Residential Zones: All signs in non-residential zones must
be erected and maintained consistent with the purposes of the chapter.
      1.   Sign Types:
         a.   Signs On Freestanding Buildings: Freestanding buildings allow
wall, fin, marquee, canopy, awning, projecting, and roof signs to have a
cumulative area up to five percent (5%) of each building face. This standard is
applicable to signs installed on the second story and above.
         b.   Signs On Store Fronts: Store front shops are allowed signs up to
fifteen percent (15%) of each shop front per tenant space, including any wall,
fin, marquee, canopy, awning, and projecting signs. This standard is applicable
to signs installed on the ground floor or street level of the primary entryway
for a commercial building. Signs proposed on walls other than primary entryway
(i.e., side walls or rear wall) are allowed a cumulative sign area up to five
percent (5%) of each building face.
         c.   Monument, Ground, Freestanding, Or Pole Signs: One monument,
ground, freestanding, or pole sign that provides a shared usage of such signs
is allowed for every one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage, or
fraction thereof. Such signs are allowed a sign area up to one hundred fifty
(150) square feet per sign and must not be placed closer than fifty (50) linear
feet from another monument, ground, freestanding, or pole sign on the same
property. Any such sign may be erected and maintained in a required building
setback, provided it is at least three feet (3') from the property line and is
not located in a required corner clearance or driveway visibility area.
         d.   Additional Development Standards: Additional development
standards are as follows:
            (1)   Monument or ground signs: Maximum height of eight feet (8')
by right. Signs over eight feet (8') and up to a maximum of twenty feet (20')
are allowed with an administrative use permit.
            (2)   Ground directory signs: Maximum height of twenty feet (20')
and are:
               (A)   Designed to be viewed primarily by pedestrians; and
               (B)   Designed to have minimal visibility from the public
rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Director.
            (3)   Freestanding or pole signs: Maximum height of twenty five
feet (25').
            (4)   Off-site directional signs: Maximum height of eight feet (8')
by right and must:
               (A)   Provide directions to a business located on another
property within the City.
               (B)   Maintain a maximum distance of five hundred feet (500')
from the property on which the sign is located.
               (C)   Require an administrative use permit for signs over eight
feet (8') and up to a maximum of twenty feet (20').
      2.   Electronic Message Centers: Electronic message centers (EMCs) are
allowed in all non-residential zones. EMCs may be approved for non-residential
uses in the Multi-Family (R-3) Zone upon the approval of an administrative use
permit, pursuant to the requirements of chapter 22 of this title. EMCs are
subject to the following standards:
         a.   EMCs may have up to two (2) faces;
         b.   For all ground-mounted signs, the changeable copy portion of the
sign cannot exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the total permitted sign area;
         c.   EMCs may include animated graphics and video only when they are:
            (1)   Designed to be viewed primarily by pedestrians; and
            (2)   Designed to have minimal visibility from the public rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the Director;
         d.   When visible from the public right-of-way, the sign display must
remain fixed for at least seven (7) seconds and transitions between slides must
be instantaneous. Any form of blinking, scrolling, or sliding of image elements
is prohibited;
         e.   EMCs must be equipped with a sensor or other device that
automatically determines the ambient illumination, that are programmed to
automatically dim according to ambient light conditions;
         f.   In the case of malfunction, EMCs must contain a default design to
either freeze the sign in one position or go blank.
      3.   Large Signs: Any sign over five hundred (500) square feet that
otherwise meets the provisions of this chapter, requires an administrative use
permit, pursuant to chapter 22 of this title.
   B.   Signs In Residential Zones: All signs in residential zones must be
erected and maintained consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
      1.   Sign Types:
         a.   Identification Signs: One identification sign per lot is allowed,
not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. The sign must not extend more
than six inches (6") above or out from the front wall and must contain only the
name and street address of the building upon which it is placed.
         b.   Wall Signs: Permitted nonresidential uses in residential zones
that are currently in compliance with this Code, except home occupation
businesses, are permitted one wall sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in
size for the purpose of identifying the business located on the property. Such
signs must not contain advertising.
   C.   Temporary Signs: Except as otherwise provided, two (2) temporary signs
not exceeding a cumulative total of six (6) square feet, are allowed at all
times. The following additional types of temporary signs may be displayed upon
the City's issuing a temporary sign permit, provided the sign meets the
following requirements:
      1.   Special Event Or Sale Sign: A sign placed in connection with and on
the site of a special event or sale, up to a maximum size of one hundred (100)
square feet, for a specific maximum thirty (30) day period is allowed, which
may be renewed up to a total of one hundred twenty (120) days. Animals or human
beings, live or simulated, designed or used to attract attention to the
premises may be used, provided they are not located on public property or in
the public right-of-way.
      2.   Construction Signs: Signs placed on an active, lawfully permitted
construction site up to a maximum size of thirty two (32) square feet per
construction site are allowed for a maximum period of six (6) months. The
Director may grant up to three (3) separate six (6) month extensions.
Construction signs must be removed within one week after completion of
construction.
      3.   New Development/New Business Signs: One temporary sign on the site
of a new development or business may be erected and maintained from the time a
building permit is issued until final inspection, but in no case may a new
development or business sign be displayed for more than one year. New
development or business signs for nonresidential uses are allowed a maximum
size of one hundred (100) square feet; residential uses are allowed a maximum
size of six (6) square feet.
   D.   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs as defined and authorized by Civil
Code section 713, do not require a building permit, but must comply with the
following:
      1.   Consent For Display: Signs must be displayed on private real
property and only with consent of the owner;
      2.   Number Of Signs; Location: One sign may be placed on the real
property to which it pertains in residential zones; three (3) signs may be
placed on the real property to which they pertain in all other zones;
      3.   Maximum Size: Signs cannot exceed six (6) square feet in size for
residential uses in residential zones, exceed twelve (12) square feet in size
for nonresidential uses in the R-3 Zone, or exceed the cumulative total of
fifty (50) square feet in size for all other zones;
      4.   Apartment Buildings: Before the City issues a certificate of
occupancy, multi-family apartment buildings with four (4) or more units must
install one monument, ground, freestanding, or pole sign that is for the sole
purpose of unit owners advertising their units. The design for the sign and its
location on the property must be approved by the Director of Community
Development, or his designee, before its installation. The sign may have up to
two (2) faces and cannot exceed a cumulative total of nine (9) square feet in
size per sign face.
      5.   Removal: Signs must be removed within five (5) days after the
advertised property is sold, rented, or leased.
      6.   Temporary Real Estate Directional Signs: Directional signs
authorized by Civil Code section 713(a)(2) that identify and provide
directional information to any residential property that is offered for sale,
lease, or exchange by the owner or his or her agent must comply with the
following:
         a.   Signs must be located only along direct routes to the residential
property from arterial streets;
         b.   Not more than one sign is permitted at each intersection on
private property and only with consent of the owner;
         c.   Signs must be removed when the subject property is sold or when
the event ends;
         d.   Signs cannot exceed nine (9) square feet in area or five feet
(5') in height;
         e.   No real estate signs are allowed on public property.
   E.   Signs Within Five Hundred Feet Of Freeway Or Highway: Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this title, no outdoor advertising structure, outdoor
advertising display, or billboard, regardless of size, which does not advertise
the business conducted, the services rendered, or the goods produced upon the
property upon which the sign is placed may be placed within five hundred feet
(500') of either side of a State or County freeway or highway in a manner which
makes the sign thereon visible to persons or passengers upon any such
thoroughfare. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022)
15-18-5: MASTER SIGN PROGRAMS, APPLICATIONS, AND PERMITS:
   A.   Master Sign Programs: Multi-tenant developments of three or more
commercial tenants require an approved Master Sign Program by the Director or
their designee. No permit may be issued for an individual sign requiring a
building permit until a required Master Sign Program is approved. A Master Sign
Program is not required for a development, lot, or business that has less than
three tenants.
      1.   Application: An application for the Master Sign Program must
include:
         a.   Accurate plot plan of the lot;
         b.   Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped
areas;
         c.   Computation of the maximum sign area allowed, maximum area
allowed for individual signs, height and number of signs, and total building
wall area on which signs are proposed;
         d.   Proposed location of each sign, present and future, whether
requiring a permit or not, shown on both the plot plan and elevations;
         e.   On site signs including, but not limited to, building marker
signs, directional signs, identification signs and onsite signs used for either
ingress or egress, identification of facilities or similar features must be
submitted as a part of a Master Sign Program;
         f.   Optional consistency standards among all signs on the lots
affected by the program with regard to:
            (1)   Color scheme;
            (2)   Lettering or graphic style;
            (3)   Lighting;
            (4)   Material; and/or
            (5)   Sign dimensions;
         g.   Payment of the applicable fees established by the City Council.
      2.   Window Signs: A Master Sign Program may indicate the areas and
general types of window signs without specifying the exact dimension or nature
of every window sign.
      3.   Consent: Master Sign Programs must be signed by the property owner
or their authorized agent.
      4.   Review Procedure: Director decisions on Master Sign Programs shall
be ministerial. After receiving a complete Master Sign Program application, the
Director or designee must either;
         a.   Approve the proposed program if it conforms with the provisions
of this chapter; or
         b.   Deny the proposed program if it fails to conform with the
provisions of this chapter. In cases of a denial, the Director will specify in
writing the sections of this chapter with which the program is inconsistent.
The Director’s determination may be appealed pursuant to chapter 29 of this
title.
      5.   Modifications: Any new sign locations or the increased size of signs
require an application for an amended Master Sign Program that conforms to all
requirements of this chapter. Minor changes to signs including, but not limited
to, color scheme, material, sign dimensions, location on building face, do not
require an amended Master Sign Program.
   B.   Administrative Use Permits, Adjustments, Variances, and Conditional
Uses:
      1.   Signs that require the approval of an administrative use permit will
be processed pursuant to chapters 22 and 23 of this title.
      2.   Deviations from any nonstructural provision of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, the number of permitted signs, the size of
proposed signs up to a maximum of 20 percent of the area of the building face,
and setbacks, may be granted upon the approval of an adjustment, pursuant to
chapters 22 and 23 of this title. The Director may consider a deviation request
to be a request for a variance and refer the request to the Planning Commission
for review pursuant to chapters 24 and 28 of this title.
      3.   Except as otherwise provided, all deviations from this chapter must
comply with the variance procedures set forth in chapters 24 and 28 of this
title. All sign regulations for land uses requiring conditional use permits are
controlled by this chapter and must be processed without regard to the proposed
message, content, or copy of proposed signs.
   C.   Permits Required:
      1.   Before erecting, modifying, repairing, or relocating any sign, the
City must issue the building permit if the proposed sign meets all provisions
of this chapter and of the applicable Master Sign Program.
      2.   Building permit applications reviewed for consistency with the
applicable Master Sign Program do not require additional Master Sign Program
fee.
   D.   Signs On Public Property And Public Right-Of-Ways: No signs shall be
allowed on public property or in the public right-of-way, except as approved by
the Public Works Department, consistent with title 9 of this Code, and as
listed below:
      1.   Permanent Signs:
         a.   Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body.
         b.   Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company.
         c.   Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles,
lines, pipes, or facilities.
         d.   Awning, canopy, marquee, projecting and suspended signs which are
attached to private property but project over public property or a public
right-of-way in conformance with the provisions contained within the latest
adopted Uniform Building Code and Uniform Sign Code.
      2.   Emergency Or Construction Signs: Emergency and construction warning
signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a
contractor doing authorized or permitted work within public property or the
public right-of-way.
      3.   Encroachment Permit: If a sign requires an encroachment permit under
this chapter, then the terms and conditions of the encroachment permit may be
incorporated into the sign permit.
      4.   Removal Of Other Signs: All signs installed or placed on public
property or in the public right-of-way not in conformance with this section may
be removed without complying with this chapter. Said signs shall be retained by
the City for a period of not less than three (3) working days. Thereafter, any
unclaimed signs may be discarded. Should the City be required to remove any
illegal sign pursuant to this section, the cost of removal shall be assessed
against the owner or person placing such sign.
      5.   Signs On City Property: Unless otherwise provided by this chapter or
by City Council resolution, it is unlawful to display signs on public property
owned by the City. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017; amd. Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; Ord.
1648, 6-21-2023)
15-18-6: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs are subject to the provisions contained in
chapter 21, "Nonconforming Buildings And Uses", of this title. (Ord. 1559, 10-
17-2017)
15-18-7: SUBSTITUTION CLAUSE:
Noncommercial copy may be substituted for any commercial copy on any sign that
is allowed by this chapter, whether permitted or exempt. Noncommercial copy of
any kind may be substituted for any other type of noncommercial copy on any
sign that is allowed by this chapter whether by permit or exemption. Message
substitution may be made without additional City approval or permitting. This
section prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this
chapter. The purpose of this section is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of
commercial speech over any other noncommercial message. This section does not
create a right to increase the total number or size of signs on property, does
not affect the permitting requirements of this chapter, nor overrides terms and
conditions in private contracts. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-8: ENFORCEMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Sign Classification: The Director of Community Development may classify
signs proposed in accordance with this chapter. Signs that do not clearly fall
within one of the definitions provided by this title must be placed in a
classification based on the sign’s design, location, physical characteristic,
and purpose. Unless appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to this Code,
the Director’s decision is final. The Director may refer any such request to
the Planning Commission for review.
   B.   Compliance With Codes: Signs must comply with applicable provisions of
the latest adopted Building Code, Electrical Code, and Sign Code at the time of
permit issuance.
   C.   Permanent Materials: Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and
window signs conforming with the provisions of this chapter, signs must be
constructed of permanent materials, and must be permanently attached to the
ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall,
frame, or structure.
   D.   Maintenance: Signs permitted pursuant to this chapter must be
maintained in good repair, structural condition, function properly, be free
from defects including, but not limited to, cracking, rusting, and peeling.
Signs not so maintained will be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated
pursuant to this Code.
   E.   Abatement Of Signs: When the permittee, property owner, or person in
possession of control of the property fails to comply with the Director’s order
requiring compliance with the chapter, the City may declare the sign as a
public nuisance in accordance with title 7 of this Code. Once designated as a
nuisance, the City is authorized to abate the nuisance according to the
provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020;
Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 19
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
15-19-1: Purpose
15-19-2: Definitions
15-19-3: Applicability
15-19-4: Distances
15-19-5: Regulations For All Wireless Communication Facilities
15-19-6: Minor Facilities
15-19-7: Major Facilities
15-19-8: Public Property Facilities
15-19-9: Coordinated Antenna Plans
15-19-10: Appeal Or Review And Notices
15-19-11: Reservation Of Right To Review Permits
15-19-12: Facility Removal
15-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these requirements and guidelines is to regulate the location
and design of "wireless communication facilities" as defined herein to protect
the public safety, the general welfare, and the quality of life in the City,
and to facilitate the orderly deployment and development of wireless
communications services in the City. The City Council has found and determined
that these requirements and guidelines for wireless communication facilities
are necessary to attain such purpose. These regulations are intended to
supersede applicable provisions of this Zoning Title pertaining to antenna
structures and appurtenant communications equipment and to establish minimum
requirements and flexible guidelines for the governance of wireless
communications facilities, taking into consideration the rapid technological
advances and the proliferation in use of radio communication services. (Ord.
1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words, terms, phrases and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: An "accessory structure" as defined in Section
15-1-6 of this Title.
   ANTENNA STRUCTURE: An antenna, any structure designed specifically to
support an antenna, and/or any appurtenances mounted on such structure or
antenna.
   COLLOCATION OR COLLOCATED: The location of multiple antennas which are
either owned or operated by more than one service provider at a single location
and mounted to a common supporting structure, wall or building.
   COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICE: Any mobile service that: a) is offered in return
for monetary compensation; b) is available to the public or a substantial
portion of the public; and c) provides subscribers with the ability to access
or receive communication from the public switched telephone network. Commercial
mobile service includes, but is not limited to, paging service, wireless data
transmission, cellular telephone service, specialized mobile radio service
(SMR), and personal communications service (PCS).
   COORDINATED ANTENNA PROGRAM OR CAP: A coordinated program to preapprove
multiple locations for proposed and potential future facilities.
   DISGUISED FACILITY: Any wireless communication facility which is designed to
blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is architecturally
integrated into a building or other concealing structure.
   FIXED WIRELESS SERVICE: Any service providing radio communication to or from
antenna structures at fixed and specified locations which are not designed to
be moved during operation and which offers the ability to access or receive
communication from the public switched telephone network.
   GROUND MOUNTED: Mounted to a pole, lattice tower or other freestanding
structure that is specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an
antenna.
   LATTICE TOWER: A tower-like structure used to support antennas, typically
with a height in excess of forty feet (40') and comprised of three (3) or four
(4) steel support legs.
   MAJOR FACILITY: A wireless communication facility that is either ground
mounted or roof mounted; provided, that a roof mounted facility screened on all
four (4) sides by solid material that is architecturally compatible with the
surrounding environment and does not exceed the maximum height of the
applicable zoning district shall be deemed a minor facility.
   MICROWAVE COMMUNICATION: The transmission or reception of radio
communication at frequencies of a microwave signal (generally, in the 3GHz to
300GHz frequency spectrum).
   MINOR FACILITY: A wireless communication facility that is either: a) wall
mounted; b) utility mounted; or c) roof mounted in such a manner that the
entire facility is screened by solid material on four (4) sides, is
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment, and does not
exceed the maximum height of the applicable zoning district.
   MOBILE SERVICE: Any service providing radio communication to or from at
least one antenna that is designed to be moved during operation or used during
halts at unspecified locations; or as otherwise defined in 47 USCS section 153
and interpreted by the Code of Federal Regulations and the Federal Register.
   MOUNTED: Any manner of attachment, support, or connection, whether on ground
or on a structure.
   MULTIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICE: A microwave communication service that
delivers video programming directly to subscribers, including multichannel
multipoint distribution services, instructional television fixed services, and
local multipoint distribution services, or as otherwise defined by section 207
of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, section 1,4000 of title 47 of the Code
of Federal Regulations and any interpretive decisions thereof issued by the
Federal Communications Commission.
   RADIO COMMUNICATION: The transmission and/or reception of impulses, writing,
signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds through space by means of
electromagnetic waves.
   ROOF MOUNTED: A facility that is mounted on any structure that is not
specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting antennas, in any manner
that does not satisfy either the definition of "wall mounted" or "utility
mounted", typically mounted on the roof of an existing building.
   UTILITY MOUNTED: A facility that is mounted to an existing aboveground
structure specifically designed and originally installed to support electrical
power lines, cable television lines, street lighting, traffic signal equipment,
park lighting or a structure on public or private property deemed by the City
to be similar in nature.
   WALL MOUNTED: A facility that is mounted on any vertical or nearly vertical
surface of a building or other existing structure that is not specifically
constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna (including without
limitation the exterior walls of a building, an existing parapet, the side of a
water tank, the face of a church steeple, or the side of a freestanding sign)
such that the highest point of the antenna structure is at an elevation equal
to or lower than the highest point of the surface on which it is mounted.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY OR FACILITY: An antenna structure and any
appurtenant facilities or equipment located within City limits and that is used
in connection with the provision of wireless service.
   WIRELESS SERVICE: Any type of wireless service providing radio
communications that satisfies the definition of commercial mobile service,
fixed wireless service, or wireless video service.
   WIRELESS VIDEO SERVICE: Any service providing radio communication which
delivers video programming. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   All facilities which are erected, located, or modified within the City
on or following the effective date hereof shall comply with this Chapter,
subject to the categorical exemptions under subsection C of this Section,
provided that:
      1.   All facilities for which applications were determined complete by
the Community, Economic and Development Services Department prior to the
effective date hereof shall be exempt from the regulations and guidelines of
this Chapter.
      2.   All facilities for which building permits were issued by the
Community, Economic and Development Services Department prior to the effective
date hereof shall be exempt from the regulations and guidelines of this
Chapter, unless and until such time as subsection B of this Section applies.
   B.   All facilities for which building permits and any extension thereof
have expired shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   The following uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter
until such time as Federal regulations are repealed or amended to eliminate the
necessity of the exemption:
      1.   Any antenna structure that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in
diameter and is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service,
including direct-to-home satellite service, as defined by section 207 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
and any interpretive decisions thereof issued by the Federal Communications
Commission.
      2.   Any antenna structure that is two meters (2 m) (78.74 inches) or
less in diameter located in a commercial or industrial zone and is designed to
transmit or receive radio communication by satellite antenna.
      3.   Any antenna structure that is one meter (1 m) (39.37 inches) or less
in diameter or diagonal measurement and is designed to receive multipoint
distribution service; provided, that no part of the antenna structure extends
more than twelve feet (12') above the principal building on the same lot.
   D.   The following uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
      1.   Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely to receive
television broadcast transmission.
      2.   Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely in connection
with authorized operations of an amateur radio station licensed by the FCC
(i.e., a "HAM" radio transmission).
   E.   Wireless communication facilities in the pubic right-of-way are subject
to the regulations in Title 9, Chapter 9. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1618, 6-16-2020)
15-19-4: DISTANCES:
For the purpose of this Chapter, all distances shall be measured in a straight
line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the
proposed major facility to the relevant property line. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-5: REGULATIONS FOR ALL WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
   A.   Application Requirements And Procedures:
      1.   Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter shall submit:
a) a site plan to the City which includes a description and visual diagram of
the location and design of the proposed facility; and b) a completed
application for either a wireless communications facilities permit ("WCFP") or
a conditional use permit ("CUP"), in accordance with the requirements set forth
in Chapters 22 and 23 of this Title, and such additional or different
requirements as are made applicable by this Chapter. Any application that is
improperly submitted or fails to contain all of the information as required by
this Chapter shall be deemed incomplete.
      2.   Each application shall contain a brief narrative accompanied by
written documentation that explains and validates the applicant's efforts to
locate the facility in accordance with the screening and site selection
guidelines set forth in subsection C of this Section.
      3.   Each application shall contain a narrative that discloses the exact
location and nature of any and all existing facilities that are owned, operated
or used by the applicant and located within five (5) miles from the geographic
borders of the City.
      4.   Each application shall contain a narrative and appropriate maps that
disclose the geographic area within the City that are proposed to be serviced
by the proposed facility, the geographic area bordering the City, if any, that
will be serviced by the proposed facility, the nature of the service to be
provided or purpose of the facility, the reasons, if any, why the applicant
cannot locate the facility outside the City and the efforts, if any, that
applicant has made to locate the facility outside the City.
      5.   Notwithstanding any permit that may be granted in accordance with
this Chapter, the facility shall be erected, located, operated and maintained
at all times in compliance with this Chapter and all applicable laws,
regulations and requirements of the building code, and every other code and
regulation imposed or enforced by the City, the State, and the United States
Federal Government. Applicants are separately required to obtain all applicable
building and construction permits that may be required prior to erecting or
installing the facility.
   B.   Development Requirements: The facility shall comply with each of the
following requirements:
      1.   The facility shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other
than certification, public safety, warning, or other required seals or required
signage. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
      2.   Any and all accessory equipment, or other equipment associated with
the operation of the facility, including, but not limited to, transmission
cables, shall be located within a building, enclosure, or underground vault in
a manner that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in
which such equipment is located. In addition, if equipment is located above
ground, it shall be visually compatible with the surrounding buildings and
either: a) shrouded by sufficient landscaping to screen the equipment from
view; or b) designed to match the architecture of adjacent buildings. If no
recent and/or reasonable architectural theme is present, the Director of
Community Development may require a particular design that is deemed by the
Director to be suitable to the subject location. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
      3.   The facility exterior shall be comprised of nonreflective material
and painted or camouflaged to blend with surrounding materials and colors.
      4.   Any and all screening used in connection with a wall mounted and/or
roof mounted facility shall be compatible with the architecture, color, texture
and materials of the building or other structure to which it is mounted.
   C.   Setback Requirements And Guidelines: The facility shall be considered
an accessory structure. If the facility is located in a residential zone or
within two hundred feet (200') of a residential use, then the facility shall
comply with the setback requirements for such zone. In all other instances, the
extent of compliance with the setback requirements for the zone in which the
facility is located shall be considered, in accordance with the following
guidelines, by the City in connection with its processing of any facility
permit.
   D.   Screening And Site Selection Guidelines: In addition to the above
requirements, the following guidelines shall be considered by the City in
connection with its processing of any facility permit.
      1.   The extent to which the proposed facility blends into the
surrounding environment or is architecturally integrated into a concealing
structure, taking into consideration alternate sites that are available.
      2.   The extent to which the proposed facility is screened or camouflaged
by existing or proposed new topography, vegetation, buildings, or other
structures.
      3.   The total size of the proposed facility, particularly in relation to
surrounding and supporting structures.
      4.   The location of the proposed facility and the extent to which it
conforms to the following in order of preference (subsection D4a being the most
preferred):
         a.   Collocated with an existing facility or located at a preapproved
location.
         b.   Attached to an existing structure such as an existing building,
communication tower, church steeple or utility.
         c.   Located in an industrial zoning district.
         d.   Located in a commercial zoning district.
      5.   The availability of suitable alternative locations for the facility.
(Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-19-6: MINOR FACILITIES:
The following requirements shall apply in addition to the requirements of
Section
15-19-5 of this Chapter:
   A.   Requirement For Wireless Communications Facilities Permit ("WCFP"):
Subject to subsections B and C of this Section, each minor facility that is not
specifically exempt under Section
15-19-3 of this Chapter must first obtain administrative approval of a WCFP in
accordance with Chapter 22 of this Title, and any additional or different
requirements made applicable by this Chapter. If the Director of Community
Development denies an application for a WCFP, (s)he shall make a written
determination supported by findings that the proposed facility would cause
significant negative impacts on the public safety or welfare.
   B.   Residential Zones Require Conditional Use Permit: A minor facility
shall not be located within a residential zone in the City unless such facility
receives Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit.
   C.   Height Requirements: Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code,
no minor facility, except utility mounted facilities, shall exceed the maximum
building height for the applicable zoning district unless such facility
receives Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit, which permit
shall not be considered for approval unless:
      1.   The applicant demonstrates to the City's satisfaction that exceeding
the height limitation is reasonably necessary for operation of the facility; or
      2.   The facility is collocated and the height in excess of zoning
requirements is reasonably necessary to the proposed shared use.
   D.   Vertical Extension; Utility Mounted Facilities: A utility mounted
facility may, if approved by the Director of Community Development or Planning
Commission, as appropriate, exceed the maximum building height limit for the
applicable zoning district. The extent that the utility mounted facility
increases the height of the existing utility pole or structure, and the need
for such height increase, shall be additional considerations taken into account
by the City in connection with its processing of any permit for a utility
mounted facility. A utility mounted facility shall not increase the height of a
utility pole or structure by more than four feet (4') of its existing height
unless such facility receives Planning Commission approval of a conditional use
permit.
   E.   Horizontal Extension; Utility Mounted Facilities: The extent that the
utility mounted facility protrudes or extends horizontally from the existing
utility pole or structure, and the need for such extension, shall be additional
considerations taken into account by the City in connection with its processing
of any permit for a utility mounted facility. A utility mounted facility may
not protrude or extend horizontally more than eighteen inches (18") from the
existing utility pole or structure unless such utility mounted facility
receives Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1275,
8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-19-7: MAJOR FACILITIES:
The following requirements shall apply in addition to the requirements of
Section
15-19-5 of this Chapter:
   A.   Requirement For Conditional Use Permit: Each major facility that is not
specifically exempt under Section
15-19-3 of this Chapter must first obtain Planning Commission approval of a
conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 23 of this Title and any
additional or different requirements made applicable by this Chapter. If the
Planning Commission denies any application for a conditional use permit, it
shall make a written determination supported by findings that the proposed
facility would cause significant negative impacts on the public safety or
welfare.
   B.   Location Requirements:
      1.   Lattice towers shall not be located in: a) any part of Zones C-RS or
C-2; b) any area zoned for residential use; or c) any part of Zone C-3 located
west of Sepulveda Boulevard. Lattice towers may be permitted in all other
zones; provided, however, that they shall not be located within one hundred
feet (100') of any property containing a residential structure.
      2.   No portion or extension of a major facility shall protrude beyond
property lines or extend into any portion of property where such facility is
not itself permitted; provided, however, that the City may approve the location
of guy wires in a required setback if such approval is consistent with the
guidelines and requirements set forth in this Chapter.
      3.   A ground mounted facility shall not be located in a required parking
area, vehicle maneuvering area, vehicle/pedestrian circulation area or area of
landscaping such that it interferes with, or in any way impairs, the utility or
intended function of such area. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
   C.   Additional Design Requirements:
      1.   A ground mounted facility shall be secured from access by the
general public with a fence of a type and design approved by either the
Director of Community Development or the Planning Commission.
      2.   A ground mounted facility shall be covered with a clear anti-
graffiti material of a type approved by the Director of Community Development.
The City may grant an exception to this requirement if the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City that there is adequate security
around the facility to prevent graffiti. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315,
1-18-2000)
   D.   Height Requirements: Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code,
no major facility shall exceed the maximum building height for the applicable
zoning district unless such facility receives Planning Commission approval of a
conditional use permit, which permit shall not be considered for approval
unless:
      1.   The applicant demonstrates to the City's satisfaction that exceeding
the height limitation is reasonably necessary for operation of the facility; or
      2.   The facility is collocated and the height in excess of zoning
requirements is reasonably necessary to the proposed shared use.
   E.   Additional Screening And Site Selection Guidelines: In addition to the
above requirements, the following guidelines shall be considered by the City in
connection with its processing of any facility permit:
      1.   A major facility should not be located within two hundred feet
(200') of any property containing a residential use.
      2.   A major facility should be located at least five hundred feet (500')
from the nearest existing, legally established major facility (except in the
event that such facility is collocated).
      3.   A ground mounted facility should be located in close proximity to
existing aboveground utilities, such as electrical tower or utility poles (not
scheduled for removal or undergrounding in the next 18 months), light poles,
trees of comparable height, water tanks and other areas where the facility will
not detract from the image or appearance of the City.
      4.   A roof mounted facility that extends above the existing parapet of
the building on which it is mounted should be screened by a material and in a
manner that is compatible with the existing design and architecture of the
building.
      5.   A roof mounted facility, and any guy wires, supporting structures
and accessory equipment should be located and designed so as to minimize the
visual impact as viewed from surrounding properties and public streets.
      6.   No part of a ground mounted facility should be located in any
required setback. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-19-8: PUBLIC PROPERTY FACILITIES:
   A.   Preapproved Locations:
      1.   The City will approve by resolution, following a duly noticed public
hearing, a list of sites which may be located on public property or within the
public right of way and which are approved for major facilities. Each site
shall include a description of permissible development and design
characteristics, including, but not limited to, maximum height requirements.
The City shall make said resolution available to all persons upon request. The
approved list of locations may be subsequently amended by resolution from time
to time.
      2.   All facilities located on a public property site which is
preapproved in accordance with subsection B1 of this Section following the
effective date hereof must obtain administrative approval of a WCFP in
accordance with Chapter 22 of this Title, and any additional or different
requirements made applicable by this Chapter.
      3.   All leases of public property which are preapproved in accordance
with subsection B1 of this Section shall be nonexclusive. The operator of a
facility located on such public property shall make the supporting structure of
the facility available to any other applicant wishing to collocate to the
extent technically feasible.
   B.   Requirement For Separate Lease Agreement: Any lease of City- owned
property for the purpose of erecting a wireless communications facility shall
require a negotiated lease agreement or other written license granted by the
City. The existence of a lease agreement or license shall not relieve applicant
of any obligations to obtain appropriate permits as required by this Code.
(Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-9: COORDINATED ANTENNA PLANS:
   A.   Requirements: Any wireless service provider may apply for Planning
Commission approval of a coordinated antenna plan (CAP) to obtain preapproval
for the use of proposed and potential future locations for facilities, subject
to the following requirements:
      1.   The CAP shall specify permissible development and design
characteristics for identified future locations, including, but not limited to,
maximum height and size, type of supporting structure, and type of antenna.
      2.   The CAP shall identify potential future locations by lot and parcel
number.
      3.   Applications for a CAP may be considered by the Planning Commission
after holding a noticed public hearing thereon in accordance with Chapter 27 of
this Title.
      4.   Following Planning Commission approval of a CAP, each facility that
complies with the specifications of the CAP may be approved subject to an
administrative WCFP in accordance with the requirements set forth and
referenced herein. Except for the type of permit, nothing in this Section shall
relieve the applicant of the obligation to comply with the regulations,
requirements, and guidelines as required by this Chapter, and the Director of
Community Development may deny a WCFP, or place conditions upon its approval,
notwithstanding prior approval of a CAP.
      5.   Any conditions placed on the approval of a WCFP for a facility which
complies with the CAP shall not be inconsistent with the specifications of the
CAP.
      6.   The CAP shall not vest any permanent rights to use the preapproved
locations for facilities beyond the date of expiration. Unless extended, the
CAP shall expire twenty four (24) months following its approval by the Planning
Commission regardless of whether any WCFP has been granted pursuant to the CAP.
The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, after written request therefor,
extend the term of the CAP for up to twenty four (24) additional months; no CAP
shall continue longer than forty eight (48) months.
   B.   Findings: The Planning Commission shall approve a CAP based upon the
following findings:
      1.   The intent and purpose of this Chapter, and all its regulations and
requirements will be preserved.
      2.   Any future facility complying with the specifications imposed by the
CAP will not have a significant adverse impact on the subject site or
surrounding community beyond those impacts considered in the approval of the
CAP.
      3.   Any future facilities within the specifications of the CAP will be
consistent with the General Plan and the uses permitted in this Zoning Title,
subject to subsequent approval of a WCFP.
   C.   Application Procedures: Each applicant for a CAP shall submit the
following information:
      1.   Written application on a form prescribed by the Community, Economic
and Development Services Department.
      2.   A map clearly indicating the following information:
         a.   Lot and parcel dimensions for proposed locations.
         b.   Location, size, height and use of all existing buildings and
structures on the proposed location and abutting properties.
         c.   Location, height, and description of all existing aboveground
utility facilities on the proposed location and abutting properties.
         d.   Location, size, and dimensions of all existing yards, setbacks,
landscape areas, parking, walls, fences, and spaces between structures on the
proposed location and abutting properties.
         e.   Any other information as may be required by the Community,
Economic and Development Services Department.
      3.   Written statement indicating for each location: a) the proposed
maximum height of the facility; b) the anticipated type of antenna structure;
c) any anticipated accessory equipment to be located on the site; d) proposed
screening materials, if any, in general terms; and e) willingness to collocate
on the proposed location.
      4.   All applicable permit processing fees as established by resolution.
An additional permit fee for each proposed facility shall be submitted with
each subsequent application for a WCFP, and with each request for modification
of a permit.
   D.   Modification Procedures: Subsequent approval of a WCFP for a major
facility subject to a CAP requires strict compliance with the specifications of
the CAP (in addition to any additional conditions of the WCFP); provided,
however, that the Director of Community Development may approve a minor
modification of the CAP concurrent with an application for a WCFP. For the
purposes of this Section, a minor modification shall include any adjustment to
the approved specifications of the CAP which: 1) does not increase the height
of the facility by more than five percent (5%) from the approved maximum
height; 2) does not move the location of the facility closer to any approved
location; 3) does not move the location of the facility within two hundred feet
(200') of a residential property or school facility; and 4) does not otherwise
significantly increase the adverse impacts upon the subject site or surrounding
community. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022)
15-19-10: APPEAL OR REVIEW AND NOTICES:
Any applicant or the operator and/or owner of a facility may appeal a final
decision of the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission. All
appeals shall be processed as provided by Chapters 25 and 27 of this Title.
(Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-19-11: RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO REVIEW PERMITS:
   A.   Changed Circumstance: Any conditional use permit or WCFP granted or
approved pursuant to this Chapter shall be granted or approved by the City and
its Planning Commission with the reservation of the right and jurisdiction to
review and modify the permit (including the conditions of approval) based on
changed circumstances. Changed circumstances include, but are not limited to,
the following in relation to the approved facility as described and diagramed
in the related site plan: increased height or size of the facility; additional
impairment of the views from surrounding properties; change in the type of
antenna or supporting structure; changed color or materials; substantial change
in location on the site; and an effective increase in signal output above or
near the maximum permissible exposure (MPE) limits imposed by the revised radio
frequency emissions guidelines by the Federal Communications Commission.
   B.   Additional Right To Revoke For Violation: The reservation of right to
review any permit granted or approved hereunder by the City, its Planning
Commission and/or City Council is in addition to, and not in lieu of, the right
of the City, its Planning Commission and/or City Council to review and revoke
or modify any permit granted or approved hereunder for any violations of the
conditions imposed on such permit. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
   C.   Modification Of Permit; Collocation: Upon review, any changed
circumstance as determined by the Director of Community Development shall
require the application and approval of a modification to the original WCFP or
conditional use permit; provided, that any modification to accommodate
collocated facilities may be approved administratively without the approval of
the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord.
1639, 9-20-2022)
15-19-12: FACILITY REMOVAL:
   A.   Discontinued Use: The operator of a lawfully erected facility, and the
owner of the premises upon which it is located, shall promptly notify the
Director of Community Development in writing in the event that use of the
facility is discontinued for any reason. In the event that discontinued use is
permanent, then the owner and/or operator shall promptly remove the facility,
repair any damage to the premises caused by such removal, and restore the
premises as appropriate such as to be in conformance with applicable zoning
codes. All such removal, repair and restoration shall be completed within
ninety (90) days after the use is discontinued, and shall be performed in
accordance with all applicable health and safety requirements. For purposes of
this subsection, a discontinued use shall be permanent unless the facility is
reasonably likely to be operative and used within the immediately following
three (3) month period.
   B.   Abandonment: A facility that is inoperative or unused for a period of
six (6) continuous months shall be deemed abandoned. Written notice of the
City's determination of abandonment shall be provided to the operator of the
facility and the owner of the premises upon which the facility is located. Such
notice may be delivered in person, or mailed to the address stated on the
facility permit application, and shall be deemed given at the time delivered or
placed in the mail. A written notice of the City's determination of abandonment
shall be mailed or delivered to the operator of the facility at the address
stated in the relevant permit application.
   C.   Removal Of Abandoned Facility Or Hearing: The operator of the facility
and the owner of the property on which it is located, shall within thirty (30)
days after notice of abandonment is given either: 1) remove the facility and
restore the premises, or 2) provide the Community, Economic and Development
Services Department with written objection to the City's determination of
abandonment and request for hearing before the Director of Community
Development in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 27 of this Title. If a
written objection is timely received and a hearing is properly requested, the
procedures for hearings, notices and related fees set forth in Chapter 27 of
this Title shall apply. The operator and/or owner shall be given the
opportunity to provide evidence that the facility was in use during the
relevant six (6) month period and that it is presently operational. The
operator and/or owner shall be given the opportunity to cross-examine any
evidence provided by the City to the contrary. The Director of Community
Development shall review all evidence, determine whether or not the facility
was properly deemed abandoned, and provide the operator notice of its
determination.
   D.   Removal By City: The City may remove the abandoned facility, repair any
and all damage to the premises caused by such removal, and otherwise restore
the premises as is appropriate to be in compliance with applicable code at any
time: 1) after thirty (30) days following the notice of abandonment; or 2)
following a notice of decision by the Director of Community Development, if
applicable, subject to the owner/operator's right of appeal under Chapter 25 of
this Title. The City may, but shall not be required to, store the removed
facility (or any part thereof). The owner of the premises upon which the
abandoned facility was located, and all prior operators of the facility, shall
be jointly liable for the entire cost of such removal, repair, restoration and
storage, and shall remit payment to the City promptly after demand therefor is
made. The City may, in lieu of storing the removed facility, convert it to the
City's use, sell it, or dispose of it in any manner deemed by the City to be
appropriate.
   E.   Penalties: The operator of the facility, and the owners of the premises
upon which it is located, shall be in violation of this Chapter for failure to
timely comply with any requirements hereunder. Each such person shall be
subject to penalties for each such violation, pursuant to Section
15-28-2 of this Title.
   F.   City Lien On Property: Until the cost of removal, repair, restoration
and storage is paid in full, a lien shall be placed on the abandoned personal
property and any real property on which the facility was located, for the full
amount of the cost of removal, repair, restoration and storage. The Director of
Community Development shall cause the lien to be recorded in the County of Los
Angeles Recorder's office. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000;
Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 20
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
SECTION:
15-20-1: Purpose And Scope
15-20-2: Definitions
15-20-3: Prohibitions
15-20-4: Approval Of Transfers; Procedure
15-20-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to facilitate orderly business development
and provide for the public benefit without increasing the total NFA permitted
under the General Plan. The goal of transfer of development rights is to reduce
the impacts of potential increased development on properties west of Sepulveda
Boulevard and allow new development east of Sepulveda Boulevard, while
minimizing traffic impacts and maximizing the public benefit. This Chapter
provides for the transfer of a minimum of twenty five thousand (25,000) square
feet of net floor area (NFA) between properties under common ownership.
Transfers may only occur from properties west of Sepulveda Boulevard, located
in the C-3 and C-O Zones, to properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard and located
in the C-3, CO, MU-N, and M-1 Zones. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
15-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, whenever used in this Chapter, shall apply only to the
transfer of development rights procedures as provided for in this Chapter:
   DONOR SITE: A parcel located west of Sepulveda Boulevard and located within
the C-3 or CO Zone from which NFA is being transferred pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter.
   RECEIVING SITE: A parcel located east of the easterly right-of- way line of
Sepulveda Boulevard, which does not abut or take access from Sepulveda
Boulevard, and located within the C-3, CO, MU-N, or M-1 Zone that receives NFA
from a donor site pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
   TRAFFIC ANALYSIS ZONE (TAZ): A specific area in the City of El Segundo which
has been identified for traffic study and mitigation purposes.
   TRANSFER: The transfer of the unused allowable NFA of a parcel from a donor
site to a receiving site, which is approved in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
   TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDRs): Allowing a property to increase its
building square footage above that permitted by the floor area ratio (FAR)
standards by purchasing allowed building square footage from another site.
   TRANSFER PLAN: A plan that identifies and describes the donor site,
receiving site, amount of the NFA to be transferred, the proposed uses of the
donor site and receiving site, the public benefit of the transfer, and the
proposed conditions of approval. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
 
15-20-3: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, no
building permit shall be issued for any project that is inconsistent with the
zoning restrictions on the lot, except for FAR restrictions.
   B.   Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, only
properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard, which do not abut or take access from
Sepulveda Boulevard, can qualify as a receiving site. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
15-20-4: APPROVAL OF TRANSFERS; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application: Any person who owns both the donor site and the receiving
site may apply for a transfer of NFA by submitting a written application for a
transfer to the Community Development Department that identifies the donor
site, receiving site, the amount of NFA proposed to be transferred, and the
proposed uses of the donor site and receiving site.
   B.   Review By Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall approve,
conditionally approve or deny a transfer plan. The Planning Commission shall
use the following criteria in making its determination:
      1.   That the transfer plan is in accord with the objectives of this
Title and the purposes of the zone in which the sites are located.
      2.   That the proposed transfer plan will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the vicinity.
      3.   That the proposed transfer plan complies with each of the applicable
provisions of this Chapter.
      4.   That the donor site and receiving site are located within the same
traffic analysis zone (TAZ) as identified in Exhibit A located at the end of
this Section.
      5.   That the total square footage of the transfer may not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the total buildout square footage for each zone, as specified
in the General Plan summary of buildout (Exhibit LU-3).
      6.   That the proposed transfer plan recognizes and compensates for
potential impacts that could be generated by the proposed transfer, such as
aesthetics, noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, traffic and hazards.
      7.   That the proposed transfer plan provides a public benefit such as
improved traffic circulation, open space, recreation facilities, landscaping,
pedestrian access, or other improvements which benefit the public.
      8.   That the proposed transfer plan is consistent with the General Plan.
   C.   Notice And Hearing: Upon filing of an application for a transfer plan
by a property owner or an applicant with the consent of the owner, the Director
of Community Development shall give public notice, as provided in Chapter 27 of
this Title of the intention to consider at a public hearing the granting of a
transfer plan. The notice shall be provided for the areas surrounding both the
donor and receiving sites.
   D.   Appeal To City Council: The applicant or any person affected by the
Planning Commission's decision respecting a transfer plan can appeal the
Planning Commission's decision to the City Council pursuant to
Chapter 25 of this Title.
   E.   Final Approval: A transfer plan approved by Planning Commission and/or
City Council shall become final upon the completion of all applicable
conditions of approval and the following:
      1.   Recorded Covenant: A covenant in a form approved by the City
Attorney shall be recorded against the donor site and receiving site setting
forth the details of the transfer plan and any conditions of approval imposed
by the Planning Commission and/or the City Council. The covenant shall be
executed by all parties that have a legal or equitable interest in the donor
site or the receiving site. The covenant shall reflect that from the date of
recording of the covenant that the donor site and receiving site shall
thereafter in perpetuity be burdened by the covenant and the FAR for the donor
site and receiving site will be set in the covenant pursuant to the FAR allowed
at the time of approval of the transfer plan. The Director of Community
Development may approve the removal of the covenant from the properties if the
transfer has not been utilized by the receiving site and the legal and
equitable owners of the property execute a request for removal in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney. Any modification to an approved transfer plan
must be submitted to the City for review utilizing the procedures set forth in
this Chapter for approval of a transfer plan. Recording, modifying or removing
a covenant shall require a title insurance policy as set forth below. (Ord.
1286, 3-18-1998; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
      2.   Title Insurance: Prior to recording, modifying or removing a
covenant pursuant to subsection E1 of this Section, the applicant shall secure
a title insurance policy benefiting the City in an amount equal to the value of
the NFA being transferred. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs
associated with procuring title insurance, including without limitation the
cost of appraising the value of the NFA proposed to be transferred.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3839.png]
 
(Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 21
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
15-21-1: Purpose
15-21-2: Chapter Application
15-21-3: General Provisions
15-21-4: Nonconforming Lots
15-21-5: Residential Restrictions
15-21-6: Nonresidential Restrictions
15-21-7: Restrictions For The Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone
15-21-8: Nonconforming Signs
15-21-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Establish Criteria: The purpose of this chapter is to establish
provisions for the continued use, modification or removal of nonconforming
buildings or uses. A nonconforming building or use is one that was lawfully
established and maintained, but due to changes in this title or other
governmental actions, such building or use no longer complies with the
provisions of this title. A nonconforming building, or portion of a building,
or use shall constitute a nonconforming use of the property.
   B.   Eventual Compliance: It is also the intent of this chapter to permit
nonconformities to continue until they are removed. In addition,
nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, extended, altered, moved,
reestablished after abandonment or restored after destruction, except as
provided by this chapter. It is the goal of this chapter to require
nonconforming uses to be altered to conform to the current requirements of this
title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-21-2: CHAPTER APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to buildings, structures, lands and
uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to any reclassification of zones
which occurred through the adoption of a new General Plan and subsequent
rezoning actions to provide consistency with the General Plan. Any uses which
become nonconforming due to these actions shall be considered legal
nonconforming uses and structures. If a use originally authorized by variance
prior to the effective date hereof is located within a zone in which such use
is not permitted by the terms of this title, the use shall acquire a legal
nonconforming status. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-21-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following conditions apply to nonconforming uses and structures:
   A.   Safety: All nonconforming structures may undergo necessary maintenance
to provide for their safe and habitable use.
   B.   Building Removal; Future Use: If any nonconforming building is
voluntarily removed, every future use of the land on which the building is
located must conform to this Code.
   C.   Reestablish Damaged Or Destroyed Building: Unless otherwise provided by
applicable law, a nonconforming use or structure that is damaged or destroyed
by fire, earthquake, or other calamity beyond the property owner's control may
be reestablished subject to the provisions of this title if a building permit
is issued within twenty four (24) months of the occurrence of the damage or
destruction. All nonconforming rights expire if a building permit is not issued
within twenty four (24) months.
   D.   Building Additions, Alterations, Remodel Or Reconstruction: A
nonconforming building or structure may be altered, restored, remodeled or
reconstructed, or may include an addition, provided that no more than fifty
percent (50%) of the existing original "exterior perimeter wall height" (as
defined) is removed, demolished or replaced. If more than fifty percent (50%)
of the existing perimeter wall height and the original foundation is removed,
demolished, or replaced, the entire building or structure must be brought into
conformity with all current development standards and laws. The foundation must
not be removed and a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the exterior perimeter
walls must remain attached to the foundation at all times. Solely removing
exterior wall coverings, including wall insulation, electrical wiring, plumbing
or interior plaster or drywall finishes does not require that the entire
building be brought into conformity with all current development standards
within the zone in which the property is located.
   E.   Minor Exceptions For Building Additions, Alterations, Remodel, Or
Reconstruction: The Director of Community Development may grant administrative
adjustments for a reduction of retention of a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of
exterior perimeter wall height for life safety repairs or upgrades, regardless
of whether those repairs or upgrades exceed the fifty percent (50%) threshold
for nonconforming buildings set forth in this section. The upgrades must be
incidental and necessary to protect public health and safety. The
administrative adjustment must be granted before any removal of any exterior
perimeter wall in excess of fifty percent (50%) occurs. (Ord. 1460, 4-19-2011;
amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-21-4: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
A lot of record existing before the effective date hereof, which does not
conform to the area and dimension standards of this title, may be used in
accordance with other provisions of this title. Even though such a lot fails to
meet the requirements for area or width, or both, for a particular zone, it may
be used; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those
applying to area or width of the lot be observed. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-21-5: RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTIONS:
All legal or legal nonconforming structures within any residential zone, in
existence as of the effective date hereof, which are now legal nonconforming or
become legal nonconforming due to changes in the land use designation or zoning
criteria under this title, are permitted to continue and remodel or expand,
provided all of the following requirements are met:
   A.   Where a side yard setback is nonconforming, the width of the existing
side yard cannot be decreased or made more nonconforming due to remodeling or
reconstruction;
   B.   A nonconforming structure may expand, provided the expansion meets all
the applicable criteria of this title; and
   C.   All new construction and additions where a building or structure is
nonconforming and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing original
exterior perimeter wall height and foundation below is removed, replaced or
rebuilt in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1460, 4-19-2011)
15-21-6: NONRESIDENTIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Except as otherwise provided for the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone, all legal or
legal nonconforming uses or buildings, in existence as of the effective date
hereof, within the nonresidential use categories and all previously designated
commercial properties which have been designated Multi-Family Residential Zones
by the 1992 general plan, with the exception of Smoky Hollow, which are now
legal nonconforming or become legal nonconforming due to changes in the land
use designation or zoning criteria under this title, are permitted to expand or
remodel subject to the following requirements: (Ord. 1460, 4-19-2011)
   A.   Until May 6, 2006, a nonconforming building or nonconforming use within
any commercial or industrial zoning category may be increased one time by a
maximum of twenty percent (20%) or fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet,
whichever is less. The expansion itself must meet the requirements of this
title related to setbacks, lot coverage, height and parking, but is not
required to compensate for any deficiency or nonconformity in the original
building or use. Expansions allowed by this section before May 6, 2006, require
a conditional use permit issued pursuant to sections
15-23-4 to 15-23-13 of this title. Wherever these sections refer to the
proposed "use" the term "expansion" shall be utilized for purposes of making a
determination under this section. (Ord. 1398, 10-3-2006)
   B.   After May 6, 2006, a nonconforming building or nonconforming use within
any commercial or industrial zoning category may be increased up to the maximum
allowable floor area ratio (FAR) as determined by this title or the El Segundo
general plan. The expansion must meet the requirements of this title related to
setbacks, lot coverage, height and parking, but is not required to compensate
for any deficiency or nonconformity in the original building or use, except as
follows:
      1.   In the Urban Mixed Use South (MU-S) Zone, architectural building
features may project up to five feet (5') from the existing building face into
required setback areas, but must maintain at least a fifteen foot (15')
distance to a lot line. (Ord. 1496, 10-14-2014)
   C.   Except as otherwise provided for the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone, if a
nonconforming building remains vacant for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months, it must be upgraded to meet all requirements of this title before
occupancy, except buildings which are actively available for lease and
occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant to permit or subject to section
15-21-3 of this chapter are not considered vacant for purposes of this section.
   D.   Except as otherwise provided for the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone, a
nonconforming use in a conforming or nonconforming building may be replaced
with another similar nonconforming use, provided the building is not vacant for
more than twelve (12) consecutive months, except buildings which are actively
available for lease and occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant to permit or
subject to 4section
15-21-3 of this chapter, are not considered vacant for purposes of this
section. (Ord. 1398, 10-3-2006)
15-21-7: RESTRICTIONS FOR THE HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (M-2) ZONE:
   A.   If a nonconforming building within a Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone
remains vacant for a period of six (6) consecutive months, it must be upgraded
to meet all requirements of this title before occupancy, except buildings that
are actively available for lease and occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant
to permit or subject to section
15-21-3 of this chapter are not considered vacant for purposes of this section.
   B.   A nonconforming use in a conforming or nonconforming building located
within the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone may be replaced with another similar
nonconforming use, provided the building is not vacant for more than six (6)
consecutive months, except buildings that are actively available for lease and
occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant to permit or subject to section
15-21-3 of this chapter, are not considered vacant for purposes of this
section. (Ord. 1398, 10-3-2006; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-21-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A nonconforming sign may not be:
   A.   Changed to another nonconforming sign or replaced by the same
nonconforming sign, except for face changes;
   B.   Structurally or electrically expanded or altered unless such alteration
is designed to and does bring the sign into greater conformance with current
provisions of this title and/or Building and Electrical Codes;
   C.   Relocated to another site on the same property or any other property
within the City;
   D.   Reestablished after discontinuance of the use for ninety (90) days or
more; or
   E.   Reestablished after damage or destruction of more than fifty percent
(50%) of the value of the structure of the sign prior to said damage or
destruction. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
CHAPTER 22
ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS, ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS, AND ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
15-22-1: Purpose
15-22-2: Administrative Determinations For Uses Not Listed
15-22-3: Administrative Use Permits
15-22-4: Adjustments To Development Standards
15-22-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the Director's authority to make
administrative determinations and to grant administrative use permits and
adjustments, and to set the required findings for making such decisions. (Ord.
1629, 11-16-2021)
15-22-2: ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS FOR USES NOT LISTED:
   A.   Authority to make administrative determinations. When a use is not
specifically listed as either a permitted use or conditional use under a
particular zone, the Director, upon written request or upon his or her own
initiative, shall determine whether said use is sufficiently similar to a
listed use in the particular zone to justify a finding that it should be deemed
either a permitted use, a conditional use or that an administrative use permit
is necessary. The Director or designee may make administrative determinations,
subject to the process outlined in Chapter 23 of this title.
   B.   Administrative determination findings. Before permitting or classifying
an unlisted use, the Director shall first make the following findings:
      1.   The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this Title;
      2.   The proposed use and its operation are compatible with the uses
allowed in the zone; and
      3.   The proposed use is similar in impact and character to one or more
permitted uses in the zone. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-22-3: ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS:
   A.   Authority to grant. When a particular use is listed as subject to
administrative use permit, or if the Director determines that a use not listed
is similar to other uses subject to administrative use permit in a particular
zone, the Director may review and grant administrative use permits, subject to
the process set forth in Chapter 23 of this title.
   B.   Findings. Before granting an administrative use permit, the Director
shall first make the following findings:
      1.   There is compatibility of the particular use on the particular site
in relationship to other existing and potential uses within the general area in
which the use is proposed to be located.
      2.   The proposed use is consistent and compatible with the purpose of
the zone in which the site is located.
      3.   The proposed location and use and the conditions under which the use
would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the
vicinity.
      4.   Potential impacts that could be generated by the proposed use, such
as noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, traffic and hazards have been
recognized and compensated for.
   C.   Alcohol-related use findings: In addition to the four findings above,
before an alcohol-related administrative use permit may be granted, it shall
also be found that the State Department of Alcohol Beverage Control has issued
or will issue a license to sell alcohol to the applicant. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-
2021)
15-22-4: ADJUSTMENTS TO DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Authority to grant. Whenever a strict interpretation of the provisions
of this title or its application to any specific case or situation pertaining
to the following items would result in the unreasonable deprivation of the use
or enjoyment of property, the Director or designee may grant an adjustment,
subject to the process set forth in Chapter 23 of this title.
   B.   Applicability. Adjustments may be granted for the following standards:
      1.   Fence or wall height to exceed permitted height by two feet.
      2.   Architectural landscape features which exceed the standards set
forth in section
15-2-14 of this title.
      3.   Signs which exceed the standards set forth in Chapter 18 of this
title.
      4.   Noise permits which exceed the standards set forth in section
7-2-11 of this Code.
      5.   Parking and loading space standards as set forth in Chapter 15 of
this title.
      6.   Reduction of retention of a minimum of 50 percent of exterior
building perimeter wall height and/or deviation from development standards for
life safety purposes.
      7.   Deviation from development standards for reasonable access
accommodations.
      8.   Dimensions of required open space and size of required landscaping
area within required open space in the Multi-Family Residential (R-3) Zone as
set forth in section 15-4C-5 of this title.
      9.   Building height to exceed the maximum allowable height by not more
than five feet.
   C.   Findings. Before granting an adjustment, the Director shall make the
following findings:
      1.    That the proposed adjustment would not be detrimental to the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
      2.    That the proposed adjustment is necessary in order that the
applicant may not be deprived unreasonably in the use or enjoyment of his
property; and
      3.    That the proposed adjustment is consistent with the legislative
intent of this title.
(Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
CHAPTER 23
DIRECTOR DISCRETIONARY DECISIONS
SECTION:
15-23-1: Applicability
15-23-2: Application Procedure
15-23-3: Review For Completeness
15-23-4: Decision
15-23-5: Planning Commission Review
15-23-6: Notification
15-23-7: Appeals
15-23-8: Effective Date
15-23-9: Expiration
15-23-10: Time Extensions
15-23-1: APPLICABILITY:
The Director shall make administrative decisions on discretionary applications
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Adjustments;
   B.   Administrative determinations;
   C.   Administrative use permits;
   D.   Downtown design review, as set forth in Downtown Specific Plan Chapter
V;
   E.   Off-site parking covenants, as set forth in Chapter 15 of this Title;
   F.   Precise plan modifications; and
   G.   Other discretionary applications as specified in this Title. (Ord.
1629, 11-16-2021)
15-23-2: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
The applicant for any of the above-referenced applications shall apply in
writing using application forms provided by the Community Development
Department, stating the type of discretionary permit desired. The applicant
must submit the application form and any additional materials required by the
Department along with the required filing fee to cover the cost of
investigation and processing. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-
2022)
15-23-3: REVIEW FOR COMPLETENESS:
The Director or designee may request any additional information deemed
necessary to evaluate the application. After all the necessary information and
material are submitted, the Director or designee shall deem an application
complete. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-23-4: DECISION:
After an application is deemed complete, a written determination as to the
approval or denial of the application must be issued within 10 business days.
The written determination shall state the findings for a decision. In approving
an application, the Director has the authority to attach conditions to the
approval if deemed necessary. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-23-5: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
The Director or designee must send copies of the findings and decision to the
applicant. Written determinations on discretionary decisions made by the
Director or designee must be placed as receive and file items on the next
available agenda of the Planning Commission. Any Planning Commissioner may
request that an item be discussed and a decision on the application be made by
the Planning Commission instead of received and filed. No decision of the
Director is final until the decision is received and filed or acted upon by the
Planning Commission, or upheld on appeal. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-23-6: NOTIFICATION:
Before the written determination is placed on a Planning Commission agenda the
Director or designee shall give public notice, as provided for in Chapter 28 of
this Title, of the Planning Commission's intent to receive and file the
Director's determination The notice shall be mailed or delivered only to the
owners and occupants of real property within 150 feet of the real property that
is the subject of the determination. Administrative determinations that are not
associated with a specific property, are not subject to this public
notification requirement. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-23-7: APPEALS:
Decisions by the Director or designee on applications listed in Section
15-23-1 are appealable to the Planning Commission. All appeals must be
processed as provided by chapter 29 of this title. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-23-8: EFFECTIVE DATE:
Permits granted pursuant to this chapter shall not become effective until 10
days from the granting thereof has elapsed or, if an appeal is filed or a
review called, until final determination has been made on the appeal or review.
(Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-23-9: EXPIRATION:
Permits granted pursuant to this chapter shall become null and void if the
privileges granted thereunder are not utilized within one year from the
effective date thereof. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-23-10: TIME EXTENSIONS:
Permits granted pursuant to this chapter may be extended for an additional
period to be specified by the Director; provided that prior to the expiration
date, a written request for a time extension is filed with the Director. (Ord.
1629, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 24
VARIANCES AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
15-24-1: Purpose Of Variance
15-24-2: Authority To Grant Variance
15-24-3: Variance Findings
15-24-4: Purpose Of Conditional Use Permit
15-24-5: Authority To Grant Conditional Use Permit
15-24-6: Conditional Use Permit Findings
15-24-1: PURPOSE OF VARIANCE:
The purpose of any variance is to allow for deviations from the development
standards contained in this Title. Those standards which are determined at the
discretion of the Planning Commission, City Council, or administratively shall
not be subject to the variance process. However, a variance shall not grant a
special privilege not shared by other property in the same vicinity and zone.
(Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-24-2: AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCE:
When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with
the general purpose of this Title result through the strict and literal
interpretation and enforcement of the provisions thereof, the Planning
Commission shall have authority, subject to the provisions of this Title, to
grant upon such conditions as it may determine such variance from the
provisions of this Title as may be in harmony with its general purpose and
intent, so that the spirit of this Title shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured and substantial justice done. A variance granted pursuant to
the provisions of this Section shall run with the land and shall continue to be
valid upon change of ownership. Variance requests shall be processed as set
forth in Chapter 28 of this Title. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-24-3: VARIANCE FINDINGS:
Before any variance may be granted, it shall be found:
   A.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applicable to the property or to the intended use that do not apply generally
to the other property or class of use in the same vicinity and zone;
   B.   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and
zone but which is denied to the property in question;
   C.   That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvement in such vicinity
and zone in which the property is located; and
   D.   That the granting of the variance will not adversely affect the General
Plan. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-24-4: PURPOSE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The purpose of a conditional use permit shall be:
   A.   To assure the compatibility of the particular use on the particular
site in relationship to other existing and potential uses within the general
area in which the use is proposed to be located;
   B.   To assure the proposed use is consistent and compatible with the
purpose of the zone in which the site is located; and
   C.   To recognize and compensate for potential impacts that could be
generated by the proposed use, such as noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration,
odors, traffic and hazards. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-24-5: AUTHORITY TO GRANT CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The Planning Commission may grant a conditional use permit upon application for
such uses allowed by this Title, subject to the process set forth in Chapter 28
of this Title. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-24-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT FINDINGS:
   A.   General: Before a conditional use permit may be granted, it shall be
found that:
      1.    The proposed location of the use is in accord with the purpose of
this Title and the purposes of the zone in which the site is located;
      2.    The proposed location of the use and the conditions under which it
would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the
vicinity; and
      3.    The proposed use will comply with each of the applicable provisions
of this Chapter.
   B.   Alcohol sales: Before a conditional use permit may be granted for the
sale of alcohol, it shall be found that:
      1.    The State Department of Alcohol Beverage Control has issued or will
issue a license to sell alcohol to the applicant;
      2.    There is compatibility of the particular use on the particular site
in relationship to other existing and potential uses within the general area in
which the use is proposed to be located;
      3.    The proposed use is consistent and compatible with the purpose of
the zone in which the site is located;
      4.    The proposed location and use and the conditions under which the
use would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the vicinity; and
      5.    Potential impacts that could be generated by the proposed use, such
as noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, traffic and hazards have been
recognized and compensated for. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 25
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
15-25-1: Purpose
15-25-2: Applicability
15-25-3: Authority To Grant
15-25-4: Findings
15-25-1: PURPOSE:
A site plan review is a discretionary land use permit that is required for any
proposed project that meets the criteria set forth in section
15-25-2 of this chapter. The purpose of the site plan review process is to:
   A.   Ensure that the project is compatible with the area in which it is
located;
   B.   Allow all City departments the opportunity to review development
proposals and place reasonable conditions to ensure that the public health,
safety and welfare are maintained. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-25-2: APPLICABILITY:
A site plan review pursuant to this chapter is required for development that
meets any of the following criteria:
   A.   Single-family residential development of more than 10 residential
units;
   B.   Multi-family residential development of more than 10 units;
   C.   New commercial, institutional or industrial development that includes
structures which have a combined gross floor area of more than 50,000 square
feet (not including parking structures);
   D.   Additions to existing structures if the combined total additions exceed
50,000 square feet of gross floor area, but not including parking structures;
   E.   For projects with a mix of residential and commercial, institutional or
industrial uses, if any criteria above applies, the entire project is subject
to site plan review. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-25-3: AUTHORITY TO GRANT:
The Planning Commission is shall review and consider site plan review
applications, subject to the process set forth in Chapter 28 of this Title.
(Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-25-4: FINDINGS:
In order to approve or conditionally approve the site plan, the approval
authority shall make the following findings:
   A.   The physical location, size, massing, setbacks, and placement of
proposed structures on the site and the location of proposed uses within the
project are consistent with applicable development standards and objective
design standards in the subject specific plan, zone, and/or overlay district;
   B.   The project is consistent with the General Plan goals, objectives, and
policies and provisions of any applicable development agreement;
   C.   The project has no specific adverse impact on public health or safety;
   D.   A consistent architectural style is used on all sides of the building
or structure, including roofing, materials, windows, doors, openings, textures,
and colors; and
   E.   The existing or proposed public infrastructure (e.g., utilities,
sewers, parkways, sidewalks, storm drains, street lights, traffic control
devices, and the width and pavement of adjoining streets and alleys) and health
and safety services (e.g., police and fire) are sufficient to accommodate the
new development.
If such findings cannot be made, the site plan shall be denied. (Ord. 1629, 11-
16-2021; amd. Ord 1657, 5-7-2024)
CHAPTER 26
COASTAL ZONE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
SECTION:
15-26-1: Purpose
15-26-2: Applicability
15-26-3: Exempt Development
15-26-4: Authority To Grant
15-26-5: Findings
15-26-1: PURPOSE:
Coastal development permits are required to ensure that all public and private
development in the Coastal Zone of El Segundo is consistent with the City's
certified Local Coastal Plan. The area affected by these regulations is located
west of Vista Del Mar. As used in this chapter, "Coastal Zone" is as defined by
the California Coastal Act, Public Resources Code sections 30100 et seq. (Ord.
1629, 11-16-2021)
15-26-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   In addition to any other permits or approvals required by the City, a
coastal development permit (CDP) shall be required and obtained from the City
prior to commencement of any development in the City's Coastal Zone, except:
      1.   Developments on tide lands, submerged lands, or public trust lands
over which the Coastal Commission has original permit jurisdiction.
      2.   Developments determined to be exempt from the CDP requirements
pursuant to state law or regulations. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-26-3: EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   No fee, public hearing, notice, or development permit shall be required
for the types of development classified as exempt from CDP requirements by
State law or regulations.
   B.   Whenever a permit is issued in the Coastal Zone by any City department
and it is determined that the subject of the permit does not require a CDP
because it is exempt, a memorandum to that effect shall be appended to the
City's file copy of the permit. The file copy of the permit and the memorandum
shall contain the applicant's name, the location of the project, and a brief
description of the project. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-26-4: AUTHORITY TO GRANT:
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to grant all CDPs within the
City's Coastal Zone subject to the findings listed below and the process set
forth in Chapter 15-28 of this Title, California Government Code sections
65920-665964.1 (Permit Streamlining Act), and in Public Resources Code Division
20 (California Coastal Act). (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-26-5: FINDINGS:
Before any CDP may be granted, the Planning Commission shall make the following
findings:
   A.   That the development conforms to the certified Local Coastal Plan; and
   B.   That the development conforms to the Coastal Act public access and
recreational policies. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 27
AMENDMENTS
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 1650,
passed 9-5-2023). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when the
ordinance is codified.
 
SECTION:
15-27-1: Purpose
15-27-2: Authority To Grant
15-27-3: Findings
15-27-1: PURPOSE:
Whenever public necessity, convenience and general welfare require, a
modification of the General Plan, a specific plan, or the zoning boundaries
established by this Title, the classification of permitted or conditionally
permitted uses, or other provisions of this Title, such changes may be
undertaken in one of the following methods:
   A.   A General Plan Amendment;
   B.   A Specific Plan Amendment;
   C.   A Precise Plan Amendment;
   D.   A Zone Map Change; and
   E.   A Zone Text Amendment. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-27-2: AUTHORITY TO GRANT:
The City Council is authorized to approve amendments listed in Section
15-27-1, subject to the process set forth in Chapter 28 of this Title. (Ord.
1629, 11-16-2021)
15-27-3: FINDINGS:
   A.   General: Before any amendment is approved, the City Council shall make
the following findings:
      1.   The amendment must be consistent with the General Plan.
      2.   The amendment is necessary to serve the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
   B.   Zone Changes: The City Council shall make the following additional
findings for zone changes:
      1.   There are changed conditions since the existing zoning became
effective to warrant other or additional zoning.
      2.   The benefits of the proposed change of zone will clearly outweigh
any potential adverse effects to adjoining property or the area. (Ord. 1629,
11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 28
PUBLIC HEARINGS
SECTION:
15-28-1: Purpose
15-28-2: Applicability And Hearing Authority
15-28-3: Application Procedure
15-28-4: Review For Completeness
15-28-5: Setting Of Hearing Dates
15-28-6: Notice Requirements
15-28-7: Continuation
15-28-8: Planning Commission Decisions
15-28-9: Planning Commission Recommendations
15-28-10: Application And Hearing Record
15-28-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for processing
applications in this Title that require public hearings before the Planning
Commission and/or City Council. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-28-2: APPLICABILITY AND HEARING AUTHORITY:
Public hearings shall be held by the following two bodies as follows:
   A.   City Council. Applications that require a public hearing before the
City Council include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Conditional Use Permit for onsite sale and consumption of alcohol at
bars.
      2.   Density Bonus Agreement.
      3.   Development Agreement.
      4.   Final Map/Subdivision.
      5.   General Plan Amendment.
      6.   Historic Resource Designation as set forth in Chapter 14 of this
Title.
      7.   Precise Plan Amendment.
      8.   Zoning Text Amendment.
      9.   Change of Zoning District.
      10.   Applications referred to the City Council by the Planning
Commission.
      11.   Appeals of Planning Commission decisions.
   B.   Planning Commission. Applications that require a public hearing before
the Planning Commission include, but are not limited to:
      1.   All applications listed in Subsection A (Planning Commission role is
advisory).
      2.   Animal Permit Appeal as set forth in Chapter 2 of title 6.
      3.   Certificate of Appropriateness as set forth in Chapter 14 of this
title.
      4.   Coastal Development Permit.
      5.   Conditional Use Permit.
      6.   Off-site parking covenant as set forth in Chapter 15 of this Title.
      7.   Downtown Design Review as set forth in the Downtown Specific Plan.
      8.   Site Plan Review.
      9.   Tentative Map/Subdivision.
      10.   Variance.
      11.   Waiver of Parcel Map.
      12.   Requests referred by the Director.
      13.   Appeals of Director's decisions. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-28-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
The applicant for any of the above requests, except those initiated by elected
or appointed bodies of the City or City Staff, shall apply in writing using
application forms provided by the Community Development Department, stating the
type of discretionary permit desired. The applicant must submit the application
form and any additional materials required by the Department along with the
required filing fee, in an amount established by the City Council. (Ord. 1629,
11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-28-4: REVIEW FOR COMPLETENESS:
The Director or designee has the authority to request any additional
information deemed necessary to evaluate the application. After all necessary
information and material are submitted, the Director or designee shall deem an
application complete. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-28-5: SETTING OF HEARING DATES:
All proposals requiring a public hearing shall be set by the secretary of the
Planning Commission for hearings to be held before the Planning Commission, and
by the City Clerk for hearings to be held before the City Council. (Ord. 1629,
11-16-2021)
15-28-6: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Applications requiring a public hearing shall contain specific information and
be distributed in the manner prescribed below.
   A.   Notification Process: Notice shall be provided in all of the following
ways:
      1.    Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least 10 days
prior to the hearing to:
         a.   The owner of the subject real property as shown on the latest
equalized assessment roll;
         b.   The owner's duly authorized agent, if any;
         c.   The project applicant;
         d.   Each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets,
roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose
ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected;
         e.   All owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized
assessment roll within 300 feet and all occupants within 150 feet of the real
property that is the subject of the hearing, unless the application is for
director discretionary decisions, in which case only the owners and occupants
of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within 150
feet of the real property that is the subject of the director decision shall be
notified;
         f.   Any owner of a mineral right pertaining to the subject real
property who has recorded a notice of intent to preserve the mineral right
pursuant to Section 883.230 of the Civil Code, when a public hearing is
required for a tentative, final, or parcel map pursuant to the Subdivision Map
Act;
         g.   Any person who has filed a written request for notice with either
the City Clerk or the Director;
         h.   Any other party as required by California Government Code §§
65090-65096 (Public Hearings);
         i.   The California Coastal Commission, if the development/project
requires a Coastal Development Permit according to Chapter 15-26 of this Title.
      2.    In lieu of using the assessment roll, the City may use records of
the county assessor or tax collector which contain more recent information than
the assessment roll.
      3.    If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered
pursuant to subsection A1(e) is greater than 1,000, the City, in lieu of mailed
or delivered notice, may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of
at least 1/8-page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the
City at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
      4.    Notice of the hearing shall also be published in at least one
newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 10 days prior to the
hearing, or posted in at least three public places within the City boundaries,
including one public place on the site or in the area directly affected by the
proceeding. The posting on the affected site or area and maintenance of such
notice shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Such notices shall be
posted in a manner prescribed by the Director.
      5.   Notwithstanding 1. through 4. above, for applications listed in
Section 15-28-2 involving a proposed zoning ordinance or an amendment to an
existing zoning ordinance, notice of the hearing shall be given as described in
this chapter, except that the notice shall be published, posted, mailed, and
delivered, or advertised, as applicable, at least twenty (20) days before the
hearing.
   B.   Contents of notification: The contents of the public hearing notice
shall include:
      1.    A title stating "Notice of Public Hearing;"
      2.    The date, time and place of a public hearing;
      3.    The identity of the hearing body;
      4.   The City's file number(s) assigned to the application;
      5.    A general explanation of the matter to be considered; and
      6.    A general description, in text or as a diagram of the location of
the property.
      7.   Coastal Development Permits. If the development requires a Coastal
Development Permit, the notice shall also include a statement that the project
is located within the coastal zone and the procedures of City and Coastal
Commission appeals, including any City fees required, and a statement of
whether or not the proposed development is appealable to the Coastal
Commission.
(Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-28-7: CONTINUATION OF PUBLIC HEARING:
If, for any reason, testimony on a case set for public hearing cannot be
completed on the date set for the hearing, the person presiding at the public
hearing may, before adjournment or recess thereof, publicly announce the time
and place at which the hearing will be continued. No further notice is
required. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-28-8: PLANNING COMMISSION DECISIONS:
   A.   Decision: the Planning Commission shall announce its findings by formal
resolution. The resolution must recite the facts and findings for the granting
or denial of the application. If granted, the resolution shall also recite such
conditions and limitations as the Planning Commission may impose.
   B.   Notice: A copy of the Planning Commission resolution shall be mailed to
the applicant at the address shown on the application filed with the Community
Development Department and to any other person requesting a copy.
Coastal development permits. Within seven calendar days following Coastal
Development Permit decisions, the City shall send a notice of final local
action to the Coastal Commission. The notice shall include a copy of the
Planning Commission resolution stating conditions of approval and written
findings and the procedures for appeal of the action to the Coastal Commission.
   C.   Effective date: The action of the Planning Commission in granting or
denying an application shall become final and effective the day following the
end of a ten-day appeal period, unless a written appeal is filed with the City
Council or the Coastal Commission as provided by Chapter 26 of this Title.
   D.   Expiration: Requests approved by the Planning Commission shall expire
two years after the effective date if the privileges granted have not been
utilized.
   F.   Time extensions. Planning Commission decisions may be extended for an
additional period to be specified by the Planning Commission; provided that
prior to the expiration date, a written request for a time extension is filed
with the Director.
   G.   Appeals. Planning Commission decisions are appealable to the City
Council, except decisions on Coastal Development Permits, which are appealable
directly to the Coastal Commission. All appeals must be processed as provided
by Chapter 29 of this title.
   H.   Suspension and revocation of approval. Upon violation of an applicable
provision of this Title, or if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to
comply with conditions, or if approval was obtained by fraud, an approved
permit may be suspended automatically. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing, in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this Chapter,
and if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision, or condition is
being complied with, may revoke the approval or take such action as may be
necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision, or
condition. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021; amd. Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-28-9: PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS:
All requests listed above requiring a decision by the City Council, except for
Development Agreements, shall first be reviewed by the Planning Commission at a
public hearing as set forth in this Chapter and the Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-
2021)
15-28-10: APPLICATION AND HEARING RECORD:
The material related to any of the applications discussed in this chapter shall
become a part of the permanent official records of the respective hearing
authority. The permanent records shall consist of the following:
   A.   Application material, including the submitted application form, plans,
exhibits, and any other material submitted with the application form.
   B.   Reports and exhibits prepared by City staff prior to the hearings.
   C.   Hearing files, including minutes of the proceedings, exhibits, names of
persons who spoke, copies of notices and affidavits pertaining thereto.
   D.   Special studies performed to assist in the evaluation of requests,
including but not limited to, environmental assessments and related
documentation.
   E.   Decisions, including resolutions, ordinances, findings, and conditions
of approval. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 29
APPEALS
SECTION:
15-29-1: Purpose
15-29-2: Appeal Of Director's Decision
15-29-3: Appeal Of Planning Commission Decision
15-29-4: City Council Action
15-29-5: Adverse Decision By City Council
15-29-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for appeal of Director
and Planning Commission decisions for those individuals aggrieved by those
decisions. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-29-2: APPEAL OF DIRECTOR'S DECISION:
   A.   Any individual may appeal a decision or determination of the Director
to the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be made within 10 calendar days
after the date of the Director's decision by filing a letter of appeal, with
the required appeal fee, with the secretary of the Planning Commission. In the
event that the tenth day falls on a holiday or weekend, the appeal letter may
be filed on the next business day. Any appeal of an administrative use permit
must be received, with the required appeal fee, prior to the decision being
received and filed by the Planning Commission. All appeals shall state
specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by
the decision maker or where a decision is not supported by the evidence in the
record.
   B.   Following the receipt of an appeal, the Secretary shall transmit to the
Planning Commission the letter of appeal, the application and all other papers
constituting the record upon which the action of the Director was taken. The
Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, in the manner
prescribed in Chapter 28 of this Title, on the matter. The hearing shall be
held within 40 calendar days of the appeal request, and the Planning Commission
may affirm, reverse, or modify the Director's decision. The decision of the
Planning Commission is appealable to the City Council, pursuant to Section
15-29-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-29-3: APPEAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION:
   A.   Any individual may appeal a decision of the Planning Commission to the
City Council, except a decision regarding a Coastal Development Permit. The
appeal shall be made within 10 calendar days after the date of the Planning
Commission decision by filing a letter of appeal and paying the required appeal
fee with the City Clerk. In the event that the tenth day falls on a holiday or
weekend, the appeal letter may be filed on the next business day. The appeal
shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of
discretion by the Planning Commission or a decision is not supported by the
evidence in the record.
   B.   Scope of Hearing on Appeal: Appeals shall be reviewed de novo. The City
Council is not bound by the decision that has been appealed or limited to the
issues raised on appeal.
   C.   Coastal Development Permits. Planning Commission decisions on Coastal
Development Permits are appealable directly to the Coastal Commission. An
appeal of a Coastal Development Permit decision must be filed pursuant to 14
Cal. Code Regs § 13111(c). The appeal must be received in the Coastal
Commission district office with jurisdiction over El Segundo on or before the
tenth working day after receipt of the notice of the permit decision by the
Coastal Commission's executive director. The appeal period for projects
approved by operation of law shall begin to run only upon the receipt of the
local government notice that it has to take final action by operation of law
pursuant to Government Code sections 65950 to 65957.1. (Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-29-4: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
The City Council shall hold at least one hearing, in the manner prescribed in
Chapter 28 of this Title, on the decision of the Planning Commission which has
been appealed. The hearing shall be held within 40 calendar days of the appeal
request. The City Council may affirm, reverse or modify a decision of the
Planning Commission; provided, that if an appealed decision is reversed or
modified, the City Council shall, on the basis of the record transmitted and
such additional evidence as may be submitted, make the findings required by
this Chapter a prerequisite to granting the application or shall specifically
decline to make such findings. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Ord. 1629, 11-16-2021)
15-29-5: ADVERSE DECISION BY CITY COUNCIL:
If the City Council, upon appeal of a Planning Commission decision, proposes an
action that is in any way contrary to the recommendations of the Planning
Commission, it may, before final action is taken, request further information
from the Planning Commission on the matter. Failure of the Planning Commission
to report to the City Council within 40 calendar days after the request may be
deemed to be consent by the Planning Commission to the proposed change. (Ord.
1629, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 30
ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 1648,
passed 6-6-2023). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when the
ordinance is codified.
SECTION:
15-30-1: Authority To Inspect
15-30-2: Violations; Penalties
15-30-1: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
Whenever necessary to make any inspection to enforce any of the provisions of
this Title, the Director or an authorized representative of the Director, is
authorized to enter any property, premises, or building at all reasonable
times. If such property, premises, or building is occupied, the Director or
his/her representative shall first present proper credentials and request
entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, a reasonable effort
shall be made to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of
the property, premises, or building to request entry. If entry is refused, the
Director or his or her authorized representative may seek an administrative
inspection warrant and shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to
secure entry. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-
20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-30-2: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure to comply with provisions: It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate any provisions of this Title or fail to comply with any requirements
of this Title. It shall further be unlawful for any person to operate, erect,
move, alter, enlarge or maintain any use which is contrary to the provisions of
any permit, approval, or condition of approval obtained pursuant to this Title.
A violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Title, or
any permits, approvals or conditions of approval issued pursuant to this Title
shall constitute an infraction; except that any such violation may, at the
discretion of the City, be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
   B.   Penalty, infraction: Any person violating provisions of this Title may
be deemed guilty on an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine as set forth in Section
1-2-1 of this Code.
   C.   Penalty, misdemeanor: Any person violating provisions of this Title may
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in Section
1-2-1 of this Code.
   D.   Each day a separate offense: Each person found guilty of a violation
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion
of which any violation of any provision of this Title is committed, continued
or permitted by such person and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in
subsection C of this Section. Any use, occupation or building or structure
maintained contrary to the provisions hereof shall constitute a public
nuisance. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1247, 2-6-1996; Ord. 1284, 2-3-
1998; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
CHAPTER 31
RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
15-31-1: Purpose
15-31-2: Definitions
15-31-3: Dedication
15-31-4: Improvements
15-31-5: Relief From Requirements
15-31-6: Notification
15-31-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to implement the orderly acquisition and improvement
of public rights of way to benefit public health, safety and welfare. Private
property owners should provide and improve public rights of way to ensure that
private property development does not adversely impact other public and private
facilities and services. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
15-31-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning
set forth elsewhere in this code, Government Code or the Public Resources Code.
DEVELOPMENT: The meaning set forth in chapter 1 of this title.
DIRECTOR: The public works director or such other director designated by the
city manager.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT: A review of a development in accordance with section
6 of resolution 3805, adopted March 16, 1993.
USE: The meaning set forth in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
15-31-3: DEDICATION:
   A.   Dedication: Unless otherwise provided, any development requiring review
and approval of a Site Plan Review application located on a lot abutting public
rights of way, must dedicate a portion of that lot to widen the public rights
of way in accordance with the standards in exhibit C-8 of the general plan
circulation element. Property dedications must be noted on building plans
before the city issues a building permit and the dedications must be made
before the city approves a final inspection for a building permit or issues a
certificate of occupancy for a proposed project. The director is authorized to
substitute an irrevocable offer to dedicate or to substitute a combination of a
dedication and an irrevocable offer to dedicate for public rights of way in
compliance with the standards in exhibit C-8 of the general plan circulation
element and subject to section
15-31-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Width: Table 1 of this section, is based on exhibit C-8 of the general
plan circulation element and establishes the standard right of way widths for
the various classifications for public rights of way. The right of way
dedication on an individual lot is that portion of private property necessary
to provide one-half (1/2) of the required standard width, measured from the
centerline of the street.
TABLE 1
Right Of Way Classification Minimum Width (Feet)
TABLE 1
Right Of Way Classification Minimum Width (Feet)
Major arterial              142 – 150 (varies based on lane configuration)
Secondary arterial          98 – 120 (varies based on lane configuration)
Collector (divided)         80
Collector                   64
Local:                       
 Commercial                60 – 64 (varies based on lane configuration)
 Residential               60
Alley                       20
 
      1.   Greater Widths: Greater widths may be required as by the director of
public works or designee conditions of subdivision maps, site plan review,
conditional use permits or standards variances.
      2.   Reduced Widths: The required standard width may be reduced at
specific locations on specific streets due to unusual conditions, as authorized
by the director of public works or designee.
   C.   Effect on required yard areas and building area ratios: All required
yard areas, lot coverage and floor area ratio calculations must be measured
after the dedication or reservation. If the director of public works requires
an irrevocable offer to dedicate, the required yard areas, lot coverage and
floor area ratio calculations may be measured not including the area of
dedication or reservation.
   D.   Notwithstanding subsection A above, the City will not impose a land
dedication requirement on a housing development pursuant to Section 66001 to
widen a roadway if the land dedication requirement is for the purpose of
mitigating vehicular traffic impacts, achieving an adopted traffic level of
service related to vehicular traffic, or achieving a desired roadway width.
However, the City may do any of the following:
      1.   Impose a land dedication requirement on a housing development if
both of the following conditions are met:
         a.   The housing development is not located in a transit priority
area.
         b.   The housing development has a linear street frontage of five
hundred feet (500') or more.
      2.   Discretionarily impose a land dedication requirement as a condition
of approval of a specific housing development project for traffic safety
features if the City makes a finding, specific to the housing development
project and supported by substantial evidence, that the land dedication
requirement is necessary to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the
public, including pedestrians, cyclists, and children.
      3.   Impose a land dedication requirement to construct public
improvements, including, but not limited to, sidewalk and sewer improvements.
(Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011; amd. Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-31-4: IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: Before the city approves a final inspection for a
building permit or issues a certificate of occupancy for any development or
change of use, a property owner must make all required improvements and repairs
to abutting public rights of way. The improvements and repairs must extend
along the width and depth of the property and for a reasonable distance beyond
the property as is necessary to complete the improvement or repair. Existing
improvements that are damaged and that may have been damaged during
construction of the building must also be repaired.
   B.   Required improvements; All Development: Development or a change of use
is required to provide the following right of way improvements that the
director determines to be required and applicable:
      1.   Sidewalk/ wheelchair ramps and parkway: Construction or repair of a
sidewalk/wheelchair ramp and parkway adjoining the site. The sidewalk/
wheelchair ramp must have a minimum clear width of five feet and a parkway, or
six feet if the sidewalk adjoins the curb.
      2.   Curb and gutter: Construction or repair of curbs and gutters
adjoining the site. All unused curb cuts must be replaced with a full height
curb and gutter.
      3.   Parkway trees: Any missing or damaged parkway trees must be replaced
with a minimum 24-inch size box tree in accordance with title 9, chapter 3 of
this code and administrative policies and procedures promulgated by the city
manager.
      4.   Alley paving: Construction, replacement, repair or extension of
alley paving up to standard width. The alley must be paved the length of the
site. If vehicle access is taken from the alley, the director may also require
that the alley be paved to a point where the alley intersects a paved public
right of way, and curb returns must be relocated as necessary.
      5.   Roadway paving: Repair or replacement of roadway paving to standard
street width as required in exhibit C-8 of the general plan circulation
element.
   C.   Required improvements; new development requiring an environmental
assessment: In addition to the improvements required by this section for
development, the following right of way improvements must be provided:
      1.   Alley lighting: Construct or install on site alley lighting.
      2.   Roadway paving: Construction or extension of roadway paving to
standard street width as required in exhibit C-8 of the general plan
circulation element.
      3.   Traffic signals and street signs: Provide a prorated share of the
cost of all roadway signal and street sign modifications attributable or partly
attributable to the development.
      4.   Streetlights: Install or relocate streetlights. This may include
widening the right of way as necessary.
      5.   Utilities relocation: Relocate utilities as necessary to provide for
the improvements set forth above.
   D.   Standards: All improvements within public rights of way must be
installed in conformance with the specifications on file with the city
engineer’s office. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
15-31-5: RELIEF FROM REQUIREMENTS:
The director may waive requirements of this chapter if the director determines
that such improvements are unnecessary for a public purpose or that the cost of
the improvement is proportionally excessive when compared to the scale of the
project or the demand generated by the project subject to the findings set
forth below. The determination of the director may be appealed to the planning
commission in accordance with chapter 29 of this title.
   A.   Proposed waiver: To waive the need for improvements and dedications
otherwise required by this chapter, the director must find upon substantial
evidence that:
      1.   The proposed waiver maintains the minimum roadway width necessary
for emergency vehicle access as determined by the fire chief;
      2.   The proposed waiver maintains the minimum roadway width and lane
widths deemed necessary for safe two-directional vehicular passage. The minimum
lane width cannot be less than 10 feet in width for a travel lane and eight
feet (8') in width for a parking lane;
      3.   The proposed waiver will maintain the necessary roadway width for
the traffic volumes projected during the general plan buildout as determined by
the director of planning and building safety unless the director determines
that the dedication or irrevocable offer to dedicate will require the removal
of all or a portion of an existing building;
      4.   The proposed waiver complies with any requirements of state and
federal regulations, including, without limitation, disabled access
requirements for public sidewalks;
      5.   The proposed waiver would not be detrimental to the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located;
      6.   That the proposed waiver is necessary in order that the applicant is
not unreasonably deprived the use or enjoyment of his property; and
      7.   The proposed waiver is consistent with the legislative intent of
this title.
   B.   Conditions: If the director grants a waiver, the director may impose
such conditions necessary to safeguard public health, safety, and welfare. In
all instances the director must impose the following conditions:
      1.   Establish a term during which the irrevocable offer to dedicate is
effective.
      2.   The waiver does not become effective for 10 days from when it is
granted or, if an appeal is filed, there is a final determination.
      3.   The waiver becomes null and void if it is unused for 180 days from
its effective date. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord.
1639, 9-20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-31-6: NOTIFICATION:
   A.   Copies of the findings and decision of the director must be mailed to
the applicant and all property owners within 300 feet and occupants within 150
feet of the proposed project site. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011; amd. Ord. 1648, 6-21-
2023)
CHAPTER 32
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
15-32-1: Purpose
15-32-2: Applicability
15-32-3: Exemptions
15-32-4: Definitions
15-32-5: Notice And Hearing Requirements
15-32-6: Imposition Of Fees; Automatic Adjustment
15-32-7: Impact Fee Accounts
15-32-8: Use Of Impact Fee Proceeds
15-32-9: Refunds
15-32-10: Protests, Appeals, And Audits
15-32-11: Amendment Procedures
15-32-12: Credits
15-32-13: Conflicts
15-32-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s police powers and the mitigation
fee act 1 , for the purpose of imposing fees on applicants seeking to construct
development projects. The purpose of such fees is to minimize, to the greatest
extent practicable, the impact that new development has on the city’s public
services and public facilities. Toward that end, the city intends that
applicants for such development projects pay their fair share of the costs of
providing such public services and public facilities. Accordingly, the amount
of each impact fee is calculated based upon the gross square footage of
nonresidential development, number of residential dwelling units, type or
density or intensity of use, vehicle trip generation, or other appropriate
methodology which ensures that the fee is roughly proportional to the impacts
of new development on public facilities. The city assumes responsibility for
and will pay for with general city revenues all public facility needs for
existing development. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
 
Notes
1    Gov.C. § 66000 et seq.
15-32-2: APPLICABILITY:
Unless expressly excepted or exempted, this chapter applies to all fees imposed
by the city to finance public facilities attributable to new development,
including without limitation:
   A.   Law enforcement facilities, vehicles, and equipment;
   B.   Fire suppression facilities, vehicles, and equipment;
   C.   General facilities, vehicles, and equipment;
   D.   Community library facilities and collections;
   E.   Public use (community centers) facilities;
   F.   Parks/open space and recreation facilities; and
   G.   Road project construction, right of way acquisition, and engineering.
(Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-32-3: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to:
   A.   Taxes and special assessments;
   B.   Fees for processing development applications;
   C.   Fees for enforcing regulations;
   D.   Fees collected under development agreements;
   E.   Fees imposed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement between the city and
a property owner for that portion of the cost of a public facility paid for by
the property owner which exceeds the need for the public facility attributable
to, reasonably related to, and roughly proportional to the development;
   F.   Fees to mitigate impacts on the environment; or
   G.   Fees imposed, levied or collected by other governmental agencies
including subdivisions of the state and federal governments. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-
2005)
15-32-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
BENEFIT AREA: The geographic area within which impact fees are collected and
expended for a particular type of capital improvement serving development
projects within such area.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: Land or facilities for the storage, treatment or
distribution of water; for the collection, treatment, reclamation or disposal
of sewage; for the collection and disposal of storm waters and for watershed
preservation purposes; for purposes of transportation and transit, including,
without limitation, streets, street lighting and traffic control devices and
supporting improvements, roads, overpasses, bridges, airports, and related
facilities; for parks and recreational improvements; for public safety,
including police and fire facilities; for schools and childcare facilities; for
libraries and public art; for public buildings of all kinds; and for any other
capital project identified in the city’s capital improvements plan. Capital
improvement also includes design, engineering, inspection, testing, planning,
legal land acquisition and all other costs associated with construction of a
public facility.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: The long term plan for capital improvements, adopted
by the city council, describing the approximate location, size, time of
availability and estimated cost of capital improvement projects and identifies
sources of funding for capital improvement projects.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROJECT LIST: The list attached to a council resolution
setting the base fee amount for each specific impact fee. The list must
describe the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated
cost of each capital improvement to be funded from a particular impact fee
account.
COLLECTION: The point in time at which the impact fee is actually paid over to
the city.
COMMITMENT: Earmarking impact fees to fund or partially fund capital
improvements serving new development projects.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a building or a portion of a room,
designed, intended to be used, or actually used for occupancy by one family for
living and sleeping quarters, and containing one kitchen only, and includes a
mobile home, but not hotel or motel units.
IMPACT FEE: Any monetary exaction imposed by the city as a condition of or in
connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying
all or some of the cost of or repayment of costs previously expended from other
city funds for capital improvements relating to the project.
IMPOSE: To determine that a particular development project is subject to the
collection of impact fees as a condition of development approval.
NEW DEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Means and includes any project
undertaken for the purpose of development, including, without limitation, a
project involving the permit issuance for construction, reconstruction, or
change of use, but not a project involving permit issuance for operating,
remodeling, rehabilitating, or improving an existing structure, nor the
rebuilding of a structure destroyed or damaged through natural disaster, nor
the replacement of one mobile home with another on the same pad if no dwelling
unit is added.
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: All development other than residential
development projects.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any development undertaken to create a new
dwelling unit or units. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-32-5: NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any legislative action adopting an ordinance, resolution, or other
legislative enactment adopting a new impact fee or approving an increase in an
existing fee must be accomplished in accordance with Government Code section
66018.
   B.   Any costs incurred by the city in conducting public hearings required
by this section may be recovered as a part of the impact fees which are the
subject of the hearing. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-32-6: IMPOSITION OF FEES; AUTOMATIC ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, persons submitting applications seeking
approval for new development projects must pay the city impact fees, in an
amount set by city council resolution, as a condition for the city to approve
such development projects.
   B.   No tentative or final subdivision map, parcel map, grading permit,
building permit, final inspection, or certificate of occupancy, or other
development permit, may be approved unless the provisions of this section are
fulfilled.
   C.   Impact fees will be imposed by including the following language in any
document of development approval:
         All fees imposed pursuant to Title 15 Chapter 32 of the El Segundo
Municipal Code must be paid to the City in accordance with Government Code
section 66007.
   D.   The director of community development or the director of public works
will collect impact fees at the following times, except as otherwise specified
in Government Code section 66007:
      1.   Unless authorized under separate agreement or condition of approval,
impact fees for any development will be collected at the time the City issues a
building permit.
      2.   Under separate agreement or condition of approval, fees for
residential development will be collected at the time the City approves a final
inspection or issues a certificate of occupancy for each dwelling unit in the
development.
      3.   Under separate agreement or condition of approval, fees for non-
residential development will be collected at the time the City approves a final
inspection or issues a certificate of occupancy.
      4.   Notwithstanding (1), 2), and (3) above, utility service connection
fees will be collected at the time an application for service is received.
   E.   Unless otherwise provided by council resolution, the impact fees
established by this chapter will be automatically adjusted on an annual basis
at the beginning of each fiscal year based on the average percentage change
over the previous calendar year set forth in the construction price index for
the Los Angeles metropolitan area. The first impact fee adjustment cannot be
made before a minimum of ten (10) months after the effective date hereof. (Ord.
1389, 12-6-2005; amd. Ord. 1448, 10-19-2010; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639,
9-20-2022; Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025; Ord. 1673, 520-2025)
15-32-7: IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS:
   A.   The city must establish an impact fee account for each benefit area and
for each type of capital improvement for which an impact fee is imposed. Impact
fees collected must be deposited in each such account according to type of
improvement and benefit area. The funds of the account cannot be commingled
with the city’s other funds. Any account previously established for the deposit
of funds which would have been developer impact fees under this chapter are
deemed an impact fee account for the purposes of this chapter.
   B.   Each impact fee account must be interest bearing and the accumulated
interest will become a part of the account.
   C.   The funds of each account will be expended within the benefit area
exclusively for the capital improvements for which the impact fees were
collected. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-32-8: USE OF IMPACT FEE PROCEEDS:
Impact fees may be expended only for the type of capital improvements for which
they were imposed, calculated, and collected and according to the time limits
and procedures established in this chapter. Impact fees may be used to pay the
principal, interest and other costs of bonds, notes and other obligations
issued or undertaken by or on behalf of the city to finance such improvements.
(Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-32-9: REFUNDS:
   A.   Except as described in this section, upon application of the property
owner, the city must refund that portion of any impact fee which has been on
deposit over five years and which is unexpended and uncommitted. The refund
will be made to the then current owner or owners of lots or units of the
development project or projects, provided that the then current owner submits
an application for a refund to the city within 180 days before the five year
period expires. The Community Development Director, the Public Works Director,
or their designee must review and approve refund applications.
   B.   If fees in any impact fee account are unexpended or uncommitted,
starting with the fifth fiscal year after the first deposit into the account or
fund, and every subsequent five years, the city council must make the findings
required by Government Code section 66001(d) for maintaining funds on deposit.
If the council makes such findings, the fees are exempt from the refund
requirement.
   C.   The city may issue refunds through direct payment; offsetting the
refund against other impact fees due for development projects by the owner on
the same or other property; or otherwise by agreement with the owner. If the
costs of refunding the impact fees would exceed the amount refunded, the city
may instead comply with Government Code section 66001(f). (Ord. 1389, 12-6-
2005; amd. Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-32-10: PROTESTS, APPEALS, AND AUDITS:
All protests, appeals, and audits must be conducted in accordance with the
procedures contained in the mitigation fee act 1 . (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. Commencing at Gov.C. § 66020 et seq.
15-32-11: AMENDMENT PROCEDURES:
At least once each year, before the city council’s adoption of the budget and
revisions to the capital improvements project list, the city manager, or
designee, must report to the city council with:
   A.   Recommendations for amendments to this chapter and to other parts of
this code and to resolutions establishing impact fees;
   B.   Proposals for changes to the capital improvements project list,
identifying capital improvements to be funded, in whole or in part, by impact
fees;
   C.   Proposals for changes in the boundaries of benefit areas; and
   D.   Proposals for changes to impact fee rates and schedules. (Ord. 1389,
12-6-2005)
15-32-12: CREDITS:
   A.   A property owner who dedicates land or agrees to participate in an
assessment district or otherwise contributes funds for capital improvements, as
defined in this chapter, may be eligible for a credit for such contribution
against the impact fee otherwise due.
   B.   The director of community development or the director of public works
must determine: 1) whether the contribution meets capital improvement needs for
which the particular impact fee has been imposed; 2) whether the contribution
will substitute for or otherwise reduce the need for capital improvements
anticipated to be provided with impact fee funds; and 3) the value of the
developer contribution. In no event, however, will the credit exceed the amount
of the otherwise applicable impact fee.
   C.   Any application for credit must be submitted at or before the time of
development project approval on forms provided by the city. The application
must contain a declaration of those facts, under oath, along with the relevant
documentary evidence which qualifies the property owner for the credit. (Ord.
1389, 12-6-2005; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022)
15-32-13: CONFLICTS:
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance or resolution establishing or amending impact
fees, the provisions of this chapter govern. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
CHAPTER 33
PARKING IN-LIEU FEES
SECTION:
15-33-1: Purpose
15-33-2: Parking In-Lieu Fee Areas
15-33-3: Payment
15-33-4: No Vested Rights
15-33-5: Director Approval Required
15-33-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes fees in lieu of providing on-site parking spaces
within designated parking in-lieu fee areas. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
15-33-2: PARKING IN-LIEU FEE AREAS:
Any property owner of a property located within a parking in-lieu fee area
identified below may pay parking in-lieu fees as established by the City
Council, in lieu of providing required on-site parking spaces as outlined in
section
15-15-6  of this title or applicable specific plans.
   PARKING IN-LIEU FEE AREAS
   A.   Smoky Hollow Specific Plan area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6857.png]
 
   B.   Downtown Specific Plan area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a5c73b40559cade4ff5af98f694480dd9115d7ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6859.png]
 
(Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1661, 5-21-2024)
15-33-3: PAYMENT:
   A.   Timing Of Payment: The parking in-lieu fee must be paid before the City
issues a Certificate of Occupancy for the project or formally approves the
project when such project does not require a Certificate of Occupancy. In
addition, the parking in-lieu fee may be paid over a period of time, as
approved by City Council resolution.
   B.   Use Of Funds: Funds collected by the City from such payments must be
deposited in a separate fund and may not be commingled with any other City
fund. Monies from the In-Lieu Fund may only be used for acquiring, developing
and maintaining additional on-street and off- street parking and parking
facilities within or adjacent to the area where they are collected. Funds paid
to the City for in-lieu parking are non-refundable.
   C.   Written Agreement/Contract Required: Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, payment of the parking in-lieu fee must be provided
by means of a written contract with the City. The contract must meet
requirements identified by City Council resolution and approved as to form by
the City Attorney. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
15-33-4: NO VESTED RIGHTS:
Payment of a parking in-lieu fee does not provide or vest any property owner
with a special right, privilege or interest of any kind in any parking facility
that may result from the payment of the fee. The City retains sole discretion
to decide when and how the fees will be spent in accordance with this chapter.
The City retains sole discretion to determine where and when it will build
parking, and the City is under no obligation to, and makes no such
representation that it will, build parking in a location near the fee payer's
property or that is advantageous to the fee payer. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
15-33-5: DIRECTOR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Requests to pay parking in-lieu fees for more than 50 percent of the required
parking spaces for a property or project as outlined in section
15-15-6  of this title or applicable specific plans must be approved by the
Director at his or her discretion. The Director must consider potential impacts
to the surrounding area when deciding whether to approve such a request. The
Director’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to
section
15-29-2  of this title. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1661, 5-21-2024)
CHAPTER 34
CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
15-34-1: Purpose
15-34-2: Application
15-34-3: Requirement To Provide Artwork Or Pay In-Lieu Fee
15-34-4: Application And Approval Process
15-34-5: Standards For Artworks
15-34-6: Maintenance And Repair Of Artworks
15-34-7: Cultural Development Fund
15-34-8: Appeal
15-34-9: Administrative Guidelines
15-34-10: Violations
15-34-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's planning, zoning and police
powers and may be known and cited as the "City of El Segundo Cultural
Development Ordinance." The intent of this Chapter is to promote the public
arts in the City of El Segundo by creating a collection of visual artwork and
providing artistic or cultural services, such as performing arts, literary art,
media art, arts education, art events, and temporary artworks, by recognized
artists, and of the highest possible quality, throughout the City, for the
public's benefit. As of the effective date of this chapter, the City shall
require that certain private developments use a portion of building development
funds for the acquisition of publicly-accessible artwork, or pay to the City an
in-lieu fee, as a condition of project approval.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019)
15-34-2: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall apply to all commercial or industrial development projects
where the project cost exceeds two million dollars ($2,000,000.00).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this chapter shall not apply to the following
projects:
   A.   Any project which consists solely of rehabilitation work required for
seismic safety or to comply with government mandates, including the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 regardless of valuation;
   B.   The reconstruction of structures which have been partially damaged or
completely destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity;
   C.   Any project constructed by a government agency which is constructed on
property exempt from taxation pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code section
214;
   D.   Residential components of a mixed-use development project;
   E.   Commercial and industrial development projects, or portion(s) thereof,
that are designed and dedicated to performing arts or museum spaces, so long as
the performing arts or museum spaces are maintained within the building,
provided the premises continue to be dedicated as such. Acceptable facilities
include museums, theaters, performance arts centers, and other similar
facilities.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019)
15-34-3: REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE ARTWORK OR PAY IN-LIEU FEE:
   A.   When a project is subject to this Chapter, the applicant must either
(a) commission or acquire and install new artwork in a location on or in the
vicinity of the project site, with the appraised value of such artwork and any
direct expenses as described herein being equal to or exceeding one percent
(1%) of the project cost; or (b) pay to the City an amount equal to one percent
(1%) of the project cost not to exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   B.   For purposes of this section, direct expenses associated with the
commission, acquisition or installation of the new artwork include:
      1.   Art valuation by public art consultant.
      2.   Consultation and direct administration of art selection and
purchase, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the art requirement.
      3.   Insuring the art, up to the time of installation.
      4.   Shipping or storage of the art, up to the time of installation.
      5.   Preparation of the site, and actual installation.
      6.   Other expenses, including waterproofing, lighting, structural
engineering, and additional structural support.
   C.   Direct expenses shall not include maintenance of the installed artwork
and indirect administrative costs.
   D.   Compliance with this section does not constitute a “public benefit” as
that term is used in certain specific plans within the City, such as the Smoky
Hollow Specific Plan. An applicant may, however, commission or acquire and
install new artwork with an appraised value greater than this Chapter’s one
percent (1%) of the project cost threshold, and such additional amount may be
considered a “public benefit.”
   E.   The fee may be allocated between the provision of on-site art
installations and the remittance of the remaining balance as an in-lieu fee.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019; amd. Ord. 1671, 4-1-2025)
15-34-4: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Whenever an applicant proposes a project that may be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, the Community Development Department must provide
the applicant a copy of this Chapter and an application form.
   B.   All applicants subject to this Chapter must complete and sign an
application form.
   C.   An applicant may elects to pay the in-lieu fee at any time prior to
certificate of occupancy or final inspection.
   D.   If the applicant elects to provide public art, the following provisions
apply:
      1.   If the applicant is not the property owner, the applicant must
submit a letter from the property owner, in a form acceptable to the City,
acknowledging the property owner’s understanding and acceptance of the property
owner’s responsibilities under the Chapter.
      2.   In order to ensure integrated projects, applicants choosing to
commission or acquire and install new artwork for their project shall submit an
application for the public art plan to the City’s community services staff. The
application will include preliminary plans that include the proposed location
of the artwork and any other documents reasonably required pursuant to the
guidelines promulgated by staff and approved by the City Manager.
      4.   The Arts and Culture Advisory Committee shall review the completed
application for the public art plan and approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the proposed artwork, and its proposed location, based on the “Standards
for Artworks” outlined in section
15-34-5. The committee’s decision is subject to appeal pursuant to section
15-34-8.
      5.   No building permit shall be issued by the Community Development
Department unless the applicant has executed an agreement committing the
applicant to complying with this Chapter and submitting an application for the
public art plan by a certain date.
      6.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Community
Development Department unless and until (a) the application for the public art
plan has been approved and the artwork has been installed and complies with
this Chapter and (b) the property owner executes and records with the Los
Angeles County Registrar-Recorder’s office, a covenant regarding the
maintenance of the artwork, as required by section
15-34-7.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019; amd. Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord.
1671, 4-1-2025)
15-34-5: STANDARDS FOR ARTWORKS:
   A.   Standards for the approval, siting, and installation of artworks shall
include, but are not limited to, the following criteria:
      1.   The artwork shall be displayed in an area that is visible and
accessible by the public, as defined in Chapter 15-1. The application shall
include a site plan showing the location of the artwork, complete with
landscaping, lighting and other appropriate accessories to complement and
protect the artwork.
      2.   The composition of the artwork shall be of a permanent type of
material in order to be durable against vandalism, theft, and weather and
requiring a low level of maintenance.
      3.   The artwork shall be designed and constructed by an artist
experienced in the production of such artwork and recognized by critics and by
the artist's peers as one who produces works of art.
      4.   The artwork shall be permanently affixed to the property.
      5.   The artwork's concept and design must be compatible with the site's
environment and function.
   B.   The following items are not to be considered as works of art:
      1.   Art objects which are mass produced from a standard design, such as
playground equipment or fountain pieces;
      2.   Reproductions of original artworks, unless it is incorporated into
an original artwork or a limited edition;
      3.   Decorative, ornamental or functional elements which are designed by
the building architect as opposed to an artist commissioned for the purpose of
creating the artwork;
      4.   Landscape architecture and landscape gardening unless such elements
are designed or approved by the artist and are an integral part of the artwork
by the artist;
      5.   Services or utilities necessary to operate or maintain the artwork;
      6.   Directional elements such as super graphics, signs or color coding,
except where these elements are integral parts of the original artwork or
executed by the artist in unique or limited editions;
      7.   Artwork that incorporates logos, images, text or other elements that
refer or relate to a business or organization's name, branding or marketing
themes;
      8.   Architectural rehabilitation, historic preservation and structural
building modifications.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019)
15-34-6: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF ARTWORKS:
   A.   The artwork installed on private property pursuant to this Chapter
shall be and remain the property of the property owner.
   B.   Artwork installed on City property shall be the property of the City.
   C.   The artwork and its setting shall be maintained by the property owner
in good repair and in a safe, functional, accessible, and clean condition, all
in a manner acceptable to the City. Before the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for the project, the property owner shall execute and record with the
Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder's office, a covenant approved by the City
Manager, and in a form approved by the City Attorney, providing, among other
things that the property owner and its successor and assigns shall maintain the
artwork as required by this section. The property owner may assign the
obligations of this subsection to the applicant without having to first obtain
the prior approval of the City.
   D.   In the event repair of the artwork is required, the artist who created
it shall be given the first opportunity to do that work for a reasonable fee.
In the event the artist is unable or unwilling to do so, the City or the
property owner may proceed to contract for such repair with another qualified
artist.
   E.   In the event the City declares the artwork a public nuisance pursuant
to Chapter 7-1, the property owner must promptly abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019)
15-34-7: CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT FUND:
   A.   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the “Cultural Development
Fund.” Any moneys collected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
shall be deposited into the fund. The fund shall be administered by the City of
El Segundo’s Chief Financial Officer.
   B.   The City Manager or designee shall provide an annual accounting to the
City Council regarding the use of all fees collected and deposited in the
Cultural Development Fund, including identification of all expenditures and
balances during the prior fiscal year and recommendations for expenditures for
the subsequent fiscal year.
   C.   The fund shall be used to provide art in public places in order to
further the intent and purpose of this Chapter. Expenditures of funds shall be
limited to the following uses:
      1.   For the design, acquisition, commission, installation, improvement,
relocation, maintenance, conservation, restoration, utility charges, and
insurance of artwork;
      2.   To sponsor or support artistic or cultural services;
      3.   For the City's costs of administering the Cultural Development Fund
and associated programs.
   D.   The City Council may request the Arts and Culture Advisory Committee to
make recommendations to City Council for expenditures from the Cultural
Development Fund in accordance with this Chapter.
   E.   Endowments: The fund shall also be used as a depository for monetary
endowments, bequests, grants or donations made for public arts purposes. Such
sums may be expended as set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019; amd.
Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020)
15-34-8: APPEAL:
Any person may seek review of a decision by the Building Official or the Arts
and Culture Advisory Committee. Appeals of the Building Official's decision
must be made pursuant to section 113.3 of the California Building Code, as
amended by section
13-1-2 of this Code. Appeals of a decision of the Arts and Culture Advisory
Committee must be made by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk's Office
within ten (10) working days of the Committee's decision and pay an appeal fee.
The City Council shall hold at least one (1) hearing on the Arts and Culture
Advisory Committee's decision and the hearing shall be held within forty (40)
calendar days of the appeal request. The City Council may affirm, reverse or
modify a decision of the Committee and the decision of the City Council shall
be final.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019)
15-34-9: ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES:
Administrative guidelines for implementation of this program shall be
promulgated by staff and approved by the City Manager.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019)
15-34-10: VIOLATIONS:
In addition to other fines or penalties provided by law, the City may revoke or
suspend any discretionary permit granted to any applicant who violates any
provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019)
CHAPTER 35
DENSITY BONUS
SECTION:
15-35-1: Purpose
15-35-2: Application
15-35-3: Density Bonus Application
15-35-4: Review And Determination
15-35-5: Waiver Of Development Standards
15-35-6: Agreement And Additional Provisions
15-35-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to encourage the production of very low-
income, low- income, moderate-income and senior citizens housing units in
accordance with Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918, as may be amended
from time to time ("State Density Bonus Law"). In enacting this section, it is
also the intent of the City to facilitate the development of affordable housing
and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the housing element of
the City's General Plan. A copy of the current State Density Bonus Law shall be
kept on file with the Development Services Department.
(Ord. 1645, 3-7-2023)
15-35-2: APPLICATION:
This Chapter shall apply to any qualifying residential development application
which meets the criteria to receive a density bonus.
(Ord. 1645, 3-7-2023)
15-35-3: DENSITY BONUS APPLICATION:
   A.   In addition to any other review required for a proposed housing
development, applications for density bonus shall be filed on a form approved
by the Development Services Director ("director"). The application for a
density bonus shall be filed concurrently with an application for a
development. At the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall pay
a density bonus application fee, established by City Council resolution.
   B.   An applicant for a density bonus must file an application for a density
bonus with the director concurrently with the application for all other
entitlements necessary for the proposed housing development.
   C.   The application must contain information sufficient to fully evaluate
the request under the requirements of this chapter and Government Code section
65915, including, without limitation, the following:
      1.   A description of the proposed housing development, including an
explanation of how the proposed project will satisfy the eligibility
requirements of Government Code section 65915;
      2.   The total number of housing units proposed in the project, including
unit sizes and the number of bedrooms;
      3.   The total number of units proposed to be granted through the density
increase over and above the otherwise maximum density for the project site;
      4.   The total number of units to be made affordable to or reserved for
sale or rental to very low, low or moderate-income households, or senior
citizens, or other qualifying residents consistent with state law;
       5.   A list of any concessions or incentives being requested to
facilitate the development of the project, together with documentation of
resulting cost reductions necessary to provide for affordable housing costs;
and
      6.   Any other information the director determines necessary to process
and evaluate the proposal consistent with Government Code section 65915.
(Ord. 1645, 3-7-2023)
15-35-4: REVIEW AND DETERMINATION:
   A.   For a housing development qualifying pursuant to the requirements of
Government Code Section 65915, the City shall grant a density bonus in an
amount specified by Government Code Section 65915. Except as otherwise required
by Government Code Section 65915, the density bonus units shall not be included
when calculating the total number of housing units that qualifies the housing
development for a density bonus.
   B.   For the purpose of calculating the density bonus, the "maximum
allowable residential density" shall be the maximum density allowed under the
zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan, or, if a range of
density is permitted, the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning
range and land use element of the general plan applicable to the project. Where
the density allowed under the zoning ordinance is inconsistent with the density
allowed under the land use element of the general plan, the maximum density
allowed in the general plan shall prevail.
   C.   The City shall grant the applicant the number of incentives and
concessions required by Government Code Section 65915. The City shall grant the
specific concession(s) or incentive(s) requested by the applicant, unless it
makes any of the relevant written findings stated in Government Code Section
65915(d)(1).
   D.   The applicant may request, and the City shall grant, a reduction in
parking requirements in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(p), as
that section may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1645, 3-7-2023)
15-35-5: WAIVER OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Except as restricted by Government Code Section 65915, the applicant
for a density bonus may submit a proposal for the waiver or reduction of
development standards that have the effect of physically precluding the
construction of a housing development incorporating the density bonus and any
incentives or concessions granted to the applicant. A request for a waiver or
reduction of development standards shall be accompanied by documentation
demonstrating that the waiver or reduction is physically necessary to construct
the housing development with the additional density allowed pursuant to the
density bonus and incorporating any incentives or concessions required to be
granted. The City shall approve a waiver or reduction of a development
standard, unless it finds that:
      1.   The application of the development standard does not have the effect
of physically precluding the construction of a housing development at the
density allowed by the density bonus and with the incentives or concessions
granted to the applicant;
      2.   The waiver or reduction of the development standard would have a
specific, adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of
Section 65589.5, upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for
which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific adverse impact;
      3.   The waiver or reduction of the development standard would have an
adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register
of Historical Resources; or
      4.   The waiver or reduction of the development standard would be
contrary to state or federal law.
(Ord. 1645, 3-7-2023)
15-35-6: AGREEMENT AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City to ensure the
continued affordability of all affordable units or the continued reservation of
such units for qualifying senior citizens. Prior to receiving a building permit
for any project that receives a density bonus or any incentive, concession,
waiver, or reduction of development standards pursuant to this section, such
agreement shall be recorded as a covenant against the property.
   B.   For any development project that is granted a density bonus or other
benefit pursuant to this section, the affordable units that qualify the project
as eligible for a density bonus, must be constructed concurrently with or prior
to the construction of any market rate units.
   C.   In addition, the affordable units must be integrated with the market
rate units so that there is a mix of affordable and market rate units, if any,
in each building of the development project.
   D.   An applicant shall not receive a density bonus or other incentive or
concession unless the housing development is entitled to such a bonus,
incentive or concession under Government Code Section 65915.
   E.   The provisions of this subdivision shall be interpreted to fulfill the
requirements of Government Code Section 65915. Any changes to that Government
Code Section 65915 shall be deemed to supersede and govern any conflicting
provisions contained herein.
   F.   The director is authorized to adopt administrative regulations and
procedures necessary to implement this chapter consistent with Chapter 4.3
(Density Bonuses and Other Incentives) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the
Government Code.
(Ord. 1645, 3-7-2023)
CHAPTER 36
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES
SECTION:
15-36-1: Purpose
15-36-2: Definitions
15-36-3: Applicability
15-36-4: Application Requirements
15-36-5: Review Procedures
15-36-6: Required Findings
15-36-7: Conditions
15-36-8: Expiration
15-36-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Pursuant to the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the
California Fair Employment and Housing Act, Section 15-22-5 of the El Segundo
Municipal Code ("Section") establishes formal procedures allowing individuals
with disabilities and their representatives to request reasonable
accommodations in the application of zoning laws and other land use
regulations, policies and procedures when necessary to eliminate barriers to
housing opportunities.
   B.   A reasonable accommodation granted pursuant to this section shall not
be construed as an amendment to this title or a change to the maps which are
part of this title. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
15-36-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
               The "Fair Housing Act" (42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.), the "Americans with
FAIR HOUSING   Disabilities Act"(42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.), and the "California Fair
LAWS:          Employment and Housing Act" (California Government Code §§ 12900 et seq.), as
               these statutes now exist or may be amended from time to time, and the
               implementing regulations for each of these statutes.
               A person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major
INDIVIDUAL     life activities, anyone who is regarded as having that type of impairment or,
WITH           anyone who has a record of that type of impairment, as those terms are defined
DISABILITY:    in the fair housing laws. People who are currently using illegal substances are
               not considered individuals with a disability.
               Physical, mental, and social activities, such as the operation of major bodily
MAJOR LIFE     functions, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, sitting,
ACTIVITY:      reaching, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading,
               concentrating, thinking, communicating, interacting with others, and working.
               Any physiological disorder or condition and any mental or psychological
               disorder, including, but not limited to, orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing
               impairments, cosmetic disfigurement, anatomical loss, cerebral palsy, epilepsy,
PHYSICAL OR    muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes,
MENTAL         intellectual disabilities (formerly termed "mental retardation"), emotional or
IMPAIRMENT:    mental illness, learning disabilities, HIV disease (whether symptomatic or
               asymptomatic), tuberculosis, and alcoholism and drug addiction (but not
               including current use of illegal drugs). A temporary condition, such as a
               broken leg, pregnancy, use of crutches, etc. does not qualify as a physical or
               mental impairment.
               Any deviation requested and/or granted from the City’s zoning and land use
REASONABLE     laws, rules, regulations, policies, procedures, practices, or any combination
ACCOMMODATION: thereof, that may be reasonable and necessary for a disabled person to have an
               equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
 
15-36-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   A request for a reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with
a disability, their representative, or any developer or provider of housing for
an individual with a disability, when the application of a zoning law or other
land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing
opportunities. This Section is intended for the benefit of those individuals
with disabilities as defined as under Subsection 15-22-5 B.
   B.   A request for a reasonable accommodation may include a modification or
exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and
use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory
barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to the
housing of their choice. Requests for a reasonable accommodation shall be made
in the manner prescribed by this Section.
   C.   A reasonable accommodation does not affect a person's obligations to
comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested
accommodation.
   D.   A request for a reasonable accommodation shall be granted to an
individual and shall not run with the land, unless expressly authorized under
Subsection 15-22-5 I.2. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
15-36-4: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requests for a reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an
application form provided by the community development department, or in the
form of a letter to the Community Development Director. The application shall
contain the following information:
      1.   The applicant's name, address and telephone number;
      2.   Address of the property for which the request is being made;
      3.   The current actual use of the property;
      4.   Documentation that the applicant is:
         a.   An individual with a disability;
         b.   Applying on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability;
or
         c.   A developer or provider of housing for one or more individuals
with a disability;
      5.   The specific exception or modification to the zoning code provision,
regulation, policy, or practice that is being requested;
      6.   Documentation that the requested accommodation is necessary to
provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use
and enjoy the residence.
   B.   Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be
retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and
shall not be made available for public inspection, unless required by state or
federal law.
   C.   A request for a reasonable accommodation from the strict application of
the City's regulations, policies, practices or procedures may be filed at any
time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.
(Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
15-36-5: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   Requests for a reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the
Community Development Director if no approval is sought other than the request
for a reasonable accommodation.
   B.   The Community Development Director may, in their discretion, refer
applications to the Planning Commission for consideration.
   C.   The Director may request additional information necessary for making a
determination regarding the request for a reasonable accommodation that
complies with the fair housing law's protections and the privacy rights of the
individual with a disability to use the specified housing. If additional
information is requested, the required timeframe for making a determination on
the request stops running until the additional information is provided.
   D.   The reviewing authority shall issue a written determination within
sixty (60) days of the receipt of a complete application, unless extended in
writing by mutual agreement of the City and the applicant.
   E.   The reviewing authority may either grant, grant with modifications, or
deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required
findings set forth in Subsection 15-22-5 F. The notice of determination shall
explain in detail the basis of the decision.
   F.   All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to
appeal and to request a reasonable accommodation in the appeals process.
      1.   The written decision shall be final, unless the applicant appeals
the decision pursuant to Chapter 29.
      2.   While a request for a reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws
and regulations otherwise applicable to the property shall remain in full force
and effect. No reasonable accommodation shall be effective and no development
permitted by a reasonable accommodation shall be initiated or construction
started, until the appeal period has been exhausted. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
15-36-6: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
   A.   The request for a reasonable accommodation shall be approved, or
approved with conditions, if the reviewing authority finds that all of the
following findings can be made:
      1.   The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable
accommodation, will be used by an individual with a disability protected under
the fair housing laws;
      2.   The requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available
to an individual with a disability protected under the fair housing laws;
      3.   The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the city;
      4.   The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental
alteration in the nature of the city's zoning regulations and policies; and
      5.   There are no alternatives to the requested accommodations that may
provide an equivalent level of benefit. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
15-36-7: CONDITIONS:
   A.   The reviewing authority may impose conditions upon the approval of the
reasonable accommodation request deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that
the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by
Subsection 15-22-5 F.
   B.   Conditions of approval may, where deemed appropriate, provide for any
or all of the following:
      1.   The reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to particular
individual(s).
      2.   Periodic inspection of the affected premises, as specified in the
conditions, to verify compliance with the El Segundo Municipal Code and with
any applicable conditions of approval.
      3.   Prior to any transfer of interest in the premises, notice shall be
given to the transferee of the existence of the modification, and the
requirements that the transferee apply for a new modification as necessary.
Once such transfer takes effect, the originally approved modification shall
have no further validity.
      4.   Removal of the improvement if the need for which the accommodation
was granted no longer exists.
      5.   Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which
the accommodation was granted no longer exists.
      6.   Other reasonable conditions deemed necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
   C.   Prior to the issuance of any permits relative to an approved reasonable
accommodation, the reviewing authority may require the applicant and/or owner
to record a covenant in the County recorder's office acknowledging and agreeing
to comply with the terms and conditions established in the determination, and
to provide notice to future owners that a reasonable accommodation has been
approved. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
15-36-8: EXPIRATION:
   A.   A reasonable accommodation shall lapse if the exercise of rights does
not occur within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the final
decision.
   B.   The rights conferred by an approved accommodation shall expire when the
disabled person for whom the accommodation was granted no longer resides at the
property, unless the Director makes either of the following findings:
      1.   That such accommodation is physically integrated with the property
and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with Chapter 4 of the El
Segundo Municipal Code; or
      2.   The property is now occupied by another disabled person who requires
the accommodation to have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling.
The Community Development Director may request documentation that subsequent
occupants are disabled persons. Failure to provide such documentation within
thirty (30) days of the date of a request by the City shall constitute grounds
for discontinuance by the City of a previously approved reasonable
accommodations. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
CHAPTER 37
HOUSING PROGRAMS
ARTICLE A. LOW-BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTERS
SECTION:
15-37A-1: Purpose
15-37A-2: Applicability
15-37A-3: Development And Operational Standards
15-37A-4: Definitions
15-37A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish development standards for low-
barrier navigation centers and to ensure this use is constructed and operated
in a manner that is consistent with the requirements and allowances of state
law, specifically Article 12 of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Planning and Zoning
Law commencing with California Government Code Section 65660. (Ord. 1654, 12-
19-2023)
15-37A-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all low-barrier navigation center
projects. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
15-37A-3: DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
A low-barrier navigation center development is a use by-right in areas zoned
for mixed-use and nonresidential zones permitting multifamily uses, if it meets
the following requirements:
   A.   Connected Services. It offers services to connect people to permanent
housing through a services plan that identifies services staffing.
   B.   Coordinated Entry System. It is linked to a coordinated entry system,
so that staff in the interim facility or staff who co-locate in the facility
may conduct assessments and provide services to connect people to permanent
housing. "Coordinated entry system" means a centralized or coordinated
assessment system developed pursuant to Section 576.400(d) or Section 578.7(a)
(8), as applicable, of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as those
sections read on January 1, 2020, and any related requirements, designed to
coordinate program participant intake, assessment, and referrals.
   C.   Code Compliant. It complies with Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section
8255) of Division 8 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
   D.   Homeless Management Information System. It has a system for entering
information regarding client stays, client demographics, client income, and
exit destination through the local Homeless Management Information System, as
defined by Section 578.3 of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord.
1654, 12-19-2023)
15-37A-4: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Low-Barrier Navigation Centers. A housing-first, low-barrier, service-
enriched shelter focused on moving people into permanent housing that provides
temporary living facilities while case managers connect individuals
experiencing homelessness to income, public benefits, health services, shelter,
and housing. "Low barrier" means best practices to reduce barriers to entry,
and may include, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   The presence of partners if it is not a population-specific site,
such as for survivors of domestic violence or sexual assault, women, or youth.
      2.   Pets.
      3.   The storage of possessions.
      4.   Privacy, such as partitions around beds in a dormitory setting or in
larger rooms containing more than two beds, or private rooms.
   B.   Use by Right. Use by right has the meaning defined in subdivision (i)
of Section 65583.2. Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the
California Public Resources Code shall not apply to actions taken by a public
agency to lease, convey, or encumber land owned by a public agency, or to
facilitate the lease, conveyance, or encumbrance of land owned by a public
agency, or to provide financial assistance to, or otherwise approve, a Low-
Barrier Navigation Center constructed or allowed by this section. (Ord. 1654,
12-19-2023)
